
The Perception of the Environment
In this work Tim Ingold offers a persuasive new approach to understanding how human
beings perceive their surroundings. He argues that what we are used to calling cultural
variation consists, in the ﬁrst place, of variations in skill. Neither innate nor acquired,
skills are grown, incorporated into the human organism through practice and training in
an environment. They are thus as much biological as cultural. To account for the generation of skills we have therefore to understand the dynamics of development. And this in
turn calls for an ecological approach that situates practitioners in the context of an active
engagement with the constituents of their surroundings.
The twenty-three essays comprising this book focus in turn on the procurement of livelihood, on what it means to ‘dwell’, and on the nature of skill, weaving together approaches
from social anthropology, ecological psychology, developmental biology and phenomenology in a way that has never been attempted before. The book is set to revolutionise
the way we think about what is ‘biological’ and ‘cultural’ in humans, about evolution and
history, and indeed about what it means for human beings – at once organisms and
persons – to inhabit an environment. The Perception of the Environment will be essential
reading not only for anthropologists but also for biologists, psychologists, archaeologists,
geographers and philosophers.
Tim Ingold is Professor of Social Anthropology at the University of Aberdeen.

Skill

Tools, minds and machines

The Perception of the
Environment
Essays on livelihood, dwelling and skill

Tim Ingold

•

GE

RO

LE
UT D

ay

or

ou

p

• T

& F r n cis G
a

r

London and New York

Skill

For Anna and Susanna,
in memory of my mother,
L. M. Ingold (1910–1998)



First published 2000
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
© 2000 Tim Ingold
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book has been requested.

ISBN 0-203-46602-0 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 0-203-77426-4 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0–415–22831–X (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–22832–8 (pbk)

Tools, minds and machines

Chapter One

Contents

List of ﬁgures viii
Acknowledgements x
General introduction 1

PART I: LIVELIHOOD
Introduction to PART I 9
Chapter One
Culture, nature, environment: steps to an ecology of life
Chapter Two
The optimal forager and economic man

Chapter Three
Hunting and gathering as ways of perceiving the environment
Chapter Four
From trust to domination: an alternative history of
human–animal relations 61
Chapter Five
Making things, growing plants, raising animals and
bringing up children 77
Chapter Six
A circumpolar night’s dream

Chapter Seven
Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals

Chapter Eight
Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land

Contents

PART II: DWELLING
Introduction to PART II 153
Chapter Nine
Culture, perception and cognition

Chapter Ten
Building, dwelling, living: how animals and people make
themselves at home in the world 172
Chapter Eleven
The temporality of the landscape

Chapter Twelve
Globes and spheres: the topology of environmentalism

Chapter Thirteen
To journey along a way of life: maps, wayﬁnding and navigation
Chapter Fourteen
Stop, look and listen! Vision, hearing and human movement

PART III: SKILL
Introduction to PART III

Chapter Fifteen
Tools, minds and machines: an excursion in the philosophy
of technology 294
Chapter Sixteen
Society, nature and the concept of technology
Chapter Seventeen
Work, time and industry

Chapter Eighteen
On weaving a basket 339
Chapter Nineteen
Of string bags and birds’ nests: skill and the construction
of artefacts 349
Chapter Twenty
The dynamics of technical change

Chapter Twenty-one
‘People like us’: the concept of the anatomically
modern human 373
Chapter Twenty-two
Speech, writing and the modern origins of
‘language origins’ 392

Contents

Chapter Twenty-three
The poetics of tool-use: from technology, language and intelligence
to craft, song and imagination 406
Notes

References 436
Index 454

Skill

Chapter One

Figures

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
6.1
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
8.1
8.2
8.3
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
11.1
12.1

Universal reason, alternative worldviews, and the reality of nature.
‘Day and night’ (1938). Woodcut by M. C. Escher.
Lévi-Strauss’s and Bateson’s views on mind and ecology.
Janáček’s sketches of the sounds of the waves, recorded at the Dutch
port of Flushing in 1926.
The ‘primitive’ hunter-gatherer as economic man and as optimal forager.
Alternative foraging strategies in a patchy environment.
‘Non-Western’ and ‘Western’ intentional worlds compared.
Western anthropological and hunter-gatherer economies of knowledge.
Western and Ojibwa models of the person.
An Inuit man and a polar bear greet one another. Drawing by
Davidialuk Alasuaq.
Dead human spirit and sand monitor. Painting by Djawada Nadjongorle.
Antilopine kangaroo with mimih spirit. Painting by Namerredje
Guymala.
Inuit hunter and caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq.
On killing a hoodless caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq.
Two masks from the Kuskokwim-Yukon area of Alaska.
Miniature waterfowl carved in walrus ivory by Inuit of the Ungava District,
northern Quebec.
‘The tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil – that is,
of human culture’ (after Kroeber).
The relation between descent-line, life-line and generation, according
to the genealogical model.
The transmission/exchange of substance in the genealogical and
relational models.
Human and animal architecture: beaver lodge and Eskimo house.
Fox, owl and oak tree.
Ant, bark-boring beetle and oak tree.
The Mbuti Pygmy camp of Apa Lelo.
Building plans of three periods from the Mesopotamian site of
Tell es-Sawwan.
The ﬁrst hut.
The ‘stone circle’ from Bed I of Olduvai Gorge.
The harvesters (1565) by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
The environment as lifeworld and as globe.

15 3
17 4
18 5
23 7
28 8
35 9
42 20
46 1
104 2
114 4
115 5
116 7
117 8
122 9
125 30
127 2
134 4
136 6
146 8
174 9
177 40
178 1
179 2
180 4
183 5
184 6
202 7
209 118

Figures

12.2
12.3
12.4
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
14.1
14.2
14.3
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
16.1
17.1
18.1
18.2
19.1
19.2
20.1
20.2
20.3
20.4
21.1
21.2
21.3
21.4
21.5
22.1
22.2
22.3
22.4

The fourteen spheres of the world (1564). Drawn by Giovanni Camillo
Maffei of Solofra.
Yup’ik cosmology in cross section.
Lithosphere, biosphere and noosphere.
The spatial orientation experiment: the original maze.
The spatial orientation experiment: the replacement maze.
The relations between mapping, mapmaking and map-using.
The cartographic illusion.
Saussure’s depiction of language at the interface between thought
and sound.
Design from the sacred book of a Shipibo-Conibo shaman.
The sensory homunculus.
Classical and modern conceptions of the technical.
Modes of technology.
Routes of transition from hand tool to automaton.
Man working a treadle grindstone.
Skilled and determining systems.
Gin-horses.
The organisations of manufacture and machinofacture.
The transition in knowledge and devices from the personal to the
impersonal.
Dwelling and commodity perspectives on time, activity, production
and exchange.
Patterns of wrapping in coiled basketry.
Artefactual and natural spirals: coiled basketry and gastropod shell.
Procedure for looping bilum fabric among the Telefolmin of central
New Guinea.
Common stitches and fastenings used by male weaverbirds in constructing
their nests.
The Tasmanian toolkit.
The development of material culture.
Inuit toggle-headed ‘feather’ harpoon and throwing board.
Decorated spear thrower from the Nyatunyara people of the Australian
Western Desert.
The orthodox distinction between evolution and development.
The analogy between genes and words as signs.
The relation between message, vehicle and interpretation, and its
biological analogue.
Individual and social learning.
The origin of ‘true humanity’ at the intersection between biological
evolution culture history.
The orthodox view of the relation between biogenetic and cultural
transmission.
Two theories of copying: the Darwinian account and the ‘developmental
systems approach’.
Two claims for the construction of mind.
A two-stage model of cognitive development.

Skill
I am a perpetual student of anthropology, taught largely by those whom I am supposed to 3
have been teaching. And no-one could have had a more inspiring set of teachers than the 4
group of research students with whom I have had the privilege to work over the last ten 5
years or so in the Department of Social Anthropology at Manchester University. This book 6
is, in many ways, a summation of all I have learned from them, and with them. So here 7
they are, with my thanks to each and every one: Stephanie Bunn, Sveinn Eggertsson, Ramsey 8
Elkholy, James Leach, Claudia Gross, Wendy Gunn, Kawori Iguchi, Axel Köhler, Nuccio 9
Mazzullo, Martin Ortlieb, Antonia Phinnemore, Amanda Ravetz, Javier Taks, Paul Towell, 20
Nikolai Zhoukov.
Everyone who has ever visited Manchester University’s Social Anthropology Department 2
has the same thing to say about it. There is an extraordinary buzz about the place: a sense 3
of intellectual adventure, of radical thinking, bold innovation, crackling debate, and above 4
all, collegiality. Like everywhere else, the department has had its fair share of the ups and 5
downs of British academic life. But all things considered, it has been a wonderful environ- 6
ment in which to work. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all my erstwhile 7
colleagues in the department – over a period spanning a quarter of a century, from 1974 8
to 1999 – for their support, encouragement and criticism.
The book would never have been completed, however, had it not been for the award 30
of a two-year Research Readership from the British Academy (1997–99). After a stint of 1
over four years as head of department, which left me with little time or energy to put 2
pen to paper, this award came as a godsend. It gave me that extra space I needed to think, 3
read and write. At a time when genuine scholarship has been squeezed into the margins 4
of academic life, the kind of support offered by the British Academy is more vital than 5
ever. I would particularly like to thank the Academy’s ever-helpful Assistant Secretary for 6
Research, Ken Emond.
In September 1999, only months before completing this book, I left Manchester to 8
take up a newly-established Chair of Social Anthropology at the University of Aberdeen. 9
Thus the book was ﬁnished amidst the chaos of moving house and ofﬁces. For me, 40
however, its completion marks not an ending but a new beginning, and I would like to 1
extend my gratitude to Steve Bruce and his staff in the Department of Sociology at 2
Aberdeen, and to the University’s Principal, Duncan Rice, for making this possible.
Two scholars to whom I am particularly indebted for their inspiration and guidance 4
are sadly no longer with us. They are Edward Reed and Alfred Gell. I offer this work as 5
a tribute to them both. Many, many more friends and colleagues have, over the years, 6
been generous with their ideas, and have done their best to educate me, point me in the 7
right directions and suggest works I should read. They include: Barbara Adam, David 118

Chapter One

Acknowledgements

Acknowledgements

Anderson, Michael Bravo, Nurit Bird-David, Bjorn Bjerkli, Mary Bouquet, Ben Campbell,
Juliet Clutton-Brock, Denis Cosgrove, Alan Costall, Akira Deguchi, Philippe Descola,
Marcia-Anne Dobres, Robin Dunbar, Roy Ellen, Gillian Feeley-Harnik, Harvey Feit,
Raymond Firth, Katsuyoshi Fukui, Maurice Godelier, Brian Goodwin, Peter Gow, Paul
Graves-Brown, Robin Grove-White, Steven Gudeman, Mark Harris, John Haworth, Harry
Heft, Mae-Wan Ho, Alf Hornborg, Mitsuo Ichikawa, Charles Keller, Heonik Kwon, Jean
Lave, Ivan Leudar, David Lowenthal, Lye Tuck-Po, Bill McGrew, Kathleen Gibson, Mary
Midgley, Kay Milton, Howard Morphy, Brian Morris, John Morton, Emiko OhnukiTierney, Susan Oyama, Gisli Palsson, Bryan Pfaffenberger, Rik Pinxten, Alan Rayner, Paul
Richards, Laura Rival, Sidsel Saugestad, Colin Scott, John Shotter, François Sigaut, Marilyn
Strathern, Yutaka Tani, Luke Taylor, Christina Toren, David Turnbull, Eduardo Viveiros
de Castro, Gerry Webster, James Weiner, Harvey Whitehouse, Peter Wilson, James
Woodburn and Tom Wynn. My thanks to all.
I dedicate this book to three remarkable women: to my mother, Nora Ingold; to my
wife, Anna Ingold; and to my daughter, Susanna Ingold. They have given me life, love
and happiness. Who could ask for more?
The majority of the essays making up the book have been previously published. All have
been more or less extensively revised for the present volume.
Chapter One was originally presented in the series of Linacre Lectures at the University
of Oxford, and I thank Sir Bryan Cartledge for the invitation to deliver the lecture. It
was ﬁrst published in Mind, brain and environment: the Linacre Lectures 1995–96, edited
by Bryan Cartledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998, pp. 158–80).
Chapter Two has evolved from a paper presented to the session on ‘Nature and society:
a contested interface’, at the Third Conference of the European Association of Social
Anthropologists, University of Oslo, June 1994. It was ﬁrst published in Nature and society:
anthropological perspectives, edited by Philippe Descola and Gisli Palsson (London:
Routledge, 1996, pp. 25–44).
Chapter Three has its origins in a paper presented at the MOA International
Symposium, ‘Beyond nature and culture: cognition, ecology and domestication’, held in
Kyoto and Atami, Japan, in March 1992. I am grateful to Katsuyoshi Fukui for the invitation to attend the symposium. The paper was ﬁrst published in Redeﬁning nature: ecology,
culture and domestication, edited by Roy Ellen and Katsuyoshi Fukui (Oxford: Berg, 1996,
pp. 117–55), and is reproduced by permission.
The essay included here as Chapter Four was ﬁrst presented to a conference organised
by the Royal Society of Edinburgh on ‘Animals and society: changing perspectives’, in
October 1991. It was published in the resulting volume, Animals and human society:
changing perspectives, edited by Aubrey Manning and James Serpell (London: Routledge,
1994, pp. 1–22).
Chapter Five started life as a presentation to a conference of the Prehistoric Society on
‘The origins and spread of agriculture and pastoralism in Eurasia’, held at the Institute
of Archaeology, University of London, in September 1993. It was ﬁrst published in this
form under the title ‘Growing plants and raising animals: an anthropological perspective
on domestication’, in the conference volume, The origins and spread of agriculture and
pastoralism, edited by David Harris (London: UCL Press, 1996, pp. 12–24). The essay
was subsequently revised for presentation to the colloquium on ‘cognitive aspects of early
food production’, organised by the Italian Institute for Philosophical Studies and the

Acknowledgements
Anthropological Museum of Naples, and held in Naples in March 1996. I am most 1
grateful to Francesca Giusti for the invitation to contribute to the symposium.
Chapter Six actually began as an undergraduate lecture, and was subsequently presented 3
(in Finnish) as a guest lecture to the Anthropological Society of Finland, Helsinki, in 4
March 1995. It has however been completely rewritten for the present volume, and is 5
published here for the ﬁrst time.
A preliminary sketch for the essay that appears as Chapter Seven was presented to the 7
Seventh International Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies, held in Moscow 8
in August 1993. I did not ﬁnd time to write it up properly, however, until 1998, in 9
response to a commission to contribute to a volume, entitled Animal. Anima. Animus, 10
accompanying a highly innovative exhibition of the same name mounted by Pori Art 1
Museum, Finland. The volume, edited by Marketta Seppälä, Jari-Pekka Vanhala and Linda 2
Weintraub, was published by the Museum in 1998, and the essay (pp. 181–207) is repro- 3
duced here by permission.
Chapter Eight has evolved from a paper ﬁrst presented to the session on ‘Images of self 5
and other’ at the Eighth International Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies, 6
held at the National Museum of Ethnology, Osaka, Japan, in October 1998. It has not 7
been published previously.
Chapter Nine began as one of a series of lectures presented to postgraduate students 9
in psychology at the University of Manchester. It was subsequently published as a chapter 20
in a book based on the series, entitled Psychological research: innovative methods and strate- 1
gies, and edited by the series co-ordinator, John Howarth (London: Routledge, 1996, pp. 2
99–119).
The essay included here as Chapter Ten has a long history, and has gone through many 4
versions. A rough sketch was presented to the workshop ‘Constructing Environments’, 5
organised by the Biological and Social Anthropology Committee of the Royal 6
Anthropological Institute, and held in London in January 1991. Later versions were 7
presented to the graduate seminar of the Department of Social Anthropology at the 8
University of Bergen, and to the seminars of the International Centre for Contemporary 9
Cultural Research and the Department of Architecture at the University of Manchester. 30
I then rewrote it once more for the opening session, entitled ‘Shifting contexts’, of the 1
Fourth Decennial Conference of the Association of Social Anthropologists held at St 2
Catherine’s College, Oxford, in July 1993. The essay was ﬁrst published in a volume of 3
papers from the session, entitled Shifting contexts: transformations in anthropological know- 4
ledge, edited by Marilyn Strathern (London: Routledge, 1995, pp. 57–80).
Chapter Eleven was originally presented to the session ‘Place, time and experience: inter- 6
preting prehistoric landscapes’, at the Conference of the Theoretical Archaeology Group 7
held at the University of Leicester in December 1991. I later rewrote it for a special issue 8
of the journal World Archaeology on ‘Conceptions of time and ancient society’, under the 9
editorship of Richard Bradley (Volume 25, 1993, pp. 152–74).
An early version of Chapter Twelve was presented to the Association of Social 1
Anthropologists Conference on ‘Environmentalism’, held at the University of Durham in 2
April 1992. It was published in the resulting volume, Environmentalism: the view from 3
anthropology, edited by Kay Milton (London: Routledge, 1993, pp. 31–42).
The essays comprising Chapters Thirteen and Fourteen have been written especially for 5
this volume.
Chapter Fifteen was originally written for presentation to the symposium on ‘Doing 7
things with tools’, co-organised by Ed Reed and myself, and held as part of the Fourth 118

Acknowledgements

International Conference on Event Perception and Action, Trieste, Italy, in August 1987.
It was subsequently published in the journal Techniques et Culture (Volume 12, 1988, pp.
151–76), and is reproduced here, in a substantially revised form, by permission of the
Editor, Jean-Luc Jamard.
Chapter Sixteen is based on a paper originally presented to a comparative workshop on
tool technology held at the University of Cambridge in November 1989, and ﬁrst published
in Archaeological Review from Cambridge (Volume 9, 1990, pp. 5–17). I later revised the
paper for presentation to the Wenner-Gren International Symposium on ‘Tools, language
and intelligence: evolutionary implications’, held in Cascais, Portugal, in March 1990. In
this form it appeared under the title ‘Tool-use, sociality and intelligence’, in the symposium volume Tools, language and cognition in human evolution, edited by Kathleen Gibson
and myself (Cambridge University Press, 1993, pp. 429–45). It has since been further
revised, and is reproduced here by permission of Cambridge University Press.
Chapter Seventeen started life as an undergraduate lecture, and was subsequently
rewritten for presentation to the Eleventh Annual Conference of the Association for Social
Studies of Time, on ‘Time and work’, held at Dartington Hall, Devon, in July 1994. As
it turned out, I was unable to attend the conference; however, I subsequently revised the
paper for publication in the journal Time and Society (Volume 4, 1995, pp. 5–28). It is
reprinted here by permission of Sage Publications Ltd.
I was encouraged to write the essay that now appears as Chapter Eighteen by Mary
Butcher, in response to the superb exhibition on basketry and textiles, entitled ‘Beyond
the bounds’, that she had assembled in the Righton Gallery of Manchester Metropolitan
University, in March and April 1996. A much revised version of that original essay was
recently published in a volume entitled Mind, materiality and modern culture, edited by
Paul Graves-Brown (London: Routledge, 2000, pp. 50–71). It has been further revised
for the present volume.
Chapter Nineteen overlaps, in part, with a paper presented to a seminar on ‘The
Anthropology of Technology’, sponsored by the Amerind Foundation and held in
Dragoon, Arizona, in October 1998. I am grateful to the Foundation and to Michael B.
Schiffer for the invitation to contribute.
Much of the material for Chapter Twenty is drawn from a longer paper, ‘Eight themes
in the anthropology of technology’, published in a special issue of the journal Social Analysis
(Volume 4, 1997, pp. 106–38). This issue, edited by Penny Harvey, resulted from a series
of seminars on ‘Technology as skilled practice’ held during 1995 and 1996 at the University
of Manchester, and funded by the Economic and Social Research Council. I am grateful
to the Council, and to Penny Harvey, for the opportunity to contribute to this exciting
series, and to the editors of Social Analysis for permission to reproduce the material here.
Chapter Twenty-one started out as a paper presented to the symposium ‘Man, ape,
apeman: changing views since 1600’, held as part of the Pithecanthropus Centennial
(1893–1993) Congress on ‘Human Evolution in its Ecological Context’ at Leiden
University, The Netherlands, in June 1993. It was ﬁrst published in the conference publication, Man, ape, apeman: changing views since 1600, edited by Raymond Corbey and
Bert Theunissen (Evaluative Proceedings of the Pithecanthropus Centennial congress,
Volume IV, Leiden, 1995, pp. 241–62). A somewhat revised version was subsequently
published in the journal Cultural Dynamics (Volume 7, 1995, pp. 187–214). It has been
further revised here, and is reproduced by permission of Sage Publications Ltd.
The essay that appears as Chapter Twenty-two was ﬁrst presented as the Jan Wind
Memorial Lecture, at the Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the Language Origins Society,

Acknowledgements
held in Pilsen, the Czech Republic, in July 1997. It was subsequently published in the 1
journal LOS Forum (Number 25, 1997, pp. 21–38). I am grateful to the Society, and to 2
its President, Bernard H. Bichakjian, for permission to publish a much revised version of 3
the essay in this book.
Finally, Chapter Twenty-three was originally written as a ﬁnal epilogue to the book 5
Tools, language and cognition in human evolution, edited by Kathleen Gibson and myself 6
(Cambridge University Press, 1993, pp. 449–72). I am grateful to Cambridge University 7
Press for permission to reproduce it here in a revised form.
Tim Ingold 10
Aberdeen 1
March 2000 2

Chapter One

General introduction

This book has grown from the same concerns as those that, over thirty years ago, led me
to embark upon the study of anthropology. At school I had done well in mathematics
and, thanks to a wonderful teacher, I had been ﬁred by a passion for physics. It was
assumed that I should go to university to read natural science. But my initial enthusiasm
soon gave way to disillusionment. Like so many of my contemporaries I was appalled by
the extent to which science had reneged both on its sense of democratic responsibility
and on its original commitment to enlarge the scope of human knowledge, and had
allowed itself to become subservient to the demands of the military-industrial complex.
The scientiﬁc establishment, it seemed to me, was so massively institutionalised, internally
specialised and oppressively hierarchical that as a professional scientist one could never be
more than a small cog in a huge juggernaut of an enterprise. Towards the end of my ﬁrst
year at university I went to see my tutor, and politely informed him over a glass of sherry
(this was Cambridge!) that natural science was not for me, and that I was seeking a discipline where there was more room to breathe. It would be exciting, I thought, to join in
a subject still on the make – one, perhaps, that was in the same formative stage that
physics was in at the time of Galileo.
My tutor, whose considerable percipience was laced with a hint of mischief, suggested
anthropology. I, of course, with that callow conceit of the Cambridge undergraduate who
thinks himself too clever by half, wanted to be the Galileo of anthropology – provided
that I did not have to suffer as Galileo did. Though I have long since abandoned these
adolescent fantasies, the real intellectual reasons why I took up anthropology then (it was
1967) are still the reasons why I study it now. Concerned about the widening gap between
the arts and the humanities on the one hand, and the natural sciences on the other, I
was looking for a discipline that would somehow close the gap, or enable us to rise above
it, while still remaining close to the realities of lived experience. Anthropology, for me,
has been that discipline, and since embarking on it I have never looked back. I have,
however, often looked from side to side, observing with mounting despair how it has been
fractured along the very lines of ﬁssion that I thought it existed to overcome. These fractures ultimately seem to derive from a single, underlying fault upon which the entire
ediﬁce of Western thought and science has been built – namely that which separates the
‘two worlds’ of humanity and nature. For this is what has given us the overriding academic division of labour between the disciplines that deal, on the one hand, with the human
mind and its manifold linguistic, social and cultural products, and on the other, with the
structures and composition of the material world. And it also cleaves anthropology itself
into its sociocultural and biophysical divisions, whose respective practitioners have less to
say to one another than they do to colleagues in other disciplines on the same side of the

General introduction
academic fence. Social or cultural anthropologists would rather read the work of histo- 1
rians, linguists, philosophers and literary critics; biological or physical anthropologists prefer 2
to talk to colleagues in other ﬁelds of biology or biomedicine.
My aim has always been to bring these two sides of anthropology together. There must 4
be something wrong, I reasoned, with a social or cultural anthropology that cannot coun- 5
tenance the fact that human beings are biological organisms that have evolved, and that 6
undergo processes of growth and development, as other organisms do. But there must be 7
something equally wrong with a biological anthropology that denies anything but a prox- 8
imate role for agency, intentionality or imagination in the direction of human affairs. 9
Advocates of both extreme positions are not hard to ﬁnd, from those who insist, on the 10
one hand, that there is nothing that is not socially or culturally constructed to those, on 1
the other, who hold that all there is to know about human beings is written into our 2
genetic constitution, and therefore that by deciphering the genome we would discover the 3
key to our humanity. In steering a course between these extremes, my ﬁrst inclination 4
was to argue for the essential complementarity of the biogenetic and sociocultural dimen- 5
sions of human existence. The fact that human beings are organisms whose life and 6
reproduction depends upon their interaction with organisms of other species, as well as 7
with abiotic components of the environment, does not rule out the possibility that they 8
are also aware of themselves as beings who can relate to one another as subjects, and who 9
can therefore – on this intersubjective level – enjoy a distinctively social life. Likewise, the 20
fact that human beings are the bearers of genes whose speciﬁc combination is a product 1
of variation under natural selection does not mean that they cannot also be the bearers 2
of cultural traditions that may be passed on by a process of learning in some ways anal- 3
ogous to, but by the same token fundamentally distinct from, the process of genetic 4
replication.
In 1986 I brought out a book, entitled Evolution and social life, in which I attempted, 6
among other things, to establish this complementarity thesis. But as several critics pointed 7
out, the argument of the book did not really cohere, since the connection between the 8
human being as a biological organism, and as a social subject or person, could not be 9
substantiated save by way of a third term, namely the human mind. The discipline that 30
exists to study the mind is, of course, psychology. In my book I had virtually ignored 1
psychology, largely because I had had my work cut out simply in ﬁnding my way through 2
the extensive literatures in anthropology and biology. But the criticism was just: there 3
would seem to be no way of piecing together the two halves of anthropology, the biophys- 4
ical and sociocultural, without taking a loop through psychology. Clearly, I would have 5
to read up on the subject. I was introduced to it, however, from a rather unorthodox 6
angle. On the recommendation of several friends and colleagues, I turned to the writings 7
of James Gibson and, in particular, to his masterpiece of 1979, The ecological approach to 8
visual perception. Reading this book was a revelation: indeed I cannot think of any other 9
work that has exerted a greater inﬂuence on my thinking over the last ten years or so. 40
This inﬂuence is evident in everything I have written since, including the essays that make 1
up this volume.
Gibson wanted to know how people come to perceive the environment around them. 3
The majority of psychologists, at least at the time when Gibson was writing, assumed that 4
they did so by constructing representations of the world inside their heads. It was supposed 5
that the mind got to work on the raw material of experience, consisting of sensations of 6
light, sound, pressure on the skin, and so on, organising it into an internal model which, 7
in turn, could serve as a guide to subsequent action. The mind, then, was conceived as 118

General introduction

a kind of data-processing device, akin to a digital computer, and the problem for the
psychologist was to ﬁgure out how it worked. But Gibson’s approach was quite different.
It was to throw out the idea, that has been with us since the time of Descartes, of the
mind as a distinct organ that is capable of operating upon the bodily data of sense.
Perception, Gibson argued, is not the achievement of a mind in a body, but of the
organism as a whole in its environment, and is tantamount to the organism’s own
exploratory movement through the world. If mind is anywhere, then, it is not ‘inside the
head’ rather than ‘out there’ in the world. To the contrary, it is immanent in the network
of sensory pathways that are set up by virtue of the perceiver’s immersion in his or her
environment. Reading Gibson, I was reminded of the teaching of that notorious maverick
of anthropology, Gregory Bateson. The mind, Bateson had always insisted, is not limited
by the skin. Could not an ecological approach to perception provide the link I was looking
for, between the biological life of the organism in its environment and the cultural life
of the mind in society?
The issue for me, at the time, was to ﬁnd a way of formulating this link that could
also resolve what I felt to be a deep-rooted problem in my own work. Setting out from
the complementarity thesis, I had argued that human beings must simultaneously be constituted both as organisms within systems of ecological relations, and as persons within
systems of social relations. The critical task for anthropology, it seemed, was to understand the reciprocal interplay between the two kinds of system, social and ecological. In
1986, alongside Evolution and social life, I had brought out a book of essays under the
title The appropriation of nature, all of which sought to explore this interplay in one way
or another. But I had continued to be troubled by the inherent dualism of this approach,
with its implied dichotomies between person and organism, society and nature. I vividly
remember one Saturday morning in April 1988 – an entirely ordinary one for Manchester
at that time of year, with grey skies and a little rain – when, on my way to catch a bus,
it suddenly dawned on me that the organism and the person could be one and the same.
Instead of trying to reconstruct the complete human being from two separate but complementary components, respectively biophysical and sociocultural, held together with a ﬁlm
of psychological cement, it struck me that we should be trying to ﬁnd a way of talking
about human life that eliminates the need to slice it up into these different layers.
Everything I have written since has been driven by this agenda.
Why had this view, that the person is the organism, and not something added on top,
eluded me for so long? In retrospect it seems so obvious as almost to ‘go without saying’.
I now realise that the obstacle that had prevented me from seeing it was a certain conception of the organism, one that is built into mainstream theory in both evolutionary and
environmental biology. According to this conception, every organism is a discrete, bounded
entity, a ‘living thing’, one of a population of such things, and relating to other organisms in its environment along lines of external contact that leave its basic, internally
speciﬁed nature unaffected. I had assumed that my task was not to challenge accepted
biological wisdom but to reconcile it with what contemporary anthropology has to teach
us about the constitution of human beings as persons. This is that the identities and characteristics of persons are not bestowed upon them in advance of their involvement with
others but are the condensations of histories of growth and maturation within ﬁelds of
social relationships. Thus every person emerges as a locus of development within such a
ﬁeld, which is in turn carried forward and transformed through their own actions.
Understanding persons in this way, however, calls for a kind of ‘relational thinking’
that goes right against the grain of the ‘population thinking’ that has been de rigueur in

General introduction
biological science ever since the establishment of the so-called modern synthesis of 1
Darwinian theory and population genetics. Now so long as the organism and the person 2
are conceived as separate components of the human being, one could perhaps think about 3
the former in populational terms and the latter in relational terms, without fear of contra- 4
diction. Whereas the population, it might be said, is of individual objects (organisms), 5
relationships exist between social or cultural subjects (persons). But if persons are organ- 6
isms, then the principles of relational thinking, far from being restricted to the domain 7
of human sociality, must be applicable right across the continuum of organic life. What 8
I glimpsed, on that fateful day in 1988, was that this would require nothing less than a 9
radically alternative biology. For if every organism is not so much a discrete entity as a 10
node in a ﬁeld of relationships, then we have to think in a new way not only about the 1
interdependence of organisms and their environments but also about their evolution.
Of course, like all good ideas, others had had it before. On further inquiry I discov- 3
ered that there already existed a considerable literature taking up what I would call a 4
relational view of the organism, and that sets out expressly to break the stranglehold that 5
neo-Darwinian theory has tended to exert, up to now, on mainstream biological thought. 6
Signiﬁcantly, most of the contributors to this literature work in the ﬁeld of developmental 7
biology. They have been concerned to unravel the dynamics of those processes of growth 8
and maturation that actually give rise to the forms and capacities of organisms. And they 9
have shown, quite convincingly, that it is not enough to regard these forms and capaci- 20
ties as the mere expressions of designs or blueprints that have already been established by 1
natural selection, and that are imparted to every organism-to-be – along with its comple- 2
ment of genes – at the moment of conception. The characteristics of organisms, they 3
argue, are not so much expressed as generated in the course of development, arising as 4
emergent properties of the ﬁelds of relationship set up through their presence and activity 5
within a particular environment. Here, then, was the biology that would help to substan- 6
tiate my view of the organism-person, undergoing growth and development in an 7
environment furnished by the work and presence of others.
It is a biology, however, that also resonates very closely with the principles of Gibsonian 9
ecological psychology. Both approaches take as their point of departure the developing 30
organism-in-its-environment, as opposed to the self-contained individual confronting a 1
world ‘out there’. The approaches are linked, too, in terms of their opposition to estab- 2
lished positions in biology and psychology. Indeed there is a striking parallel between the 3
‘developmentalist’ critique of neo-Darwinian biology and the ‘ecological’ critique of main- 4
stream cognitive psychology. In both cases the objection is to the idea that what an 5
organism does, or what it perceives, is the calculated output of an intelligent design, 6
whether that intelligence be equated with the mind or with natural selection (which is, 7
after all, but the reﬂection of scientiﬁc reason in the mirror of nature). Moreover, a very 8
similar objection can be raised against those versions of culture theory, in anthropology, 9
that would attribute human behaviour to designs that are passed from one generation to 40
the next as the content of acquired tradition. These parallels led me to suggest that a 1
combination of ‘relational’ thinking in anthropology, ‘ecological’ thinking in psychology 2
and ‘developmental systems’ thinking in biology would yield a synthesis inﬁnitely more 3
powerful than any of the ‘biosocial’, ‘psychocultural’ or ‘biopsychocultural’ alternatives 4
currently on offer, all of which invoke some version of the complementarity thesis.
Crucially, such a synthesis would start from a conception of the human being not as 6
a composite entity made up of separable but complementary parts, such as body, mind 7
and culture, but rather as a singular locus of creative growth within a continually unfolding 118

General introduction

ﬁeld of relationships. In the following chapters I pursue three implications of this approach.
The ﬁrst is that much if not all of what we are accustomed to call cultural variation in
fact consists of variations of skills. By skills I do not mean techniques of the body, but
the capabilities of action and perception of the whole organic being (indissolubly mind
and body) situated in a richly structured environment. As properties of human organisms,
skills are thus as much biological as cultural. Secondly, and stemming from the above,
becoming skilled in the practice of a certain form of life is not a matter of furnishing a
set of generalised capacities, given from the start as compartments of a universal human
nature, with speciﬁc cultural content. Skills are not transmitted from generation to generation but are regrown in each, incorporated into the modus operandi of the developing
human organism through training and experience in the performance of particular tasks.
Hence, thirdly, the study of skill demands a perspective which situates the practitioner,
right from the start, in the context of an active engagement with the constituents of his
or her surroundings. I call this the ‘dwelling perspective’. Humans, I argue, are brought
into existence as organism-persons within a world that is inhabited by beings of manifold
kinds, both human and non-human. Therefore relations among humans, which we are
accustomed to calling ‘social’, are but a sub-set of ecological relations.
The essays collected together here comprise a series of attempts to establish this relationalecological-developmental synthesis. I have come to the project from a background in ecological anthropology, in the anthropology of technology, and in the history of anthropological
theory. In my ecological work I have concentrated on the comparative study of huntergatherer and pastoral societies, an interest that has its roots in my earlier research on northern circumpolar reindeer hunting and herding peoples. This accounts for my particular
concern with human-animal relations, and with the conceptualisation of the humanityanimality interface. It is also the reason why, in selecting ethnographic material to substantiate my arguments, I have tended to go for studies of northern circumpolar societies.
My interest in technology developed in part from a reconsideration of the signiﬁcance of
toolmaking as an index of human distinctiveness, and in part from a growing interest in the
connection, in human evolution, between technology and language. More recently, I have
tried to ﬁnd ways of bringing together the anthropologies of technology and of art, and it is
this, above all, that has led me to my present view of the centrality of skilled practice. In my
work on the history of theory I focused on the way in which the notion of evolution has
ﬁgured in the writings of anthropologists, biologists and historians from the late nineteenth
century to the present. The key question to which I sought an answer was how, if at all, the
concept of evolution was to be separated from that of history. I did not resolve this question
to my satisfaction, and it has remained at the top of my agenda. I believe now that the
proposed synthesis of relational, ecological and developmental approaches offers a solution.
The volume is divided into three parts. In the ﬁrst, on ‘livelihood’, my concern is to
ﬁnd a way of comprehending how human beings relate to their environments, in the tasks
of making a living, that does not set up a polarity between the ecological domain of their
relations with non-human ‘nature’ and the cognitive domain of its cultural construction.
The second part, on ‘dwelling’, explores the implications of the position that awareness
and activity are rooted in the engagement between persons and environment for our understanding of perception and cognition, architecture and the built environment, local and
global conceptions of environmental change, landscape and temporality, mapping and
wayﬁnding, and the differentiation of the senses. In the third part, on ‘skill’, I show how
a focus on practical enskilment, conceived as the embodiment of capacities of awareness
and response by environmentally situated agents, can help us to overcome both an overly

General introduction
rigid division between the works of human beings and those of non-human animals and, 1
in the human case, the opposition between the ﬁelds of ‘art’ and ‘technology’. This tripar- 2
tite division is, however, largely a matter of convenience. The parts themselves are anything 3
but watertight. All I can say is that there is a rather greater density of thematic inter- 4
connectedness among the chapters making up each part than there is between them.
As for the individual chapters, they are of diverse origin. Most were initially written 6
for presentation at conferences, and have been extensively revised since. Earlier versions 7
of many of these have already appeared in conference publications. Naturally, the form 8
and substance of each essay have to some extent been dictated by the needs of the occa- 9
sion for which it was originally prepared. All were written, however, with the ultimate 10
intention of bringing them together into one coherent work. With one exception, none 1
dates back more than a decade: thus they all represent my post-1988 thinking. The excep- 2
tion is Chapter 15, which I ﬁrst drafted for a conference in 1987. I have included it here 3
since it marks the beginnings of my reconsideration of the concept of technology. Four 4
chapters (Six, Eight, Thirteen and Fourteen) have been written specially for this volume. 5
Chapter Fourteen is by far and away the longest, and it was undoubtedly, for me, the 6
most challenging to write. Surveying the book in its entirety, I see it somewhat in 7
the shape of a mountain, with a steady climb through the ﬁrst part, a brief plateau at the 8
start of the second followed by an ascent to the summit in Chapters Thirteen and Fourteen. 9
Having reached that far, the third part affords a relatively easy descent. But like a moun- 20
tain, one could just as well proceed in the other direction, starting with the third part 1
and ending with the ﬁrst. Indeed there is no ﬁxed order in which the chapters should be 2
tackled. Each can be read and understood on its own, or as one of the set of explorations 3
of closely connected themes comprising each part, which in turn can be read as one aspect 4
of the total intellectual project comprised by the book as a whole.
Before closing this general introduction, I should insert a note about my use of the 6
concepts of ‘the Western’ and ‘the modern’. These concepts have been the source of no 7
end of trouble for anthropologists, and I am no exception. Every time I ﬁnd myself using 8
them I bite my lip with frustration, and wish that I could avoid it. The objections to the 9
concepts are well known: that in most anthropological accounts they serve as a largely 30
implicit foil against which to contrast a ‘native point of view’; that much of the philo- 1
sophical ammunition for the critique of so-called Western or modern thought comes 2
straight out of the Western tradition itself (thus we ﬁnd such ﬁgures as the young Karl 3
Marx, Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty enlisted in the enterprise of showing 4
how the understandings of North American Indians, New Guinea Highlanders or 5
Australian Aborigines differ from those of ‘Euro-Americans’); that once we get to know 6
people well – even the inhabitants of nominally Western countries – not one of them 7
turns out to be a full-blooded Westerner, or even to be particularly modern in their 8
approach to life; and that the Western tradition of thought, closely examined, is as richly 9
various, multivocal, historically changeable and contest-riven as any other.
For those of us who call ourselves academics and intellectuals, however, there is a good 1
reason why we cannot escape ‘the West’, or avoid the anxieties of modernity. It is that 2
our very activity, in thinking and writing, is underpinned by a belief in the absolute worth 3
of disciplined, rational inquiry. In this book, it is to this belief that the terms ‘Western’ 4
and ‘modern’ refer. And however much we may object to the dichotomies to which it 5
gives rise, between humanity and nature, intelligence and instinct, the mental and the 6
material, and so on, the art of critical disputation on these matters is precisely what ‘the 7
West’ is all about. For when all is said and done, there can be nothing more ‘Western’, 118

General introduction

or more ‘modern’, than to write an academic book such as this. Nor can I be anything
less than profoundly grateful for the freedom, education and institutional facilities that
have allowed me to do so.

Part I

Livelihood

INTRODUCTION
My focus, in the essays making up this part, is on the ways in which human beings relate
to components of their environment in the activities of subsistence procurement. I draw,
in particular, on ethnographic studies of people who make their living primarily by hunting
and gathering. In the existing anthropological literature on hunting and gathering societies, questions of how people interact, practically and technically, with the resources of
their environment in obtaining a livelihood tend to be treated separately from questions
of how their lifeworld is imaginatively ‘constructed’, in myth, religion and ceremony. The
former are typically addressed in naturalistic terms, often by way of comparison with the
foraging behaviour of non-human animals, and drawing on the same frameworks of
concepts and theory as have been employed by animal ecologists. The latter, by contrast,
are considered suitable topics for cultural analysis, concerned as it is with the ways in
which the environment, and people’s relations with it, are represented in consciousness.
I believe that this division between naturalistic and ‘culturalogical’ accounts is unfortunate, in that it takes for granted precisely the separation, of the naturally real from the
culturally imagined, that needs to be put into question if we are to get to the bottom of
people’s own perceptions of the world. Starting from the premise that ways of acting in
the environment are also ways of perceiving it, these essays suggest how the division might
be overcome.
I set the scene, in Chapter One, by comparing the accounts that Western biologists
and indigenous hunters give of the behaviour of caribou during episodes of predation. I
show that the scientiﬁc authority of the former account, as well as the anthropological
understanding of the latter as ﬁtting within a culturally speciﬁc cosmology, depend on a
two-step movement of disengagement that cuts out ﬁrst nature, then culture, as objects
of attention. I then set out to retrace these steps in the reverse direction, in an attempt
to replace the dichotomy of nature and culture with the synergy of organism and environment, and thereby to regain a genuine ecology of life. The inspiration for this move comes
from the work of Gregory Bateson, whose ideas are introduced through a contrast with
those of Claude Lévi-Strauss. Both authors set out to demolish the distinction between
mind and nature, but whereas for Lévi-Strauss the mind recovers information from the
world through a process of decoding, for Bateson it is opened out to the world in a
process of revelation. This contrast is linked to two senses in which it might be said that
novices, in learning to perceive the world around them, are furnished with ‘keys to
meaning’. The key could be a cipher or a clue. I argue that sensory education consists in
the acquisition of clues, not ciphers, and that songs and stories – including stories of how

Livelihood
animals respond to the presence of the hunter – give shape to a perception of the world 1
guided by this education. The knowledge grounded in such perception, I conclude, 2
amounts to what may be regarded as a ‘sentient ecology’.
In the following two chapters I argue, ﬁrst, against the naturalisation of the hunter- 4
gatherer economy under the rubric of ‘foraging’, and secondly, against the complementary 5
claim that in the eyes of the people themselves, the environment they inhabit is cultur- 6
ally constructed. Chapter Two is a critique of attempts, under the guise of ‘human 7
evolutionary ecology’, to apply models designed for the study of non-human foraging 8
behaviour to the analysis of human hunting and gathering. This application results from 9
a conﬂation of rational choice theory, drawn from classical microeconomics, with the 10
theory of natural selection, drawn from evolutionary biology. In the one case hunter- 1
gatherers are likened to ‘economic men’ who can work out their strategies for themselves. 2
In the other they are seen as ‘optimal foragers’ whose strategies have been worked out for 3
them by natural selection. These two characters fall on opposite sides of an overriding 4
opposition between reason and nature, or freedom and necessity. A properly ecological 5
account of hunting and gathering requires however that we dissolve this opposition, 6
showing how people develop their skills and sensitivities through histories of continuing 7
involvement with human and non-human constituents of their environments. For it is 8
by engaging with these manifold constituents that the world comes to be known by its 9
inhabitants.
In Chapter Three, I contrast this view, that hunter-gatherers’ perception of the environ- 1
ment is embedded in practices of engagement, with the more conventional alternative that 2
such perception results from the reconstruction of naturally given realities in terms of 3
metaphors drawn from the ideal realm of culture. I develop this contrast through a review, 4
ﬁrst, of how certain tropical hunter-gatherer peoples perceive their forest environment. 5
Secondly, I look at the way northern hunters, particularly the Cree of northeastern Canada, 6
understand their relations with the animals they hunt. Thirdly, drawing on ethnographic 7
material from Aboriginal Australia and subarctic Alaska, I consider how hunters and gath- 8
erers perceive the landscape. I conclude that anthropological attempts to depict the mode 9
of practical engagement of hunter-gatherers with the world as a mode of cultural construc- 30
tion of it have had the effect of perpetuating a naturalistic vision of the hunter-gatherer 1
economy. This vision of hunters and gatherers as ‘living in nature’ is closely tied to a 2
certain notion of history, as a process in which human beings have gradually risen above, 3
and brought under control, both their own nature, in the process of civilisation, and the 4
nature around them, in the domestication of animals and plants. In Chapters Four and 5
Five, I revisit this Western historical narrative of the human conquest of nature, and seek 6
to replace it with an alternative more in keeping with indigenous understandings.
Chapter Four focuses on the history of human–animal relations, and on the trans- 8
formation of these relations entailed in the shift from hunting to pastoralism. I argue that 9
relationships between hunters and prey are based on a principle of trust, constituted by 40
a combination of autonomy and dependency. The human–animal relationship under 1
pastoralism, by contrast, is based on a principle of domination. The transition from hunting 2
to pastoralism, therefore, is marked not by the replacement of wild by domesticated 3
animals, but by the movement from trust to domination in the principles of human beings’ 4
relations with them. Chapter ﬁve continues the critique of the notion of domestication, 5
and with it the dichotomy between collection and production, entailed in the notion of 6
history as the human transformation of nature. In terms of this dichotomy, growing crops 7
and raising animals are viewed as instances of production in the same way as is the 118

Introduction to Part I

manufacture of artefacts. In every case, things are ‘made’. Drawing on ethnographic studies
of how people who actually live by tilling the soil or keeping livestock understand the
nature of their activity, I show that the work people do does not make plants and animals,
but rather establishes the conditions for their growth and development. The distinctions
between gathering and cultivation, and between hunting and animal husbandry, thus hinge
on the scope of human involvement in establishing these conditions. Moreover, growing
plants and raising animals are not so different, in principle, from bringing up children.
Contrary to the conventional wisdom that not only animals and plants but also children
are ‘made’, through domestication and socialisation, I conclude that children, animals,
plants and even – in a sense – artefacts as well, are ‘grown’.
I return, in Chapter Six, to the theme of engagement, and to the different approaches
to environmental understanding of indigenous hunters and modern science. There is, as
I show, a paradox at the heart of science. For while, on the one hand, it asserts that
human beings are biological organisms, composed of the same stuff and having evolved
according to the same principles as organisms of every other kind, on the other hand the
very possibility of a scientiﬁc account rests on the separation of humanity from organic
nature. To resolve the paradox I suggest an alternative mode of understanding based on
the premise of our engagement with the world, rather than our detachment from it. I do
this by drawing on one anthropological study of how people in a non-Western society
perceive themselves and the world around them. This is A. Irving Hallowell’s classic study
of the Ojibwa, indigenous hunters and trappers of the Canadian boreal forest. For the
Ojibwa, knowledge is grounded in experience, understood as a coupling of the movement
of one’s awareness to the movement of aspects of the world. Experience, in this sense,
does not mediate between mind and nature, since these are not separated in the ﬁrst place.
It is rather intrinsic to the process of being alive to the world. This is linked to a view
of personhood in which the self is seen to inhere in the unfolding of the relations set up
by virtue of its positioning in an environment. The essay explores the implications of this
view of the self and experience for our understanding of animacy, metamorphosis, dreaming
and speech. I conclude that what the Ojibwa have arrived at is not an alternative science
of nature but a poetics of dwelling. Far from having been superseded, in the West, by
the rise of modern science, such poetics is the necessary ground for all scientiﬁc activity.
In Chapter Seven I turn from science to art. Whereas science is often supposed to be
a speciﬁc historical achievement of the Western world, art is commonly regarded as one
of the hallmarks of humanity, revealing a universal capacity to represent experience in
symbolic media. I argue against this view. Focusing on the ways in which hunters and
gatherers depict animals, in painting, drawing and sculpture, I show that activities leading
to the production of what we in the West would call ‘art’ should be understood not as
ways of representing the world of experience on a higher, more symbolic plane, but of
probing more deeply into it and discovering the signiﬁcance that lies there. The argument
is developed by way of a comparison between two distinct traditions, of ‘painting the
ancestors’ among Australian Aboriginal peoples and of ‘carving the spirits’ among the
peoples of the circumpolar North. The differences between these traditions reﬂect
contrasting understandings of the relationships between human beings, animals and the
land, which I call respectively totemic and animic. The fundamental difference between
the totemic and animic depiction of animals is that the former focuses on morphology
and anatomy, whereas the latter focuses on posture, movement and behaviour. But while
hunters and gatherers have been painting and carving ﬁgures of one kind or another for
thousands of years, only recently have they begun to engage in the production of ‘art’.

Livelihood
To understand the original signiﬁcance of what they were doing, I argue, we have to cease 1
thinking of painting and carving as modalities of the production of art, and view art 2
instead as a historically speciﬁc objectiﬁcation of painting and carving.
Now it is conventional to describe hunters and gatherers as indigenous inhabitants of 4
the lands in which they live. But precisely what it means to be ‘indigenous’ is a matter 5
of some controversy. According to one deﬁnition, indigenous peoples are the descendants 6
of those who inhabited a country when colonists arrived from elsewhere. Yet while habi- 7
tation of the land is taken to be the source of indigenous identity, the claim that this 8
identity can be passed on by descent implies that it is no longer drawn from the land at 9
all, but from one’s genealogical ancestors. I take up this paradox in Chapter Eight. It 10
hinges, as I show, on the interpretation of ﬁve key terms: ancestry, generation, substance, 1
memory and land. I show that the conventional meanings of these terms are linked through 2
their common grounding in what I call the ‘genealogical model’. After spelling out the 3
elements of this model, and the assumptions it entails, I argue that it fundamentally 4
misrepresents the ways in which peoples whom we class as indigenous constitute their 5
identity, knowledgeability, and the environments in which they live. I suggest an alter- 6
native, relational approach to interpreting the key terms which is more consonant with 7
these people’s lived experience of inhabiting the land. In this approach, which ties together 8
many of the key arguments of the preceding chapters while laying the groundwork for 9
the ecological and developmental perspectives to be elaborated in Parts II and III, both 20
cultural knowledge and bodily substance are seen to undergo continuous generation in 1
the context of an ongoing engagement with the land and with the beings that dwell 2
therein. I conclude that it is in articulating their experience in a way that is compatible 3
with the discourses of the state that people are led to lay claim to indigenous status, in 4
terms that nevertheless invert their own understandings.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter One

Culture, nature, environment
Steps to an ecology of life

As a social anthropologist whose ethnographic interests lie in the northern circumpolar
regions, I should like to begin with an observation drawn from my own ﬁeld experience
of mustering reindeer in Finnish Lapland. When pursuing reindeer, there often comes a
critical point when a particular animal becomes immediately aware of your presence. It
then does a strange thing. Instead of running away it stands stock still, turns its head and
stares you squarely in the face. Biologists have explained this behaviour as an adaptation
to predation by wolves. When the reindeer stops, the pursuing wolf stops too, both of
them getting their breath back for the ﬁnal, decisive phase of the episode when the deer
turns to ﬂight and the wolf rushes to overtake it. Since it is the deer that takes the initiative in breaking the stalemate, it has a slight head start, and indeed a healthy adult deer
can generally outrun a wolf (Mech 1970: 200–3). But the deer’s tactic, that gives it such
an advantage against wolves, renders it peculiarly vulnerable when encountering human
hunters equipped with projectile weapons or even ﬁrearms. When the animal turns to
face the hunter, it provides the latter with a perfect opportunity to take aim and shoot.
For wolves, deer are easy to ﬁnd, since they travel with the herd, but hard to kill; for
humans, to the contrary, deer may be hard to ﬁnd, but once you have established contact,
they are rather easy to kill (Ingold 1980: 53, 67).
Now the Cree people, native hunters of northeastern Canada, have a different explantation for why reindeer – or caribou as they are called in North America – are so easy to
kill. They say that the animal offers itself up, quite intentionally and in a spirit of goodwill or even love towards the hunter. The bodily substance of the caribou is not taken,
it is received. And it is at the moment of encounter, when the animal stands its ground
and looks the hunter in the eye, that the offering is made. As with many other hunting
people around the world, the Cree draw a parallel between the pursuit of animals and
the seduction of young women, and liken killing to sexual intercourse. In this light, killing
appears not as a termination of life but as an act that is critical to its regeneration.1

SCIENCE AND INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
Here, then, we have two accounts – one coming from biological science, the other from
indigenous people – of what happens when humans encounter reindeer or caribou.
My initial question is: how are we to understand the relation between them? Wildlife
biologists are liable to react to native stories about animals presenting themselves of their
own accord with a mixture of cynicism and incredulity. The cynical view would be that
such stories provide a very handy way of dodging the ethical issues surrounding hunting
and killing that cause such anxiety for many people in Western societies. For hunters, it

Livelihood
is most convenient to be able to transfer responsibility for the death of animals onto the 1
animals themselves. What the Western scientist ﬁnds hard to believe is that anybody 2
should be taken in by patently fanciful excuses of this kind. The fact of the matter, surely, 3
is that caribou are being tracked down and killed. Could any intelligent person seriously 4
think that animals actually offer themselves to hunters as recounted in the stories of 5
the Cree? Are the folk who tell these stories mad, lost in a fog of irrational superstition, 6
talking in allegories, or simply having us on? Whatever the answer may be, science insists 7
that stories are stories, and as such have no purchase on what really goes on in the 8
natural world.
Anthropologists are inclined to take a rather different approach. On being told that the 10
success of hunting depends upon the bestowal of favour by animals, the anthropologist’s 1
ﬁrst concern is not to judge the truth of the proposition but to understand what it means, 2
given the context in which it is advanced. Thus it can readily be shown that the idea of 3
animals offering themselves to hunters, however bizarre it might seem from the viewpoint 4
of Western science, makes perfectly good sense if we start from the assumption (as the 5
Cree evidently do) that the entire world – and not just the world of human persons – is 6
saturated with powers of agency and intentionality. In Cree cosmology, the anthropolo- 7
gist concludes, relations with animals are modelled on those that obtain within the human 8
community, such that hunting is conceived as a moment in an ongoing interpersonal 9
dialogue (Tanner 1979: 137–8, see Gudeman 1986: 148–9, and Chapter Three, pp. 20
48–52). This is not to say that the biological explanation of the stand-off between hunter 1
and caribou at the point of encounter, as part of an innate response mechanism designed 2
to combat predation by wolves, is without interest. For anthropologists, however, 3
explaining the behaviour of caribou is none of their business. Their concern is rather to 4
show how hunters’ direct experience of encounters with animals is given form and meaning 5
within those received patterns of interconnected images and propositions that, in anthro- 6
pological parlance, go by the name of ‘culture’.
Though from what I have just said, the perspectives of the wildlife biologist and the 8
cultural anthropologist might seem incompatible, they are nevertheless perfectly comple- 9
mentary, and indeed disclose a common, albeit practically unattainable, point of 30
observation.2 Whereas the biologist claims to study organic nature ‘as it really is’, the 1
anthropologist studies the diverse ways in which the constituents of the natural world 2
ﬁgure in the imagined, or so-called ‘cognised’ worlds of cultural subjects. There are any 3
number of ways of marking this distinction, but of these the most notorious, at least in 4
anthropological literature, is that between so-called ‘etic’ and ‘emic’ accounts. Derived 5
from the contrast in linguistics between phonetics and phonemics, the former purports 6
to offer a wholly neutral, value-free description of the physical world, while the latter 7
spells out the speciﬁc cultural meanings that people place upon it.
There are two points I want to make about this distinction. First, to suggest that human 9
beings inhabit discursive worlds of culturally constructed signiﬁcance is to imply that they 40
have already taken a step out of the world of nature within which the lives of all other 1
creatures are conﬁned. The Cree hunter, it is supposed, narrates and interprets his expe- 2
riences of encounters with animals in terms of a system of cosmological beliefs, the caribou 3
does not. But, secondly, to perceive this system as a cosmology requires that we observers 4
take a further step, this time out of the worlds of culture in which the lives of all other 5
humans are said to be conﬁned. What the anthropologist calls a cosmology is, for the 6
people themselves, a lifeworld. Only from a point of observation beyond culture is it 7
possible to regard the Cree understanding of the relation between hunters and caribou as 118

Culture, nature, environment

but one possible construction, or ‘modelling’, of an independently given reality. But by
the very same token, only from such a vantage point is it possible to apprehend the given
reality for what it is, independently of any kind of cultural bias.
It should now be clear why natural science and cultural anthropology converge on a
common vertex. The anthropological claim of perceptual relativism – that people from
different cultural backgrounds perceive reality in different ways since they process the same
data of experience in terms of alternative frameworks of belief or representational schemata
– does not undermine but actually reinforces the claim of natural science to deliver an
authoritative account of how nature really works. Both claims are founded upon a double
disengagement of the observer from the world. The ﬁrst sets up a division between
humanity and nature; the second establishes a division, within humanity, between ‘native’
or ‘indigenous’ people, who live in cultures, and enlightened Westerners, who do not.
Both claims, too, are underwritten by a commitment that lies at the heart of Western
thought and science, to the extent of being its deﬁning feature. This is the commitment
to the ascendancy of abstract or universal reason. If it is by the capacity to reason that
humanity, in this Western discourse, is distinguished from nature, then it is by the fullest
development of this capacity that modern science distinguishes itself from the knowledge
practices of people in ‘other cultures’ whose thought is supposed to remain somewhat
bound by the constraints and conventions of tradition. In effect, the sovereign perspective of abstract reason is a product of the compounding of two dichotomies: between
humanity and nature, and between modernity and tradition.
The result is not unlike that produced by perspective painting, in which a scene is
depicted from a point of view which itself is given independently of that of the spectator
who contemplates the ﬁnished work. Likewise abstract reason can treat, as objects of
contemplation, diverse worldviews, each of which is a speciﬁc construction of an external
reality (Figure 1.1). The anthropologist, surveying the tapestry of human cultural variation, is like the visitor to the art gallery – a ‘viewer of views’. Perhaps it is no accident
that both perspective painting and anthropology are products of the same trajectory of
Western thought (Ingold 1993a: 223–4).

UNIVERSAL REASON

WORLDVIEW 2
WORLDVIEW 1

NATURE, OR
‘THE WORLD OF REALITY’

Figure 1.1 The sovereign perspective of abstract or universal reason, which treats the lifeworlds of
people of different cultures as alternative constructions, cosmologies or ‘worldviews’, superimposed upon
the ‘real’ reality of nature. From this perspective, anthropology embarks on the comparative study of
cultural world-views, while science investigates the workings of nature.

Livelihood
We have now reached the stage at which I can introduce the terms comprising the title 3
of this chapter. I have observed that the possibility of an objective account of such natural 4
phenomena as the behaviour of caribou, as well as the recognition of an indigenous 5
account, such as that of the Cree, as ﬁtting within a particular culture-speciﬁc cosmology, 6
depend on a two-step movement of disengagement that cuts out ﬁrst nature, then culture, 7
as discrete objects of attention. Whereas the scientiﬁc account is attributed to disinter- 8
ested observation and rational analysis, the indigenous account is put down to the 9
accommodation of subjective experience within ‘beliefs’ of questionable rationality. What 10
I wish to do now is to retrace the two steps in the reverse direction. Only by doing so, 1
I maintain, can we level the ranking, implicit in what has been said up to now, of scien- 2
tiﬁc over indigenous accounts. Moreover I believe it is necessary that we take these steps, 3
that we descend from the imaginary heights of abstract reason and resituate ourselves in 4
an active and ongoing engagement with our environments, if we are ever to arrive at an 5
ecology that is capable of recovering the reality of the life process itself. In short, my aim 6
is to replace the stale dichotomy of nature and culture with the dynamic synergy of 7
organism and environment, in order to regain a genuine ecology of life. This ecology, 8
however, will look very different from the kind that has become familiar to us from scien- 9
tiﬁc textbooks. For it comprises a kind of knowledge that is fundamentally resistant to 20
transmission in an authorised textual form, independently of the contexts of its instanti- 1
ation in the world.
The subtitle of this chapter, ‘steps to an ecology of life’, is borrowed from the work of 3
Gregory Bateson (1973). I have, however, substituted ‘life’ for ‘mind’ as it appears in the 4
title of Bateson’s famous collection of essays. This substitution is deliberate. Bateson was 5
a great dismantler of oppositions – between reason and emotion, inner and outer, mind 6
and body. Yet curiously, he seemed unable to shake off the most fundamental opposition 7
of all, between form and substance. His objection to mainstream natural science lay in 8
its reduction of ‘real’ reality to pure substance, thus relegating form to the illusory or 9
epiphenomenal world of appearances. This he saw as the inevitable consequence of the 30
false separation of mind and nature. Bateson thought that mind should be seen as imma- 1
nent in the whole system of organism–environment relations in which we humans are 2
necessarily enmeshed, rather than conﬁned within our individual bodies as against a world 3
of nature ‘out there’. As he declared, in a lecture delivered in 1970,3 ‘the mental world 4
– the mind – the world of information processing – is not limited by the skin’ (Bateson 5
1973: 429). Yet the ecosystem, taken in its totality, was nevertheless envisaged as two- 6
faced. One face presents a ﬁeld of matter and energy, the other presents a ﬁeld of pattern 7
and information; the ﬁrst is all substance without form, the second is all form detached 8
from substance. Bateson likened the contrast to one which Carl Jung, in his Seven Sermons 9
to the Dead, had drawn between the two worlds of the pleroma and the creatura. In the 40
former there are forces and impacts but no differences; in the latter there are only differ- 1
ences, and it is these differences that have effects (Bateson 1973: 430–1). Corresponding 2
to this duality Bateson recognised two ecologies: an ecology of material and energy 3
exchanges, and an ecology of ideas. And it was this second ecology that he christened the 4
‘ecology of mind’.
To bring out the full signiﬁcance of Bateson’s position, it is instructive to set it along- 6
side that of another giant of twentieth-century anthropology, Claude Lévi-Strauss. In a 7
lecture on ‘structuralism and ecology’ – delivered in 1972, just two years after the Bateson 118

MIND AND NATURE: GREGORY BATESON AND CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS

Culture, nature, environment

Figure 1.2 ‘Day and night’ (1938), a woodcut by the Dutch artist M. C. Escher, aptly illustrates, in
visual form, the way in which the mind – according to Lévi-Strauss – works upon the data of perception. Drawing upon a selection of recognisable and familiar features of the environment, such as houses,
ﬁelds, a river, ﬂying swans, the mind casts them into a symmetrical structure of oppositions and contrasts:
day/night, left/right, city/country, water/land.
M. C. Escher’s ‘Day and Night’ ©2000 Cordon Art B.V. – Baarn – Holland. All rights reserved.

lecture to which I have just referred – Lévi-Strauss likewise set out to demolish the classical
dichotomy between mind and nature.4 Although neither of the two ﬁgures made any reference to the other’s work, there are some superﬁcial resemblances between their respective
arguments. For Lévi-Strauss, too, the mind is a processor of information, and information consists in patterns of signiﬁcant difference. Unlike Bateson, however, Lévi-Strauss
anchors the mind very ﬁrmly in the workings of the human brain. Fastening in a more
or less arbitrary fashion upon certain elements or distinctive features that are presented to
it in the surrounding environment, the mind acts rather like a kaleidoscope, casting them
into patterns whose oppositions and symmetries reﬂect underlying universals of human
cognition (Figure 1.2). It is by these interior patterns that the mind possesses knowledge
of the world outside. If, in the ﬁnal analysis, the distinction between mind and nature is
dissolved, it is because the neurological mechanisms that underwrite the mind’s apprehension of the world are part of the very world that is apprehended. And this world,
according to Lévi-Strauss, is structured through and through, from the lowest level of
atoms and molecules, through the intermediate levels of sensory perception, to the highest
levels of intellectual functioning. ‘When the mind processes the empirical data which it
receives previously processed by the sense organs’, Lévi-Strauss concluded, ‘it goes on
working out structurally what at the outset was already structural. And it can only do so
in as much as the mind, the body to which the mind belongs, and the things which body
and mind perceive, are part and parcel of one and the same reality’ (1974: 21).
In all these respects, Bateson’s position could not have been more different. For LéviStrauss ecology meant ‘the world outside’, mind meant ‘the brain’; for Bateson both

Livelihood

mind and ecology were situated in the rela- 1
tions between the brain and the surrounding 2
environment (Figure 1.3). For Lévi-Strauss, 3
the perceiver could only have knowledge of 4
the world by virtue of a passage of infor- 5
MIND
(= BRAIN)
mation across the boundary between outside 6
and inside, involving successive steps of 7
encoding and decoding by the sense organs 8
and the brain, and resulting in an inner 9
mental representation. For Bateson the idea 10
BATESON
WORLD
of such a boundary was absurd, a point he 1
illustrated with the example of the blind 2
man’s cane (1973: 434). Do we draw a 3
ECOLOGY
boundary around his head, at the handle of 4
OF MIND
BRAIN
the cane, at its tip, or halfway down the 5
pavement? If we ask where the mind is, 6
the answer would not be ‘in the head rather 7
than out there in the world’. It would 8
be more appropriate to envisage mind as 9
extending outwards into the environment 20
Figure 1.3 Schematic comparison of Lévi-Strauss’s and
along multiple sensory pathways of which 1
Bateson’s views on mind and ecology.
the cane, in the hands of the blind man, is 2
just one. Thus while Bateson shared with 3
Lévi-Strauss the notion of mind as a processor of information, he did not regard processing 4
as a step-by-step reﬁnement or repackaging of sensory data already received, but rather as 5
the unfolding of the whole system of relations constituted by the multi-sensory involve- 6
ment of the perceiver in his or her environment.
To continue with the example of the blind man, it is as though his processing of infor- 8
mation were tantamount to his own movement – that is, to his own processing through 9
the world. The point about movement is critical. For Lévi-Strauss, both the mind and 30
the world remain ﬁxed and immutable, while information passes across the interface 1
between them. In Bateson’s account, by contrast, information only exists thanks to the 2
movement of the perceiver relative to his or her surroundings. Bateson constantly empha- 3
sised that stable features of the world remain imperceptible unless we move in relation to 4
them: if the blind man picks up surface features of the road ahead by sweeping his cane 5
from side to side, people with normal vision do the same with their eyes. Through this 6
scanning movement we draw distinctions, in the sense not of representing them graphi- 7
cally, but of ‘pulling them out’.5 Whereas Lévi-Strauss often writes as though the world 8
were sending coded messages to the brain, which it then recovers through an operation 9
of decoding, for Bateson the world opens out to the mind through a process of revela- 40
tion. This distinction, between decoding and revelation, is critical to my argument, and 1
I shall return to it shortly. First, however, a few words are needed on the subject of life. 2
THE ECOLOGY OF LIFE
My leading question is one from which Bateson also set out. ‘What sort of thing is this’, 6
he asked, ‘which we call “organism plus environment”?’ (Bateson 1973: 423). But the 7
answer at which I have arrived is different. I do not think we need a separate ecology of 118
LÉVI-STRAUSS

ECOLOGY
(= WORLD)

Culture, nature, environment

mind, distinct from the ecology of energy ﬂows and material exchanges. We do however
need to rethink our understanding of life. And at the most fundamental level of all, we
need to think again about the relation between form and process. Biology is – or at least
is supposed to be – the science of living organisms. Yet as biologists gaze into the mirror
of nature, what they see – reﬂected back in the morphology and behaviour of organisms
– is their own reason. Accordingly, they are inclined to impute the principles of their
science to the organisms themselves, as though each embodied a formal speciﬁcation,
programme or building plan, a bio-logos, given independently and in advance of its development in the world. Indeed the possibility of such a context-independent speciﬁcation
is an essential condition for Darwinian theory, according to which it is this speciﬁcation
– technically known as the genotype – that is said to undergo evolution through changes
in the frequency of its information-bearing elements, the genes.
But if the underlying architecture of the organism were thus pre-speciﬁed, then its lifehistory could be nothing more than the realisation or ‘writing out’ of a programme of
construction, under given environmental conditions. Life, in short, would be purely consequential, an effect of the injection of prior form into material substance. I take a different
view (Ingold 1990: 215). Organic life, as I envisage it, is active rather than reactive, the
creative unfolding of an entire ﬁeld of relations within which beings emerge and take on
the particular forms they do, each in relation to the others. Life, in this view, is not the
realisation of pre-speciﬁed forms but the very process wherein forms are generated and
held in place. Every being, as it is caught up in the process and carries it forward, arises
as a singular centre of awareness and agency: an enfoldment, at some particular nexus
within it, of the generative potential that is life itself. (This argument is further developed
in Chapter Twenty-one, pp. 383–5.)
I can now spell out more precisely what I mean by an ‘ecology of life’. It all hinges
on a particular answer to Bateson’s question: what is this ‘organism plus environment’?
For conventional ecology, the ‘plus’ signiﬁes a simple addition of one thing to another,
both of which have their own integrity, quite independently of their mutual relations.
Thus the organism is speciﬁed genotypically, prior to its entry into the environment; the
environment is speciﬁed as a set of physical constraints, in advance of the organisms that
arrive to ﬁll it. Indeed the ecology of the textbooks could be regarded as profoundly antiecological, insofar as it sets up organism and environment as mutually exclusive entities
(or collections of entities) which are only subsequently brought together and caused to
interact. A properly ecological approach, to the contrary, is one that would take, as its
point of departure, the whole-organism-in-its-environment. In other words, ‘organism plus
environment’ should denote not a compound of two things, but one indivisible totality.
That totality is, in effect, a developmental system (cf. Oyama 1985), and an ecology of
life – in my terms – is one that would deal with the dynamics of such systems. Now if
this view is accepted – if, that is, we are prepared to treat form as emergent within the
life-process – then, I contend, we have no need to appeal to a distinct domain of mind,
to creatura rather than pleroma, to account for pattern and meaning in the world. We do
not, in other words, have to think of mind or consciousness as a layer of being over and
above that of the life of organisms, in order to account for their creative involvement in
the world. Rather, what we may call mind is the cutting edge of the life process itself,
the ever-moving front of what Alfred North Whitehead (1929: 314) called a ‘creative
advance into novelty’.

Livelihood
Armed with this approach to the ecology of life, I shall now return to the question of 3
how human beings perceive the world around them, and to see how we might begin to 4
build an alternative to the standard anthropological account of environmental perception 5
as a cultural construction of nature, or as the superimposition of layers of ‘emic’ signiﬁ- 6
cance upon an independently given, ‘etic’ reality. Before we begin, however, I want to 7
make three preliminary points about the notion of environment. First, ‘environment’ is a 8
relative term – relative, that is, to the being whose environment it is. Just as there can 9
be no organism without an environment, so also there can be no environment without 10
an organism (Gibson 1979: 8, Lewontin 1982: 160). Thus my environment is the world 1
as it exists and takes on meaning in relation to me, and in that sense it came into exis- 2
tence and undergoes development with me and around me. Secondly, the environment 3
is never complete. If environments are forged through the activities of living beings, then 4
so long as life goes on, they are continually under construction. So too, of course, are 5
organisms themselves. Thus when I spoke above of ‘organism plus environment’ as an 6
indivisible totality, I should have said that this totality is not a bounded entity but a 7
process in real time: a process, that is, of growth or development.
The third point about the notion of environment stems from the two I have just made. 9
This is that it should on no account be confused with the concept of nature. For the 20
world can exist as nature only for a being that does not belong there, and that can look 1
upon it, in the manner of the detached scientist, from such a safe distance that it is easy 2
to connive in the illusion that it is unaffected by his presence. Thus the distinction between 3
environment and nature corresponds to the difference in perspective between seeing 4
ourselves as beings within a world and as beings without it. Moreover we tend to think 5
of nature as external not only to humanity, as I have already observed, but also to history, 6
as though the natural world provided an enduring backdrop to the conduct of human 7
affairs. Yet environments, since they continually come into being in the process of our 8
lives – since we shape them as they shape us – are themselves fundamentally historical. 9
We have, then, to be wary of such a simple expression as ‘the natural environment’, for 30
in thus conﬂating the two terms we already imagine ourselves to be somehow beyond the 1
world, and therefore in a position to intervene in its processes (Ingold 1992a).
COMMUNICATION AND REVELATION
When I was a child my father, who is a botanist, used to take me for walks in the coun- 6
tryside, pointing out on the way all the plants and fungi – especially the fungi – that 7
grew here and there. Sometimes he would get me to smell them, or to try out their distinc- 8
tive tastes. His manner of teaching was to show me things, literally to point them out. 9
If I would but notice the things to which he directed my attention, and recognise the 40
sights, smells and tastes that he wanted me to experience because they were so dear to 1
him, then I would discover for myself much of what he already knew. Now, many years 2
later, as an anthropologist, I read about how people in Australian Aboriginal societies pass 3
their knowledge across the generations. And I ﬁnd that the principle is just the same!
In his classic study of the Walbiri of Central Australia, Mervyn Meggitt describes how 5
a boy being prepared for initiation would be taken on a ‘grand tour’, lasting two or three 6
months. Accompanied by a guardian (a sister’s husband) and an elder brother, the boy 7
was taken from place to place, learning as he went about the ﬂora, fauna and topography 118

A NOTE ON THE CONCEPT OF ENVIRONMENT

Culture, nature, environment

of the country, while being told (by the elder brother) of the totemic signiﬁcance of the
various localities visited (Meggitt 1962: 285). Every locality has its story, telling of how
it was created through the earth-shaping activities of ancestral beings as they roamed the
country during the formative era known as the Dreaming. Observing the waterhole while
the story of its formation is related or enacted, the novice witnesses the ancestor coming
out of the ground; likewise, casting his eyes over the distinctive outline of a hill or rocky
outcrop, he recognises in it the congealed form of the ancestor as it lies down to rest.
Thus are truths immanent in the landscape, the truths of the Dreaming, gradually revealed
to him, as he proceeds from the most superﬁcial, ‘outside’ level of knowledge to deeper,
‘inside’ understanding.6
Did my father’s knowledge of plants and fungi, or the Aboriginal elder’s knowledge of
the Dreaming, take the form of a set of interconnected beliefs and propositions inside his
head? Is it through the transfer of such beliefs and propositions from one generation to
the next that we learn to perceive the world in the way we do? If so – if all knowledge
is cradled within the mind – why should so much importance be placed on ensuring that
novices should see or otherwise experience for themselves the objects or features of the
physical world?
One answer might be to suggest that it is through its inscription in such objects or
features – plants and fungi, waterholes and hills – that cultural knowledge is transmitted.
These objects would accordingly ﬁgure as vehicles, or carriers, for meanings that are, so
to speak, ‘pinned on’, and that together constitute a speciﬁc cultural worldview or
cosmology (Wilson 1988: 50). In other words, cultural forms would be encoded in the
landscape just as, according to the standard semiological approach to linguistic signiﬁcation, conceptual representations are encoded in the medium of sound. The great Swiss
linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who laid the foundation for this approach, argued that a
sign is essentially the union of two things, a signiﬁer and a signiﬁed, and that the relation between them is established through the mapping of one system of differences on
the plane of ideas onto another system of differences on the plane of physical substance
(Saussure 1959: 102–22). As sounds stand for concepts, so – by the same logic – fungi
(for my father) or waterholes (for the Aboriginal elder) would stand as signiﬁers for elements
of a comprehensive system of mental representations. Was my father, then, communicating his knowledge to me by encoding it in the fungi? Do Aboriginal elders transmit
ancestral wisdom by encoding it in hills and waterholes?
Strange as it may seem, much anthropological analysis of the cultural construction of
the environment proceeds from this assumption. Yet if the idea of encoding beliefs in
fungi sounds bizarre, as indeed it is, the idea of the Dreaming as a cosmology encoded
in the landscape is no less so. My father’s purpose, of course, was to introduce me to the
fungi, not to communicate by way of them, and the same is true of the purpose of
Aboriginal elders in introducing novices to signiﬁcant sites. This is not to deny that information may be communicated, in propositional or semi-propositional form, from
generation to generation. But information, in itself, is not knowledge, nor do we become
any more knowledgeable through its accumulation. Our knowledgeability consists, rather,
in the capacity to situate such information, and understand its meaning, within the context
of a direct perceptual engagement with our environments. And we develop this capacity,
I contend, by having things shown to us.
The idea of showing is an important one. To show something to somebody is to cause
it to be seen or otherwise experienced – whether by touch, taste, smell or hearing – by
that other person. It is, as it were, to lift a veil off some aspect or component of the

Livelihood
environment so that it can be apprehended directly. In that way, truths that are inherent 1
in the world are, bit by bit, revealed or disclosed to the novice. What each generation 2
contributes to the next, in this process, is an education of attention (Gibson 1979: 254). 3
Placed in speciﬁc situations, novices are instructed to feel this, taste that, or watch out 4
for the other thing. Through this ﬁne-tuning of perceptual skills, meanings immanent in 5
the environment – that is in the relational contexts of the perceiver’s involvement in the 6
world – are not so much constructed as discovered.
It could be said that novices, through their sensory education, are furnished with keys 8
to meaning. But the metaphor of the key has to be used with some care. I do not have 9
in mind the kind of key – analogous to a cipher – that might enable me to translate from 10
physical signiﬁers to mental ideas and thereby to come into possession of the cultural 1
knowledge of my forefathers through a reverse decoding of what they, in their turn, had 2
encoded in the landscape. There is, indeed, a rather fundamental circularity in the notion 3
that cultural knowledge is transmitted across generations by means of its encoding in 4
material symbols. For without the key it is impossible for the novice to read off the cultural 5
message from salient features of the physical world. Yet unless the message has already 6
been thoroughly understood, it is impossible to extract the key. How can features of the 7
landscape ﬁgure as elements of a communicative code if, in order to crack the code, you 8
must already know what is to be communicated thereby?
When the novice is brought into the presence of some component of the environment 20
and called upon to attend to it in a certain way, his task, then, is not to decode it. It is 1
rather to discover for himself the meaning that lies within it. To aid him in this task he 2
is provided with a set of keys in another sense, not as ciphers but as clues (see Chapter 3
Eleven, p. 208). Whereas the cipher is centrifugal, allowing the novice to access mean- 4
ings that are attached (‘pinned on’) by the mind to the outer surface of the world, the 5
clue is centripetal, guiding him towards meanings that lie at the heart of the world itself, 6
but which are normally hidden behind the facade of superﬁcial appearances. The contrast 7
between the key as cipher and the key as clue corresponds to the critical distinction, to 8
which I have already drawn attention, between decoding and revelation. A clue, in short, 9
is a landmark that condenses otherwise disparate strands of experience into a unifying 30
orientation which, in turn, opens up the world to perception of greater depth and clarity.7 1
In this sense, clues are keys that unlock the doors of perception, and the more keys you 2
hold, the more doors you can unlock, and the more the world opens up to you. My 3
contention is that it is through the progressive acquisition of such keys that people learn 4
to perceive the world around them.
FORM AND FEELING
When Susanne Langer gave the title Philosophy in a New Key to her inﬂuential book on 9
art and aesthetics (Langer 1957), she was of course using the metaphor of the key in yet 40
another sense, here referring to a kind of register of understanding, akin to the key of 1
musical notation. In the book, Langer contends that the meaning of art should be found 2
in the art object itself, as it is presented to our awareness, rather than in what it might be 3
supposed to represent or signify. If people in Western societies ﬁnd this hard to grasp, it 4
is because they are so used to treating art as somehow representative of something else – 5
for we expect every picture to have a title – that the ways in which we respond to objects 6
or performances themselves are forever getting confused with our responses to whatever 7
they are supposed to stand for. One way around this difﬁculty, Langer suggests, is to 118

Culture, nature, environment

concentrate on the kind of art that – at least for Westerners – is apparently least representational, namely music. Music, surely, can stand for nothing but itself, so that an
investigation of musical meaning should be able to show how meaning can reside in art
as such. ‘If the meaning of art belongs to the sensuous percept itself apart from what it
ostensibly represents’, writes Langer, ‘then such purely artistic meaning should be most
accessible through musical works’ (1957: 209). Pursuing this line of argument, Langer
suggests that ‘what music can actually reﬂect is . . . the morphology of feeling’ (p. 238).
I believe this idea can be generalised, so long as we recognise that feeling is a mode of
active, perceptual engagement, a way of being literally ‘in touch’ with the world. The
craftsman feels his raw material, as the potter feels clay or the turner feels wood, and out
of that process of feeling there emerges the form of the vessel. Likewise, the orchestral
musician feels – or rather watches – the gestures of the conductor, and out of that feeling
comes a phrase shaped in sound. Or more generally, art gives form to human feeling; it is
the shape that is taken by our perception of the world, guided as it is by the speciﬁc
orientations, dispositions and sensibilities that we have acquired through having had things
pointed out or shown to us in the course of our sensory education.
While on the subject of music, let me give you one example of what I mean, taken
from an essay by my favourite composer, Leoš Janáček. Here, Janáček writes of how, on
one occasion, he stood on the seashore and notated the sounds of the waves. The waves
‘shout’, ‘bubble’, and ‘yell’ (Janáček 1989: 232). Figure 1.4 is a reproduction of what he

Figure 1.4 Janáček’s sketches of the sounds of the waves, as he stood on the shore at the Dutch port
of Flushing in 1926 (taken from his essay ‘The sea, the land’, in Janáček 1989: 229–34).
From Janáček’s Uncollected Essays on Music, Selected, Edited and Translated by Mirka Zemanová,
published by Marion Boyars Publishers of London and New York, 1989, p. 232.

Livelihood
put in his notebook. Now these musical sketches are no mere mechanical record of the 1
sounds as they impinged on his ears. For Janáček is not just hearing, he is listening. That 2
is to say, his perception is grounded in an act of attention. Like watching and feeling, 3
listening is something people do (see Chapter Fourteen, p. 277). In his act of attention, 4
the movement of the composer’s consciousness resonates with the sounds of the waves, 5
and each sketch gives form to that movement.
But Janáček teaches us something more. Throughout his career, he was a compulsive 7
collector of what he called ‘speech-melodies’. He scribbled down the melodic form of 8
snippets of speech heard from all kinds of people in all manner of activities: a house- 9
keeper calling to her chickens as she scatters grain, an old man grumbling as he goes to 10
work, children at play, and so on. But these jottings were not conﬁned to human sounds. 1
Speech, for Janáček, was a kind of song, and so were all the other sounds that resonate 2
with our consciousness, from the noises of the waves, through the tolling of an old rusty 3
bell or the ominous sound of a burst water-pipe, to the clucking of hens in the farmyard 4
and the ‘bloodthirsty nocturne’ of a mosquito.8 Are we to suppose, then, that in these 5
melodies, nature is trying to communicate with us, to send us messages encoded in patterns 6
of sound? Janáček’s point was quite the opposite. It was that we should cease thinking 7
of the sounds of speech merely as vehicles of symbolic communication, as serving to give 8
outward expression to inner states such as beliefs, propositions or emotions. For sound, 9
as Janáček wrote, ‘grows out of our entire being . . . There is no sound that is broken away 20
from the tree of life ’ (1989: 88, 99, original emphasis).
Let me put this another way. The waves, says Janáček, shout and yell. So, sometimes, 2
do people. When you yell in anger, the yell is your anger, it is not a vehicle that carries 3
your anger. The sound is not broken off from your mental state and despatched like a 4
message in a bottle cast upon the ocean of sound in the hope that someone might pick 5
it up. The echoes of the yell are the reverberations of your own being as it pours forth 6
into the environment. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, in his Phenomenology of Perception, caught 7
the point precisely in his observation that your yell ‘does not make me think of anger, it 8
is anger itself ’ (1962: 184, original emphasis). And if people pour out their being in the 9
melodies of speech, so the waves pour out theirs in the sounds we describe as foaming 30
and crashing, and the hens pour out theirs in their endless clucking. Thus to take one 1
more hint from Janáček, song – any song, any singing – ‘is something from which we 2
are to learn the truth of life’ (1989: 89). This is why Aboriginal people sing their songs 3
of the Dreaming, songs which give form to their feeling for the country around them. 4
CONCLUSION: TOWARDS A SENTIENT ECOLOGY
I have not forgotten the Cree hunter and the caribou, and to wrap up my argument, I 8
now want to return to them. The hunter, let us say, can tell. He can do so in two ways. 9
First, he is a perceptually skilled agent, who can detect those subtle clues in the environ- 40
ment that reveal the movements and presence of animals: thus he can ‘tell’ where the 1
animals are. Secondly, he is able to narrate stories of his hunting journeys, and of his 2
encounters with animals. But in doing so, in telling in this other sense, he is no more 3
aiming to produce a record or transcription of what happened than was Janáček, when 4
he wrote down the sounds of the waves. When the hunter speaks of how the caribou 5
presented itself to him, he does not mean to portray the animal as a self-contained, rational 6
agent whose action in giving itself up served to give outward expression to some inner 7
resolution. Like music, the hunter’s story is a performance; and again like music, its aim 118

Culture, nature, environment

is to give form to human feeling – in this case the feeling of the caribou’s vivid proximity as another living, sentient being. At that crucial moment of eye-to-eye contact, the
hunter felt the overwhelming presence of the animal; he felt as if his own being were
somehow bound up or intermingled with that of the animal – a feeling tantamount to
love and one that, in the domain of human relations, is experienced in sexual intercourse.
In telling of the hunt he gives shape to that feeling in the idioms of speech.
In his recent study of reindeer herders and hunters of the Taimyr region of northern
Siberia, David Anderson (2000: 116–17) writes that in their relations with animals and
other components of the environment, these people operate with a sentient ecology. This
notion perfectly captures the kind of knowledge people have of their environments that
I have been trying to convey. It is knowledge not of a formal, authorised kind, transmissible in contexts outside those of its practical application. On the contrary, it is based
in feeling, consisting in the skills, sensitivities and orientations that have developed through
long experience of conducting one’s life in a particular environment. This is the kind
of knowledge that Janáček claimed to draw from attending to the melodic inﬂections of
speech; hunters draw it from similarly close attention to the movements, sounds and
gestures of animals.
Another word for this kind of sensitivity and responsiveness is intuition. In the tradition of Western thought and science, intuition has had a pretty bad press: compared
with the products of the rational intellect, it has been widely regarded as knowledge of
an inferior kind. Yet it is knowledge we all have; indeed we use it all the time as we go
about our everyday tasks (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1986: 29). What is more, it constitutes a
necessary foundation for any system of science or ethics. Simply to exist as sentient beings,
people must already be situated in a certain environment and committed to the relationships this entails. These relationships, and the sensibilities built up in the course of their
unfolding, underwrite our capacities of judgement and skills of discrimination, and scientists – who are human too – depend on these capacities and skills as much as do the rest
of us. That is why the sovereign perspective of abstract reason, upon which Western
science lays its claim to authority, is practically unattainable: an intelligence that was
completely detached from the conditions of life in the world could not think the thoughts
it does. It is also why reasoning logically from ﬁrst principles will not sufﬁce to design
an ethical system that actually works. For any judgement that had no basis in intuition,
however justiﬁed it might be on grounds of ‘cold’ logic, would carry no practical or
motivational force whatever. Where the logic of ethical reasoning, setting out from ﬁrst
principles, leads to results that are counter-intuitive, we do not reject our intuitions but
rather change the principles, so that they will generate results which conform more closely
to what we feel is right.
Intuitive understanding, in short, is not contrary to science or ethics, nor does it appeal
to instinct rather than reason, or to supposedly ‘hardwired’ imperatives of human nature.
On the contrary, it rests in perceptual skills that emerge, for each and every being, through
a process of development in a historically speciﬁc environment. These skills, I maintain,
provide a necessary grounding for any system of science or ethics that would treat the
environment as an object of its concern. The sentient ecology is thus both pre-objective
and pre-ethical. I have no wish to devalue the projects of either natural science or environmental ethics, indeed both are probably more needed now than ever before. My plea is
simply that we should not lose sight of their pre-objective, pre-ethical foundations. My
overriding aim has been to bring these foundations to light. And what these excavations
into the formation of knowledge have revealed is not an alternative science, ‘indigenous’

Livelihood
rather than Western, but something more akin to a poetics of dwelling. It is within the 1
framework of such a poetics, I contend, that Cree tales of animals offering themselves to 2
humans, Aboriginal stories of ancestors emerging from waterholes, Janáček’s attempts to 3
notate the sounds of nature and my father’s efforts to introduce me to the plants and 4
fungi of the countryside, can best be understood.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Two

The optimal forager and
economic man

INTRODUCTION
Enlightenment thought has proclaimed the triumph of human reason over a recalcitrant
nature. As a child of the Enlightenment, neoclassical economics developed as a science of
human decision-making and its aggregate consequences, based on the premise that every
individual acts in the pursuit of rational self-interest. Whether the postulates of microeconomic theory are applicable to humanity at large, or only to those societies characterised
as Western, has been much debated: classic anthropological statements include those of
Malinowski – who dismissed as ‘preposterous’ the assumption that ‘man, and especially
man on a low level of culture, should be actuated by pure economic motives of enlightened self-interest’, and Firth – who argued, to the contrary, that ‘in some of the most
primitive societies known . . . there is the keenest discussion of alternatives in any proposal
for the use of resources, of the relative economic advantages of exchange with one party
as against another, and the closest scrutiny of the quality of goods which change hands
. . . and taking a proﬁt thereby’ (Malinowski 1922: 60; Firth 1964: 22, see Schneider
1974: 11–12).
My concern here is not to revisit this old debate. Instead, I want to address the paradox
presented by the emergence of an approach within contemporary anthropology which
seeks to understand the behaviour of so-called primitive people – or more speciﬁcally,
hunters and gatherers – not through a direct extension of the principles of formal
economics, but through a rather more indirect route. This is to extend to human beings
principles already applied in analysing the behaviour of non-human animals, principles
that are nevertheless closely modelled on – even to the extent of being identiﬁed with –
those of economics. The approach in question is known to its practitioners as ‘human
evolutionary ecology’, and it is currently one of the most vigorous areas of research in
ecological anthropology.
I aim to show that evolutionary ecology is the precise inverse of microeconomics, just
as natural selection is the mirror-image of rational choice. As such, it reproduces in an
inverted form the dichotomy between reason and nature that lies at the heart of postEnlightenment science. But in seeking to account for behaviour in terms of pre-speciﬁed
and heritable properties of discrete individuals, evolutionary ecology is prevented – despite
its claims to the contrary – from developing a truly ecological perspective. By this I do
not simply mean a perspective that would incorporate external environmental variables as
part of the explanation for behaviour. An approach that is genuinely ecological, in my
view, is one that would ground human intention and action within the context of an
ongoing and mutually constitutive engagement between people and their environments.

Livelihood

Yet such an approach, I argue, calls into question the very foundations of the neo- 1
Darwinian explanatory paradigm.
Suppose you were an advocate of economic formalism in anthropology, and that you 3
were concerned to explain why a particular group of hunters and gatherers should choose 4
to concentrate their efforts on harvesting a certain mix of plant and animal resources. By 5
attaching a utility value to each unit of resource, measured in terms of the satisfaction 6
it yields, you would calculate an optimal strategy of resource procurement, that would 7
yield the highest overall utility relative to time and energy expended. You would then 8
compare this strategy with what the people actually do and, ﬁnding a nice ﬁt, you would 9
declare that your model has passed the test of empirical conﬁrmation. Anticipating the 10
‘so what?’ challenge of the sceptic, you would conclude that what this proves is that 1
hunters and gatherers are just as capable of making informed choices in their own 2
best interests as anyone else. Reason, you would point out, is a faculty common to all 3
humans, not just ‘modern Western’ or ‘civilised’ ones, and it is ethnocentric to imagine 4
that while we decide what to do in any given situation on the basis of rational delibera- 5
tion, they are bound in their actions by blind conformity to the received wisdom of cultural 6
convention.
What, then, of non-human animals? They, too, seem to come out with strategies of 8
resource procurement which would look eminently rational, had they worked these strategies 9
out for themselves. But of course, you say, they have not. The animals have had their 20
strategies worked out for them in advance, by the evolutionary force of natural selection. 1
The logic of natural selection is simply as follows: individuals with more efﬁcient resource 2
procurement or foraging strategies will have a reproductive advantage over individuals with 3
less efﬁcient strategies, and since these strategies – or more precisely, the rules or programmes 4
for generating them – are encoded in the materials of heredity, the more efﬁcient strategies 5
will automatically tend to become more 6
ﬁrmly established in each generation as 7
their carriers bear proportionally more 8
offspring. Now the point of departure 9
for human evolutionary ecology is 30
Economic
Formal
that the foraging behaviour of human 1
man
economic
hunter-gatherers, just like that of 2
theory
HUMANITY
their non-human counterparts, can be 3
understood as the application, in spe- 4
ciﬁc environmental contexts, of decision 5
‘Primitive’
rules or ‘cognitive algorithms’ that have 6
hunterbeen shaped up through a Darwinian 7
gatherer
process of variation under natural selec- 8
tion. From this premise has been 9
derived a body of theory, known in the 40
Optimal
NATURE
The optimal
trade as ‘optimal foraging theory’, 1
foraging
forager
theory
consisting of formal models which pre- 2
dict how, under given external condi- 3
tions, a forager should behave, assuming 4
that the overriding objective is to max- 5
imise the balance between the energy 6
Figure 2.1 The ‘primitive’ hunter-gatherer conceived as a version intake from harvested resources and the 7
of economic man and as a species of optimal forager.
energy costs of procurement.

The optimal forager and economic man

Is the human hunter-gatherer, then, a version of economic man or a species of optimal
forager? On the face of it these two ﬁgures – both of them, of course, ideal constructs of
the analytic imagination – appear diametrically opposed, and their conﬂation in the archetypal ﬁgure of the ‘primitive’ hunter-gatherer seems to reﬂect the ambivalent status of this
ﬁgure, within the discourse of Western science, as transitional between the conditions of
nature and humanity (see Figure 2.1). Economic man, surely, exercises his reason in the
sphere of social interaction, and in so doing advances in culture or civilisation, against
the background of an intrinsically resistant nature. The rationality of the optimal forager,
by contrast, is installed at the very heart of nature, while the speciﬁcally human domain
of society and culture is seen as a source of external normative bias that may cause behaviour to deviate from the optimum. Here, then, is the paradox to which I referred at the
outset, of an approach which, while explicitly modelling itself on classical microeconomics,
is nevertheless considered applicable to human beings only insofar as their behaviour is
in some sense comparable to that of non-human animals. How can we hold, at one and
the same time, that the faculty of reason is the distinctive mark of humanity, and that
the rationality of human hunter-gatherers, by comparison with that of their non-human
counterparts, is compromised by social and cultural constraints? I take this question as
my point of departure.

CULTURE AND CHOICE
Hunters-gatherers, or foragers, live in environments characterised by diverse and heterogeneously distributed resources. From the array of potential food species, foraging
locations and pathways, the forager can choose combinations which more or less effectively and efﬁciently procure subsistence. The forager’s choices make up a strategy of
adjustment to ecological conditions, an adaptive pattern resulting from evolutionary
processes and the constraints of situation, time, and chance.
(Winterhalder 1981a: 66)
This lucid statement, by one of the foremost exponents of optimal foraging theory, takes
us directly to the core of the problem. It lies in the contradiction between the notions,
on the one hand, that the forager’s ‘strategy of adjustment’ is the result of a series of
choices about where to go and what to procure, and on the other hand, that as an ‘adaptive pattern’ it is the product of an evolutionary process. In explicating this contradiction
it helps to have an empirical example in mind, and for this purpose I turn brieﬂy to
ethnographic material that Winterhalder himself presents, gathered through ﬁeldwork
among Cree people of Muskrat Dam Lake in northern Ontario.
The Cree draw for their subsistence on a variety of large and small mammals, waterfowl and ﬁsh, distributed rather sparsely and patchily in an environment which consists
of a ﬁne-grained mosaic of different types of dominant vegetation. Not only does the
abundance of resource species ﬂuctuate markedly and irregularly from year to year, but
the vegetational mosaic also changes in response to climatic variations. The result is that
the Cree hunter is unlikely ever to encounter the same conditions from one year to the
next (Winterhalder 1981a: 80–1). He has, therefore, to work out his tactics as he goes
along. One hunting trip described by Winterhalder exempliﬁes this point very well. In
this trip, ostensibly for beaver trapping, he and his Cree companion came across signs of
grouse, moose, wolf, hare, beaver, mink, otter and muskrat. At each sign his companion
had to make up his mind whether to pursue the animal in question. In the event, the

Livelihood
grouse was shot, the moose and wolf were ignored, snares were set for the hare and beaver, 1
and traps for the muskrat and otter.
But this hunt, Winterhalder tells us, was an example of an older style of doing things: 3
although the journey from the village to the start of the trail was made by snowmobile, 4
during the hunt itself the companions proceeded on snowshoes. Hunters of the younger 5
generation are making greater use of the snowmobile, not just for getting to the trail but 6
in the course of seeking out animals. The consequent reduction in search times allows 7
them to be far more selective, and to concentrate on taking high-priority species. In the 8
past, the mark of a good hunter was supposed to lie in his ability to handle almost any 9
kind of animal; nowadays, by contrast, younger hunters are said to specialise in hunting 10
just one or two species, and to lack competence in dealing with the others (Winterhalder 1
1981a: 86–9).
It is clear from this account that hunters are faced with choices, that the choices 3
they make add up to a pattern, and that this pattern changes in response to alterations 4
in the parameters of hunting brought about, for example, by the introduction of new 5
technologies. It is not so clear, however, that the pattern has ‘evolved’ in the Darwinian 6
sense, or that its emergence has anything to do with the process of natural selection. For 7
the sake of argument let us suppose that in the hunting trip described above, taking 8
account of the expected caloriﬁc yield of different resource species and of the energy costs 9
of search and pursuit (or of setting and visiting traps), the hunter’s decisions conformed 20
closely to what might be modelled as the optimal strategy for a forager seeking to maximise 1
the net rate of energy gain. And let it also be supposed – rather more problematically – 2
that the households of tactically skilled hunters, being relatively securely provisioned, are 3
also prosperous in terms of the production of healthy offspring: in other words that the 4
hunter’s success in the woods is matched by reproductive success at home. There would 5
still be no reason to believe that the successful hunting strategy was the result of an evolu- 6
tionary process.
It is commonly argued, even by biologists who should know better (e.g. Dunbar 1987), 8
that to show how behaviour of a certain kind has evolved by natural selection, one has only 9
to demonstrate that it contributes positively to the reproductive ﬁtness of those individuals 30
who execute it. This argument is critically incomplete. It misses out the essential link that 1
closes the loop of Darwinian explanation. Behaviour will only evolve by natural selection 2
if, through its effects on reproduction, it contributes to the representation, in successor gen- 3
erations, of a set of instructions or a ‘programme’ for generating it. In other words, the 4
behaviour must not only have consequences for reproduction but also be a consequence of 5
the elements that are reproduced (Ingold 1990: 226 fn.9). So far as non-human animals are 6
concerned, the replicated programme elements are usually assumed to be genes. Whatever 7
the merits of this assumption, once our attention turns to human beings it looks decidedly 8
unrealistic. I know of no recent author who has seriously suggested that the behavioural 9
variability apparent from ethnographic studies of human hunter-gatherers might be attrib- 40
uted to inter-populational genetic differences. Instead it is proposed that the instructions 1
underwriting human foraging behaviour are cultural rather than genetic, encoded in words 2
or other symbolic media rather than the ‘language’ of DNA. As Winterhalder himself has 3
noted (1981b: 17), in the case of human foragers ‘information passed from generation to 4
generation by culture provides much of the strategic framework within which speciﬁc 5
choices and options are exercised by individuals and groups’.
Does this enculturation model take us any closer to understanding the behaviour of 7
the Cree hunter in the above example? Although in the account the hunter is described 118

The optimal forager and economic man

as having made a number of decisions – to shoot this animal, pass up another, lay a trap
for a third, and so on – the model would imply that in reality, the scope of his autonomy
in decision-making is extremely restricted. He is, after all, merely applying a set of decision rules acquired more or less unselfconsciously from his seniors, and whose prevalence
in the society is due not to their perceived efﬁcacy but to the fact that they served his
predecessors well, enabling them to bring in the food to support numerous offspring who
– following in their fathers’ footsteps – reproduced the same strategic steps in their own
hunting activities (Boone and Smith 1998: S146). To put the point in more general terms,
if a particular strategy of hunting is inscribed within a cultural tradition, and if that tradition has evolved through a process of natural selection, then all the hunter can do is to
carry on in the same way, even if changes in environment or technology have had the
effect of wiping out its earlier advantages. This is not to say that behaviour is completely
prescribed, and genuine choices may still have to be made. But they are made within a
received strategic framework, they are not about what framework to adopt.

NEO-DARWINIAN BIOLOGY AND NEO-CLASSICAL MICROECONOMICS
Strangely, however, this view of the human forager as the bearer of evolved cultural propensities that cause behaviour to strain towards the optimum coexists, in the writings of
evolutionary ecologists, side by side with a quite different picture. Observing that human
behaviour often seems far from optimal, the blame for the discrepancy is placed squarely
upon culture itself ! Thus Winterhalder explicitly singles out ‘cultural goals’, situated within
systems of belief and meaning, as one of the possible reasons for the disjunction, in the
human case, ‘between modeled optima and observed behaviors’ (1981b: 16). Likewise,
Foley (1985: 237) lists, as among the consequences of the human capacity for culture, a
number of characteristics that ‘may inhibit the achievement of optimality’. Nowhere,
however, is the contradiction more blatant than in a recent review of optimal foraging
theory in its archaeological and anthropological application to human hunter-gatherers,
by Robert Bettinger (1991).
Referring back to the classic debate in economic anthropology between advocates of
so-called ‘formalism’ and ‘substantivism’, Bettinger reminds us that the terms of the debate
have their source in Max Weber’s (1947: 184–5) distinction between the formal and
substantive aspects of human rationality, the ﬁrst consisting in the element of quantitative calculation or accounting involved in economic decision-making, the second in the
subservience of economic activity to ultimate ends or standards of value of a qualitative
nature. Without denying the salience of the latter in human affairs, Bettinger argues that
formal models have the great advantage of providing a ‘yardstick of objective economic
rationality’, against which it is possible to gauge how far actual behaviour is governed by
‘rational, self-interested incentives’ as opposed to ‘cultural norms and ideas’ (Bettinger
1991: 106). And this, he maintains, is precisely what the models of optimal foraging theorists enable one to achieve. The ideal-typical forager of these models is a creature entirely
free from cultural constraint to act out of pure, calculated self-interest. Insofar as real
human beings are biased by their commitment to ‘cultural norms’, it is expected that their
behaviour will diverge from the optimum.
This puts the Cree hunter in an entirely different light. The received wisdom of his
cultural heritage, far from underwriting his ability to come up with an effective strategy,
is actually liable to prevent him from recognising the best course of action judged in terms
of an objective reckoning of costs and beneﬁts. For example, older hunters, strongly

Livelihood
committed to the traditional ideal of spreading their effort across a range of species, 1
continue to practise a broad spectrum style of hunting even when the availability of the 2
snowmobile makes it much more proﬁtable to concentrate on a few preferred, high-yield 3
game animals. By contrast, men of the younger generation, whose commitment to tradi- 4
tional cultural values (at least in the eyes of their seniors) is weak, readily opt for a more 5
specialised strategy. It seems perfectly reasonable to suppose that this strategy is a result 6
of the quite conscious and deliberate decision, on the part of these younger men, not 7
to imitate the style of their forefathers. But by the same token, it makes no sense at all 8
to regard it as the outcome of a process of variation under natural selection (Boone and 9
Smith 1998: S146–7).
One cannot avoid the impression that optimal foraging theorists are trying to have it 1
both ways, taking their cue, as it suits them, either from neo-Darwinian evolutionary 2
biology or from neoclassical microeconomics. Indeed in Bettinger’s view the fact that 3
optimal foraging theory came to anthropology via biology is more or less incidental – ‘it 4
might just as easily have been borrowed from economics’ (1991: 83). If that were really 5
so, then the theorems of economics should be as applicable to non-human as to human 6
behaviour, and economic man would have his counterpart among the animals. The 7
‘economic muskrat’, for example, would place its own self-preservation before the prompt- 8
ings of its genes, and would choose not to visit the traps laid by the Cree hunter. The 9
following passage, however, gives the game away:
In Darwinian theories, . . . individuals are essential to explanation: their interests cannot 2
be ignored. It is the self-interested individual that must make real and metaphorical 3
choices about reproduction and the selective risks associated with different courses of 4
action
(Bettinger 1991: 152, my emphasis) 6
Crucially, Bettinger fails to explain what he means by ‘metaphorical choices’. We can only 8
surmise that he has in mind the common habit that neo-Darwinian biologists have of 9
speaking as if the individual had selected what in fact is built into its modus operandi by 30
countless generations of natural selection of which its own constitution is the latest product. 1
The metaphor may have its uses, affording a kind of shorthand, but when reality and 2
metaphor are fused as they are here, the consequences are disastrous.
Are the Cree hunter’s choices real or metaphorical? If they are real, then they have not 4
been ‘passed on’ as part of any inherited schema, whether genetic or cultural, and appeals 5
to natural selection are irrelevant. If, on the other hand, the hunter’s behaviour follows a 6
strategy that has evolved through a process of natural selection, albeit working on cultur- 7
ally rather than genetically transmitted characteristics, then strictly speaking, he exercises 8
no more choice in the matter of where to go or what species to pursue than do non- 9
human creatures whose behaviour is presumed to be under genetic control. ‘Why’, asks 40
Ernst Mayr (1976: 362), ‘did the warbler on my summer place in New Hampshire start 1
its southward migration on the night of the 25th August?’: his answer is that the bird has 2
an evolved genetic constitution, shaped up ‘through many thousands of generations of 3
natural selection’, which induces it to respond in this particular way to a speciﬁc conjunc- 4
tion of environmental conditions (a reduction in daylight hours coupled with a sudden 5
drop in temperature). Likewise, the muskrat is drawn compulsively into the hunter’s trap. 6
And likewise too, according to this selectionist account, the hunter is predisposed to 7
respond appropriately to signs of the presence of animals, as revealed by their tracks, by 118

The optimal forager and economic man

pursuing some, laying traps for others, and passing yet others by. He could not have
chosen to do other than what he actually does, any more than the muskrat could have
chosen not to enter the trap, or the warbler not to migrate. For as a product of ‘enculturation’, the hunter is as stuck with his heritage as are the muskrat and the bird with
their respective sets of genes.
In short, to have recourse to neo-Darwinian theory is to show not how individuals
design strategies, but how natural selection designs strategies for individuals to follow.
Equipped by virtue of its evolutionary past with a programme for generating more or
less optimal behaviour, within an appropriate environmental context, the individual is
predestined to execute that behaviour; thus its entire life, judged by its reproductive
outcome, becomes just one trial in that protracted and ongoing decision process that is
natural selection itself. Stephen Toulmin (1981) refers to this as a process of populational
adaptation, by contrast to the calculative adaptation that results from rational decision
making. But as he points out, explanations of adaptive behaviour based on rational choice
and on natural selection are not incompatible. Indeed it may be argued that the former
actually depend on the latter – in other words, that a prerequisite for any theory of calculative adaptation is an account of human nature which must necessarily be couched in
populational terms. I present this argument below.

REASON AND NATURE AS AGENTS OF SELECTION
A formal theory of rational choice, as elaborated in classical microeconomics, predicts what
people will do, assuming that their deliberate aim is to obtain the greatest beneﬁt from
their actions. The relative beneﬁt to be derived from alternative courses of action can,
however, only be evaluated in terms of people’s own subjective beliefs and preferences. It
may, of course, be possible to derive certain ‘lower order’ beliefs and preferences from
‘higher order’ ones. But this process of derivation cannot go on indeﬁnitely. Ultimately,
if we want to explain where these beliefs and preferences came from in the ﬁrst place –
if, that is, we seek the source of human intentions – then we have to show how they may
have emerged through a history of natural selection. Appeal to human intentionality and
rational choice, it is argued, reveals only the proximate causes of behaviour, while the ultimate cause lies in those selective forces that have furnished individuals both with the
fundamental motivations underwriting their choices and with the cognitive mechanisms
that allow them to be made. As Boone and Smith observe, ‘past genetic (and perhaps
cultural) evolution has shaped the human psyche to be very effective at solving adaptive
problems, and one important element of the psyche is what we commonly label “intentions” or “goals” or “preferences”’ (1998: S152, see also Smith and Winterhalder 1992:
41–50). Thus even if strategies are taken to be products of human reasoning, we have
still to resort to natural selection to account for the rationality of the strategists.
Does human evolutionary ecology offer such an account? It does not – indeed it cannot,
so long as it remains committed to its principal tactic of analysing behaviour in terms of
its potential reproductive consequences rather than focusing on the effects of differential
reproductive success in establishing the psychological mechanisms that give rise to it. As
Symons (1992: 148) has put it, evolutionary ecology is concerned with the adaptiveness
of behaviour, whereas a properly Darwinian account should be concerned with adaptation. That is, it should attempt to show how the most basic goals that human beings seek
to achieve, and that motivate their behaviour, have been designed by natural selection
under the kinds of environmental conditions experienced by ancestral populations in the

Livelihood
course of the evolution of our species. Such goals, Symons argues, are both species-speciﬁc 1
and inﬂexible, such that their contemporary pursuit, under environments very different 2
from those of the ‘environment of evolutionary adaptedness’, can lead to behaviour whose 3
consequences are profoundly maladaptive. A taste for sweet things, for example, may have 4
served our hunter-gatherer ancestors well, in establishing a preference for fruit when it is 5
at its most nutritious. But for the more afﬂuent inhabitants of a modern industrial society 6
it can have the less benign consequences of obesity and tooth decay (Symons 1992: 139). 7
In recent years a new ﬁeld of study, styling itself as evolutionary psychology, has grown 8
up around the attempt to identify those capacities and dispositions conventionally gath- 9
ered under the rubric of ‘human nature’, and to explain how and why they evolved 10
(Barkow, Cosmides and Tooby 1992). This is not the place for a critique of evolutionary 1
psychology, however it is worth noting that its protagonists ﬁnd themselves at loggerheads 2
with the advocates of evolutionary ecology, despite their common allegiance to the neo- 3
Darwinian paradigm. The difference between them is this: evolutionary ecology seeks to 4
show how behaviour is sensitively responsive to variations in the environment, but lacks 5
a coherent account of human nature; evolutionary psychology seeks to construct just such 6
an account, but in doing so is insensitive to the ﬁne-tuning of human behaviour to environ- 7
mental conditions. This is not just a difference of emphasis: on behavioural differences as 8
against cognitive universals. The issue is more profound, for behaviour that evolutionary 9
psychology interprets as the product of evolved problem-solving mechanisms in the human 20
mind/brain, is interpreted by evolutionary ecology as the expression of solutions already 1
reached through the mechanism of natural selection, and impressed upon the mind through 2
a process of enculturation.1 As I intend to argue, neither alternative offers an adequate, 3
ecologically grounded account of how the subsistence skills of hunters and gatherers are 4
acquired and deployed. The problem lies at the heart of the Darwinian paradigm itself. 5
COGNITIVE ALGORITHMS AND RULES OF THUMB
Let me return for a moment to Winterhalder’s ethnography of the Cree of Muskrat Dam 9
Lake. It will be recalled that the environment presents a heterogeneous mosaic of habitat 30
types, which differ in terms of the kinds and relative abundance of the prey species 1
they support. Optimal foraging theory predicts that under these circumstances, hunters 2
will move from patch to patch, sampling what each has to offer, but will drop low-quality 3
patches from their itinerary once it is clear that more is to be gained from concentrating 4
their efforts in high-quality patches despite the extra costs of between-patch travel 5
(MacArthur and Pianka 1966). Where travel costs are high, hunters will tend to be patch- 6
generalists, where they are low they will be patch-specialists. Winterhalder found that the 7
adoption by the Cree of snowmobiles and outboard motors, which greatly reduced 8
the time spent on travel, did indeed favour specialisation. Yet even in the days when 9
everyone moved about on snowshoes, it appears that their itineraries took in relatively few 40
patch types.
To account for this discrepancy, Winterhalder (1981a: 90) proposes that the Cree 2
employ an ‘interstice’ rather than a ‘patch-to-patch’ strategy of foraging (see Figure 2.2). 3
It is a strategy that makes good sense when one is hunting animals, such as moose and 4
caribou, which themselves move frequently from one patch to another, which are not 5
particularly abundant in proportion to the number of patches they are associated with, 6
and which leave tracks or trails that may be used by hunters as evidence for their recent 7
movements and present whereabouts. Moving in the interstices between patches – mainly, 118

The optimal forager and economic man

that is, on the hard-packed snow of
frozen lakes and creeks which in any
case makes travel easier – the hunter
can expect to intercept the tracks
left by animals as they move from
patch to patch, and will visit a patch
only when the tracks indicate
that favoured prey are present there.
‘Cree foragers’, Winterhalder reA
B
marks, ‘have developed this techPath
of
forager
nique to a high level of skill’ (1981a:
Path of mobile prey
91).
There is no reason to doubt the
truth of this remark. My concern is Figure 2.2 Alternative foraging strategies in a patchy environment:
rather with the signiﬁcance to be (A) patch-to-patch foraging; (B) interstice foraging (Winterhalder
attached to the notion of skill in 1981a: 91).
this context. For Winterhalder, skill From Winterhalder and Smith (eds) Hunter-Gatherer Foraging Strategies,
evidently means an ability to pro- published by University of Chicago Press 1981.
duce rapid solutions to ostensibly
rather complex problems posed by
speciﬁc conjunctions of environmental circumstances. Elsewhere, Smith and Winterhalder
(1992: 57) suggest that this is done by means of ‘rules of thumb’. Clearly, as they point
out, the formal mathematical techniques (including geometric tangents, partial derivatives,
algebraic inequalities and the like) used in the construction of optimal foraging models
are not replicated in the ‘everyday decision processes of actors’. Nevertheless, ‘simple rules
of thumb or cognitive algorithms provided by natural or cultural selection may allow them
to approach the solution [to a particular foraging problem] quite closely under conditions
approximating the environments in which these “short-cuts” evolved’ (1992: 58, my
emphasis). One such rule, for the Cree hunter, might be stated as follows: ‘Proceed along
the creek bed until you intercept a track; then, if the track is fresh, search the upland
patch to which it leads’. To become skilled, then, the hunter must be equipped with such
rules through a process of enculturation.
Now I do not wish to deny that Cree hunters have resort to rules of thumb. I believe,
however, that to describe these rules as ‘cognitive algorithms’ is fundamentally to distort
their nature. The notion of cognitive algorithm comes from planning theory, and posits
a series of linked decision rules, internal to the actor, which operate on received information to generate plans for subsequent action. As a ‘solution’ to a perceived ‘problem’,
the plan is supposed to contain a precise and complete speciﬁcation of the action that is
predicated upon it, so that the latter is fully accounted for by the former: to explain what
foragers do it is enough to have explained how they decide what to do. The power and
utility of rules of thumb, by contrast, rest on the fact that they are inherently vague, specifying little or nothing about the concrete details of action. Invoked against the background
of involvement in a real world of persons, objects and relations, rules of thumb may
furnish practitioners with a way of talking about what they have done, or about what
they mean to do next, but once launched into the action itself they must necessarily fall
back on abilities of a quite different kind – namely, on developmentally embodied and
environmentally attuned capacities of movement and perception. Rules of thumb, as
Suchman (1987: 52) puts it, serve ‘to orient you in such a way that you can obtain the

Livelihood
best possible position from which to use those embodied skills on which, in the ﬁnal 1
analysis, your success depends’. In no sense, however, do they substitute for these skills. 2
Nor, as I shall now show, can we understand the acquisition of technical skills, in succes- 3
sive generations, as a process of enculturation.
ENCULTURATION AND ENSKILMENT
If, as evolutionary ecology would claim, the interstice pattern of foraging has evolved by 8
natural selection as an optimal strategy of resource procurement for hunters and trappers 9
in the boreal forest environment, then it must be expressible in the form of rules and 10
representations that can be transmitted across generations. Let me emphasise once again 1
that there is no question of these rules and representations being encoded genetically. The 2
suggestion is rather that the ‘formula’ for interstice foraging is contained within a body 3
of cultural information that is passed on, in a manner analogous to genetic transmission, 4
from one generation to the next. According to this analogy, the transmission of cultural 5
information must be distinguished from the experience of its application in particular 6
settings of use, just as the transmission of the constituent elements of the genotype must 7
be distinguished from the latter’s realisation, within a particular environment, in the mani- 8
fest form of the phenotype. This distinction is commonly made by means of a contrast 9
between two forms of learning: social and individual (e.g. Richerson and Boyd 1992: 64, 20
see also Chapter Twenty-one, pp. 386–7). Thus in social learning, the novice absorbs the 1
underlying rules and principles of hunting from already knowledgeable members of 2
the community; in individual learning he puts them to use in the course of his activities 3
in the environment.
Given that social learning occupies such a central place in their theory – as central, 5
indeed, as genetic replication – it is rather surprising that evolutionary ecologists have 6
devoted almost no attention to how it occurs. Consequently, as Hillard Kaplan and Kim 7
Hill are honest enough to admit, ‘we know virtually nothing about . . . the developmental 8
processes by which children become adult foragers’ (1992: 197). Most often, cultural trans- 9
mission is viewed as a simple process of imprinting, in which a whole inventory of rules 30
and representations is miraculously downloaded into the passively receptive mind of the 1
novice. It is to precisely this notion of enculturation that evolutionary psychologists have 2
taken exception. Nothing can be acquired, they claim, unless innate processing mecha- 3
nisms are already in place that serve to decode the signals received from the social 4
environment, and to extract the information contained therein. Thus the traditional model 5
of enculturation, they argue, rests upon an impossible psychology. Not only do innate 6
information-processing mechanisms make the transmission of variable cultural forms 7
possible; they also impose their own structure on what can be learned and how. And it 8
is the evolution of these mechanisms under natural selection, according to evolutionary 9
psychologists, that has to be explained (Tooby and Cosmides 1992: 91–2).
Does this offer an account that is any more convincing? I do not believe that it does, 1
for a simple reason. Human beings are not born with a ready-made architecture of 2
specialised acquisition mechanisms; to the extent that such mechanisms do exist, they could 3
only emerge within a process of ontogenetic development. Thus, even if there were such 4
a thing as a ‘technology acquisition device’ (analogous to the ‘language acquisition device’ 5
posited by many psycholinguists), it would still have to undergo formation within the 6
very same developmental context in which the child learns the particular skills of his or 7
her community. And if both are aspects of the same developmental process, it is difﬁcult 118

The optimal forager and economic man

to see how the learning of the ‘acquired’ skills can be distinguished from the formation
of the ‘innate’ device (this point is argued at greater length in Chapter Twenty-one).
However there is no reason to suppose that anything like a ‘technology acquisition device’
exists at all. Rather, the learning of technical skills appears to depend on what might be
called ‘technology acquisition support systems’ (Wynn 1994: 153). These systems, as Wynn
argues, are not even partly innate. They are rather systems of apprenticeship, constituted by
the relationships between more and less experienced practitioners in hands-on contexts of
activity. And it is on the reproduction of these relationships, not on genetic replication
– or the transmission of some analogous code of cultural instructions – that the continuity of a technical tradition depends.
Considering how novice hunters actually learn their trade, two points should be made
right away. First, there is no explicit code of procedure, specifying the exact movements
to be executed under any given circumstances: indeed practical skills of this kind, as I
show in Chapter Nineteen, are just not amenable to codiﬁcation in terms of any formal
system of rules and representations. Secondly, it is not possible, in practice, to separate
the sphere of the novice’s involvement with other persons from that of his involvement
with the non-human environment. The novice hunter learns by accompanying more experienced hands in the woods. As he goes about, he is instructed in what to look out for,
and his attention is drawn to subtle clues that he might otherwise fail to notice: in other
words, he is led to develop a sophisticated perceptual awareness of the properties of his
surroundings and of the possibilities they afford for action. For example, he learns to
register those qualities of surface texture that enable one to tell, merely from touch, how
long ago an animal left its imprint in the snow, and how fast it was travelling.
We could say that he acquires such know-how by observation and imitation, but not,
however, in the sense in which these terms are generally employed by enculturation
theorists. Observation is no more a matter of having information copied into one’s head,
than is imitation a matter of mechanically executing the received intructions. Rather,
to observe is actively to attend to the movements of others; to imitate is to align that
attention to the movement of one’s own practical orientation towards the environment.
The ﬁne-tuning of perception and action that is going on here is better understood as a
process of enskilment than as one of enculturation (I return to this distinction in Chapter
Twenty-three, p. 416; see also Pálsson 1994). For what is involved, as I showed in the
last chapter, is not a transmission of representations, as the enculturation model implies,
but an education of attention. Indeed, the instructions the novice hunter receives – to
watch out for this, attend to that, and so on – only take on meaning in the context
of his engagement with the environment. Hence it makes no sense to speak of ‘culture’
as an independent body of context-free knowledge, that is available for transmission prior
to the situations of its application (Lave 1990: 310). And if culture, in this form, exists
nowhere save in the heads of anthropological theorists, then the very idea of its evolution
is a chimera.

CONCLUSION
In short, a technique such as interstice foraging is not passed on as part of any systematic body of cultural representations; it is rather inculcated in each successive generation
through a process of development, in the course of novices’ practical involvement with
the constituents of their environment – under the guidance of more experienced mentors
– in the conduct of their everyday tasks. The accomplished hunter consults the world,

Livelihood
not representations inside his head. The implications of this conclusion cannot be overem- 1
phasised, since they strike at the very core of neo-Darwinian theory itself. It is a 2
fundamental premise of this theory that the morphological attributes and behavioural 3
propensities of individual organisms must be speciﬁable, in some sense, independently and 4
in advance of their entry into relations with their environments, and that the components 5
of these speciﬁcations – whether genes or (in humans) their cultural analogues – must be 6
transmissible across generations. It is my contention, to the contrary, that such context- 7
independent speciﬁcations are, at best, analytic abstractions, and that in reality the forms 8
and capacities of organisms are the emergent properties of developmental systems (Oyama 9
1985: 22–3).
We can now see why the attempt to produce a neo-Darwinian evolutionary ecology 1
inevitably runs into difﬁculties. For if morphology and behaviour truly emerge through a 2
history of organism–environment relations, as a properly ecological perspective requires, 3
then they cannot be attributed to a prior design speciﬁcation that is imported into the 4
environmental context of development. Yet just such an attribution is entailed in the 5
theory of adaptation under natural selection. As we have seen, evolutionary ecologists have 6
tended to evade the problem by focusing on the reproductive consequences of behaviour 7
while remaining agnostic about its developmental causes, thereby substituting the study 8
of adaptiveness for that of adaptation. On the other hand, evolutionary psychologists, 9
adhering more strictly to the neo-Darwinian logic of adaptation, have come up with an 20
account of human nature that is fundamentally anti-ecological in its appeal to an ‘evolved 1
architecture’ that is ﬁxed and universal to the species, regardless of the environmental 2
circumstances in which people happen to grow up.
Let me conclude by returning to the opposition with which I began, between the 4
optimal forager and economic man. Whereas the latter is credited with the capacity to 5
work out his strategies for himself, the former has to have them worked out for him by 6
natural selection. They appear to stand, thus, on opposite sides of an overriding division 7
between reason and nature, freedom and necessity, subjectivity and objectivity. But this 8
is also a dichotomy on which the project of modern natural science depends, and it under- 9
writes the distinction, as it has appeared in the literature of Western anthropology, between 30
the scientist, whose humanity is not in doubt, and the hunter-gatherer who, it would 1
appear, is only contingently human. The scientist – in this case the evolutionary ecolo- 2
gist – constructs an abstract model on the basis of which he can calculate what it would 3
be best for the hunter-gatherer to do; this prediction is then ‘tested’ against what the 4
hunter-gatherer actually does. If observed practice conforms to the prediction, the model 5
is said to provide an ultimate explanation for the hunter-gatherer’s behaviour. Natural 6
selection features, in this account, not as a real-world process but as the reﬂection of scien- 7
tiﬁc reason in the mirror of nature, providing the theorist with the excuse to parade models 8
of behaviour as though they were explanations for behaviour.
No amount of appeal, however, to ‘methodological individualism’, the ‘hypothetico- 40
deductive method’, or other such contrivances in the analyst’s bag of tricks (Smith and 1
Winterhalder 1992, Winterhalder and Smith 1992), will get around the fact that the indi- 2
viduals whose behaviour evolutionary ecologists purport to explain are creatures of their 3
own imagination. The scientiﬁc image of hunting and gathering, as a naturally prescribed 4
course of ﬁtness-maximisation, is as illusory as the image that science has of its own enter- 5
prise, as a monument to the freedom and pre-eminence of human reason. Far from 6
confronting one another across the boundary of nature, both the people who call them- 7
selves scientists and the people whom scientists call hunter-gatherers are fellow passengers 118

The optimal forager and economic man

in this world of ours, who carry on the business of life and, in so doing, develop their
capacities and aspirations, within a continuing history of involvement with both human
and non-human components of their environments. If we are to develop a thoroughgoing
ecological understanding of how real people relate to these environments, and of the sensitivity and skill with which they do so, it is imperative to take this condition of involvement
as our point of departure. Yet to achieve this, as I have shown, will require nothing less
than a fundamental overhaul of evolutionary theory itself.

Livelihood
That nature is a cultural construction is an easy claim to make, and it is one that ﬁgures 3
prominently in recent anthropological literature. It is not so easy, however, to ascertain 4
what might be meant by it. One of my principal objectives in this chapter is to demon- 5
strate that this claim is incoherent. To illustrate my argument I shall consider the 6
anthropological treatment of those peoples classically regarded as operating within a natural 7
economy, namely societies of hunters and gatherers. Comparing this treatment with the 8
understandings that people who actually live by hunting and gathering have of themselves 9
and their environments, I shall show that the latter systematically reject the ontological 20
dualism of that tradition of thought and science which – as a kind of shorthand – we 1
call ‘Western’, and of which the dichotomy between nature and culture is the prototyp- 2
ical instance. I propose that we take these hunter-gatherer understandings seriously, and 3
this means that far from regarding them as diverse cultural constructions of reality, alter- 4
native to the Western one, we need to think again about our own ways of comprehending 5
human action, perception and cognition, and indeed about our very understanding of the 6
environment and of our relations and responsibilities towards it. Above all, we cannot rest 7
content with the facile identiﬁcation of the environment – or at least its non-human 8
component – with ‘nature’. For as we saw in Chapter One, the world can only be ‘nature’ 9
for a being that does not inhabit it, yet only through inhabiting can the world be consti- 30
tuted, in relation to a being, as its environment.
NATURE, CULTURE AND THE LOGIC OF CONSTRUCTION
Let me begin by outlining what I take to be a commonly adopted position within social 5
and cultural anthropology. I admit that this has something of the character of a ‘straw 6
man’, and I am indeed setting it up in order to knock it down. Nevertheless, it is one 7
that has proved remarkably resilient, for reasons that will become clear as we proceed. 8
Of all species of animals, the argument goes, humans are unique in that they occupy 9
what Richard Shweder (1990: 2) calls ‘intentional worlds’. For the inhabitants of such a 40
world, things do not exist ‘in themselves’, as indifferent objects, but only as they are given 1
form or meaning within systems of mental representations. Thus to individuals who belong 2
to different intentional worlds, the same objects in the same physical surroundings may 3
mean quite different things. And when people act towards these objects, or with them in 4
mind, their actions respond to the ways they are already appropriated, categorised or 5
valorised in terms of a particular, pre-existent design. That design, transmitted across 6
the generations in the form of received conceptual schemata, and manifested physically 7
in the artiﬁcial products of their implementation, is what is commonly known as ‘culture’. 118

Chapter Three

Hunting and gathering as ways
of perceiving the environment

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

The environments of human beings, therefore, are culturally constituted. And when we
refer to an environment – or more speciﬁcally to that part of it consisting of animate and
inanimate things – as ‘nature’, then this too has to be understood as an artefact of cultural
construction. ‘Nature is to culture’, writes Marshall Sahlins, ‘as the constituted is to the
constituting’ (1976: 209). Culture provides the building plan, nature is the building; but
whence come the raw materials?
There must indeed be a physical world ‘out there’, beyond the multiple, intentional
worlds of cultural subjects, otherwise there would be nothing to build with nor anyone,
for that matter, to do the building. Minds cannot subsist without bodies to house them,
and bodies cannot subsist unless continually engaged in material and energetic exchanges
with components of the environment. Biological and ecological scientists routinely describe
these exchanges as going on within a world of nature. It is apparently necessary, therefore, to distinguish between two kinds or versions of nature: ‘really natural’ nature (the
object of study for natural scientists) and ‘culturally perceived’ nature (the object of study
for social and cultural anthropologists). Such distinctions are indeed commonplace in
anthropological literature: examples are Rappaport’s between the ‘operational’ models of
ecological science, purportedly describing nature as it really is, and the ‘cognized’ models
of native people; and, perhaps most notoriously, the much used and abused distinction
between ‘etic’ and ‘emic’ accounts (Rappaport 1968: 237–41, Ellen 1982, Chapter 9, cf.
Ingold 1992a: 47–8).
In the formula ‘nature is culturally constructed’, nature thus appears on two sides: on
one as the product of a constructional process, on the other as its precondition. Herein,
however, lies a paradox. Many anthropologists are well aware that the basic contrast
between physical substance and conceptual form, of which the dichotomy between nature
and culture is one expression, is deeply embedded within the tradition of Western thought.
It is recognized that the concept of nature, insofar as it denotes an external world of
matter and substance ‘waiting to be given meaningful shape and content by the mind
of man’ (Sahlins 1976: 210), is part of that very intentional world within which is situated the project of Western science as the ‘objective’ study of natural phenomena (Shweder
1990: 24). And yet the notion that there are intentional worlds, and that human realities
are culturally constructed, rests on precisely the same ontological foundation. The paradox
may be represented as follows:

Culture

Culture
Nature (culturally perceived)

Nature (really natural)
If the concept of nature is given within the intentional world of the Western scientist,
then the concept of culture must – by the same token – be given within the intentional
world of the Western humanist. Each, indeed, presupposes the other. Not only, then,
must the concept of nature be regarded as a cultural construct, but so also must that of
culture. As Carol MacCormack puts it: ‘Neither the concept of nature nor that of culture
is “given”, and they cannot be free from the biases of the [European] culture in which
the concepts were constructed’ (1980: 6). The fact that ‘culture’ appears twice in this
statement at once alerts us to a basic contradiction. For the references, in the second
part of the statement, to culture and to the logic of construction take as ‘given’ the
very concepts that, in the ﬁrst part of the statement, are said to be historically relative.

Livelihood

Nor can the problem be contrived to disappear by trying to have it both ways, as Kirsten 1
Hastrup does when she suggests that instead of regarding nature as ‘either a relative cultural 2
category or an objective physical framework around culture’, it might better be seen as 3
‘both-and’ (1989: 7). For then culture, too, must be both-and, both an objective cate- 4
gorical constructor and a relative category constructed. To attempt to apply this logic is 5
at once to be caught in the vortex of an inﬁnite regress: if the opposed categories of 6
‘nature’ and ‘culture’ are themselves cultural constructs, then so must be the culture that 7
constructs them, and the culture that constructs that, and so on ad inﬁnitum. And since, 8
at every stage in this regress, the reality of nature reappears as its representation, ‘real’ 9
reality recedes as fast as it is approached.
In what follows I shall argue that hunter-gatherers do not, as a rule, approach their 1
environment as an external world of nature that has to be ‘grasped’ conceptually and 2
appropriated symbolically within the terms of an imposed cultural design, as a precondi- 3
tion for effective action. They do not see themselves as mindful subjects having to contend 4
with an alien world of physical objects; indeed the separation of mind and nature has no 5
place in their thought and practice. I should add that they are not peculiar in this regard: 6
my purpose is certainly not to argue for some distinctive hunter-gatherer worldview or to 7
suggest that they are somehow ‘at one’ with their environments in a way that other peoples 8
are not. Nor am I concerned to set up a comparison between the ‘intentional worlds’ of 9
hunter-gatherers and Western scientists or humanists. It is of course an illusion to suppose 20
that such a comparison could be made on level terms, since the primacy of Western 1
ontology, the ‘givenness’ of nature and culture, is implicit in the very premises on which 2
the comparative project is itself established (see Figure 3.1).
What I wish to suggest is that we reverse this order of primacy, and follow the lead of 4
hunter-gatherers in taking the human condition to be that of a being immersed from the 5
start, like other creatures, in an active, practical and perceptual engagement with 6
constituents of the dwelt-in world. This ontology of dwelling, I contend, provides us with 7
a better way of coming to grips with the 8
nature of human existence than does the 9
Intentional
alternative, Western ontology whose point 30
worlds
of departure is that of a mind detached from 1
the world, and that has literally to formu- 2
Culture
late it – to build an intentional world in 3
‘Western’
consciousness – prior to any attempt at 4
Nature
engagement. The contrast, I repeat, is not 5
between alternative views of the world; it is 6
Culture
rather between two ways of apprehending 7
it, only one of which (the Western) may be 8
characterised as the construction of a view, 9
No nature,
no culture
that is, as a process of mental representa- 40
‘non-Western’
(e.g., Stathern
tion. As for the other, apprehending the 1
1980)
world is not a matter of construction but 2
Nature
of engagement, not of building but of 3
dwelling, not of making a view of the world 4
but of taking up a view in it (Ingold 1996a: 5
Figure 3.1 A comparison between ‘non-Western’ and ‘West6
ern’ intentional worlds assumes the primacy of the Western 117).
In
the
following
three
sections
shall
move
ontology, with its dichotomy between nature and culture, or
between physical substance and conceptual form.
on to examine, in more detail, how this 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

contrast has been played out in the context of Western anthropological studies of hunters
and gatherers. First, I shall consider how certain tropical hunter-gatherer peoples perceive
their relations to their forest environment. Secondly, I shall look at the way northern
hunters, in particular the Cree of northeastern Canada, understand their relations to the
animals they hunt. Thirdly, drawing on ethnographic material from Aboriginal Australia
and subarctic Alaska, I shall consider the way hunters and gatherers perceive the landscape. I conclude by showing how anthropological attempts to depict the mode of practical
engagement of hunter-gatherers with the world as a mode of cultural construction of it
have had the effect, quite contrary to stated intentions, of perpetuating a naturalistic vision
of the hunter-gatherer economy.

CHILDREN OF THE FOREST
In his classic study of the Mbuti Pygmies of the Ituri Forest, Colin Turnbull observes
that the people recognise their dependence on the forest that surrounds them by referring to it as ‘Father’ or ‘Mother’. They do so ‘because, as they say, it gives them food,
warmth, shelter and clothing, just like their parents’, and moreover, ‘like their parents,
[it] gives them affection’ (Turnbull 1965: 19). This form of reference, and the analogy it
establishes between the most intimate relations of human kinship and the equally intimate relations between human persons and the non-human environment, is by no means
unique to the Mbuti.1 Precisely similar observations have been made among other huntergatherers of the tropical forest, in widely separate regions of the world. For example,
among the Batek Negritos of Malaysia, according to Kirk Endicott, the forest environment ‘is not just the physical setting in which they live, but a world made for them in
which they have a well-deﬁned part to play. They see themselves as involved in an intimate relationship of interdependence with the plants, animals and hala’ (including the
deities) that inhabit their world’ (Endicott 1979: 82). The hala’ are the creator beings
who brought the forest world into existence for the people, who protect and care for it,
and provide its human dwellers with nourishment. And again, among the Nayaka, forestdwelling hunter-gatherers of Tamil Nadu, South India, Nurit Bird-David found a similar
attitude: ‘Nayaka look on the forest as they do on a mother or father. For them, it is not
something “out there” that responds mechanically or passively but like a parent, it provides
food unconditionally to its children’ (Bird-David 1990: 190). Nayaka refer to both the
spirits that inhabit the landscape and the spirits of their own predecessors by terms that
translate as ‘big father’ and ‘big mother’, and to themselves in relation to these spirits as
sons and daughters.
What are we to make of this? Drawing an explicit parallel between her own Nayaka
material and the ethnography of the Batek and Mbuti, Bird-David argues that huntergatherer perceptions of the environment are typically oriented by the primary metaphor
‘forest is as parent’, or more generally by the notion that the environment gives the wherewithal of life to people – not in return for appropriate conduct, but unconditionally.
Among neighbouring populations of cultivators, by contrast, the environment is likened
to an ancestor rather than a parent, which yields its bounty only reciprocally, in return
for favours rendered. It is this difference in orientation to the environment, she suggests,
that most fundamentally distinguishes hunter-gatherers from cultivators, and it is upheld
even when the former draw (as they often do) on cultivated resources and when the
latter, conversely, draw on the ‘wild’ resources of the forest (Bird-David 1990). In a subsequent extension of the argument, and drawing once again on Mbuti, Batek and Nayaka

Livelihood
ethnography, Bird-David (1992a) proposes that hunter-gatherers liken the unconditional 1
way in which the forest transacts with people to the similarly unconditional transactions 2
that take place among the people of a community, which in anthropological accounts 3
come under the rubric of sharing. Thus the environment shares its bounty with humans 4
just as humans share with one another, thereby integrating both human and non-human 5
components of the world into one, all-embracing ‘cosmic economy of sharing’.
But when the hunter-gatherer addresses the forest as his or her parent, or speaks of 7
accepting what it has to offer as one would from other people, on what grounds can we 8
claim that the usage is metaphorical? This is evidently not an interpretation that the people 9
would make themselves; nevertheless – taking her cue from Lakoff and Johnson (1980) 10
– Bird-David argues that these key metaphors enable them to make sense of their environ- 1
ment, and guide their actions within it, even though ‘people may not be normally aware 2
of them’ (1992a: 31; 1990: 190, my emphasis). There is a troublesome inconsistency here. 3
On the one hand, Bird-David is anxious to offer a culture-sensitive account of the hunter- 4
gatherer economy, as a counterpoint to the prevailing ecologism of most anthropological 5
work in this ﬁeld. On the other hand, she can do so only by imposing a division of her 6
own, which forms no part of local conceptions, between actuality and metaphor. 7
Underwriting this division is an assumed separation between two domains: the domain 8
of human persons and social relations, wherein parenting and sharing are matters of 9
everyday, commonsense reality; and the domain of the non-human environment, the forest 20
with its plants and animals, relations with which are understood by drawing, for analogy, 1
on those intrinsic to the ﬁrst domain. In short, hunter-gatherers are supposed to call upon 2
their experience of relations in the human world in order to model their relations with 3
the non-human one.
The theoretical inspiration for this analytical tactic comes from Stephen Gudeman 5
(1986), so let us turn to look at how he approaches the matter. Starting from the assump- 6
tion that ‘humans are modelers’, Gudeman proposes that ‘securing a livelihood, meaning 7
the domain of material “production”, “distribution” and “consumption”, is culturally 8
modeled in all societies’ (1986: 37). Entailed in the notion of modeling is a distinction 9
between a ‘schema’ which provides a programme, plan or script, and an ‘object’ to which 30
it is applied: thus ‘the model is a projection from the domain of the schema to the domain 1
of the object’ (p. 38). Comparing Western and non-Western (or ‘local’) models of liveli- 2
hood, Gudeman suggests that in the former, schemas taken from the ‘domain of material 3
objects’ are typically applied to ‘the domain of human life’, whereas in the latter the 4
direction of application is reversed, such that ‘material processes are modeled as being 5
intentional’ (pp. 43–4). But notice how the entire argument is predicated upon an initial 6
ontological dualism between the intentional worlds of human subjects and the object world 7
of material things, or in brief, between society and nature. It is only by virtue of holding 8
these to be separate that the one can be said to furnish the model for the other. The 9
implication, however, is that the claim of the people themselves to inhabit but one world, 40
encompassing relations with both human and non-human components of the environ- 1
ment on a similar footing, is founded upon an illusion – one that stems from their inability 2
to recognise where the reality ends and its schematic representation begins. It is left to 3
the anthropological observer to draw the dividing line, on one side of which lies the social 4
world of human modelers of nature, and on the other, the natural world modeled as 5
human society.
In the speciﬁc case with which we are concerned, hunter-gatherers’ material interactions 7
with the forest environment are said to be modeled on the interpersonal relations of 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

parenting and sharing: the former, assigned to the domain of nature, establish the object;
the latter, assigned to the domain of society, provide the schema. But this means that
actions and events that are constitutive of the social domain must be representative of the
natural. When, for example, the child begs its mother for a morsel of food, that communicative gesture is itself a constitutive moment in the development of the mother–child
relationship, and the same is true for the action of the mother in fulﬁlling the request.
Parenting is not a construction that is projected onto acts of this kind, it rather subsists
in them, in the nurture and affection bestowed by adults on their offspring. Likewise, the
give and take of food beyond the narrow context of parent–child ties is constitutive of
relations of sharing, relations that subsist in the mutuality and companionship of persons
in intimate social groups (cf. Price 1975, Ingold 1986a: 116–17). Yet according to the
logic of the argument outlined above, as soon as we turn to consider exchange with the
non-human environment, the situation is quite otherwise. For far from subsisting in
people’s practical involvement with the forest and its fauna and ﬂora in their activities of
food-getting, parenting and sharing belong instead to a construction that is projected onto
that involvement from a separate, social source. Hence, when the hunter-gatherer begs
the forest to provide food, as one would a human parent, the gesture is not a moment
in the unfolding of relations between humans and non-human agencies and entities in
the environment, it is rather an act that says something about these relationships, a representative evaluation or commentary.2
In short, actions that in the sphere of human relations would be regarded as instances
of practical involvement with the world come to be seen, in the sphere of relations with
the non-human environment, as instances of its metaphorical construction. Yet those who
would construct the world, who would be ‘modelers’ in Gudeman’s sense, must already
live in it, and life presupposes an engagement with components not only of the human
but also of the non-human environment. People need the support and affection of one
another, but they also need to eat. How then, to stay with the same argument, do huntergatherers deal, actually rather than metaphorically, with non-human beings in the practical
business of gaining a livelihood? They cannot do so in their capacity as persons, since
non-human agencies and entities are supposed to have no business in the world of persons
save as ﬁgures of the anthropomorphic imagination. Hence the domain of their actual
interaction with the non-human environment in the procurement of subsistence must lie
beyond that of their existence as persons, in a separate domain wherein they ﬁgure as
biological objects rather than cultural subjects, that is as organisms rather than persons.
This is the natural domain of organism-environment interactions, as distinct from the
social domain of interpersonal relations. In Figure 3.2 (upper diagram) this result is indicated schematically.
There is a profound irony here. Was not the principal objective to counteract that
‘naturalisation of the hunter-gatherer economy’ which, as Sahlins comments (1976: 100),
has formed the received anthropological wisdom, in favour of an account sensitive to the
nuances of local culture? Yet what we ﬁnd is that such naturalisation is entailed in the
very stance that treats the perception of the environment as a matter of reconstructing
the data of experience within intentional worlds. The sphere of human engagement
with the environment, in the practical activities of hunting and gathering, is disembedded
from the sphere within which humans are constituted as social beings or persons, as a
precondition for letting the latter stand to the former as schema to object. The consequences are all too apparent from the conclusion towards which Gudeman moves, in
bringing his argument to a close:

Livelihood
Person
SOCIETY
Human
being
Non-human
animals,
plants
Organism
NATURE
Inanimate entities
Other
humans
Human
being
Inanimate
Non-human
entities
animals,
plants
ENVIRONMENT
Figure 3.2 Western anthropological (above) and hunter-gatherer (below) economies of knowledge.
In all living societies humans must maintain themselves by securing energy from the
environment. Although this life-sustaining process amounts only to a rearranging of 5
nature, a transforming of materials from one state or appearance to another, humans 6
make something of this activity.
(1986: 154) 8
By his own account, then, the life-process of human beings, shorn of the diverse construc- 40
tions that are placed upon it, and that ‘make something’ of it, is nothing more than a 1
rearranging of nature.
In this connection, we may recall Sahlins’s attempt to treat ‘economy’ as a ‘component 3
of culture’, which led him to contrast ‘the material life process of society’ to ‘a need satis- 4
fying process of individual behaviour’ (1972: 186 fn.1). Hunting and gathering, by this 5
account, are operations that take place in nature, consisting of interactions between human 6
organisms with ‘needs’, and environmental resources with the potential to satisfy them. 7
Only after having been extracted is the food transferred to the domain of society, wherein 118
Other
persons

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

its distribution is governed by a schema for sharing, a schema inscribed in the social relations which the economic practices of sharing serve to reproduce (see Ingold 1988a: 275).
In the economy of knowledge, as conceived in general by Gudeman and speciﬁcally for
hunter-gatherers by Bird-David, what applies to food applies also to sensory experience.
That experience, gained through human organism–environment interactions, provides the
raw material of sensation that – along with food – hunters and gatherers ‘take home’ with
them. Carried over to the domain of interpersonal relations, it too is assimilated to a social
schema, to yield a cultural construction of nature such as ‘the forest is as parent’.
In Figure 3.2 this anthropological conception of the economy of knowledge is contrasted
with that of the people themselves. In their account (lower diagram) there are not two
worlds, of nature and society, but just one, saturated with personal powers, and embracing
both humans, the animals and plants on which they depend, and the features of the landscape in which they live and move. Within this one world, humans ﬁgure not as composites
of body and mind but as undivided beings, ‘organism-persons’, relating as such both to
other humans and to non-human agencies and entities in their environment. Between
these spheres of involvement there is no absolute separation, they are but contextually
delimited segments of a single ﬁeld. As Bird-David observes, hunter-gatherers ‘do not
inscribe into the nature of things a division between the natural agencies and themselves,
as we [Westerners] do with our “nature:culture” dichotomy. They view their world as an
integrated entity’ (1992a: 29–30). And so one gets to know the forest, and the plants and
animals that dwell therein, in just the same way that one becomes familiar with other
people, by spending time with them, investing in one’s relations with them the same qualities of care, feeling and attention. This explains why hunters and gatherers consider time
devoted to forays in the forest to be well spent, even if it yields little or nothing by way
of useful return: there is, as Bird-David puts it, ‘a concern with the activity itself ’ (1992a:
30), since it allows people to ‘keep in touch’ with the non-human environment. And
because of this, people know the environment ‘intimately, in the way one “knows” close
relatives with whom one shares intimate day-to-day life’ (Bird-David 1992b: 39).
That the perception of the social world is grounded in the direct, mutually attentive
involvement of self and other in shared contexts of experience, prior to its representation
in terms of received conceptual schemata, is now well established. But in Western anthropological and psychological discourse such involvement continues to be apprehended
within the terms of the orthodox dualisms of subject and object, persons and things.
Rendered as ‘intersubjectivity’, it is taken to be the constitutive quality of the social
domain as against the object world of nature, a domain open to human beings but not
to non-human kinds (Willis 1990: 11–12). Thus according to Trevarthen and Logotheti,
‘human cultural intelligence is seen to be founded on a level of engagement of minds, or
intersubjectivity, such as no other species has or can acquire’ (1989: 167). In the huntergatherer economy of knowledge, by contrast, it is as entire persons, not as disembodied
minds, that human beings engage with one another and, moreover, with non-human
beings as well. They do so as beings in a world, not as minds which, excluded from a
given reality, ﬁnd themselves in the common predicament of having to make sense of it.
To coin a term, the constitutive quality of their world is not intersubjectivity but interagentivity. To speak of the forest as a parent is not, then, to model object relations in
terms of primary intersubjectivity, but to recognize that at root, the constitutive quality
of intimate relations with non-human and human components of the environment is one
and the same.

Livelihood
The Waswanipi Cree of northeastern Canada, according to Harvey Feit, ‘say that they 3
only catch an animal when the animal is given to them. They say that in winter the north 4
wind, chuetenshu, and the animals themselves give them what they need to live’ (Feit 1973: 5
116). This idea, that the nourishing substance of animals is received by humans as a gift, 6
is widely reported among northern hunting peoples, but in what follows I shall conﬁne 7
my remarks to studies of two other Cree groups. Among the Wemindji Cree, ‘respectful 8
activity towards the animals enhances the readiness with which they give themselves, or 9
are given by God, to hunters’ (Scott 1989: 204). And for the Mistassini Cree, Adrian 10
Tanner reports that the events and activities of the hunt, though they have an obvious 1
‘commonsense’ signiﬁcance insofar as they entail the deployment of technical knowledge 2
and skill in the service of providing for the material needs of the human population, are 3
also ‘reinterpreted’ on another, magico-religious level:
The facts about particular animals are reinterpreted as if they had social relationships 6
between themselves, and between them and anthropomorphized natural forces, and 7
furthermore the animals are thought of as if they had personal relations with the hunters. 8
The idealized form of these latter relations is often that the hunter pays respect to an 9
animal; that is, he acknowledges the animal’s superior position, and following this the 20
animal ‘gives itself’ to the hunter, that is, allows itself to assume a position of equality, 1
or even inferiority, with respect to the hunter.
(Tanner 1979: 136) 3
In short, the animals ﬁgure for these northern hunters very much as the forest ﬁgures for 5
such tropical hunter-gatherers as the Mbuti, Batek and Nayaka: they are partners with 6
humans in an encompassing ‘cosmic economy of sharing’.
Now Western thought, as is well known, drives an absolute division between the contrary 8
conditions of humanity and animality, a division that is aligned with a series of others 9
such as between subjects and objects, persons and things, morality and physicality, reason 30
and instinct, and, above all, society and nature. Underwriting the Western view of the 1
uniqueness of the human species is the fundamental axiom that personhood as a state of 2
being is not open to non-human animal kinds. It is for this reason that we are able to 3
conﬂate both the moral condition and the biological taxon (Homo sapiens) under the single 4
rubric of ‘humanity’. And for this reason, too, we can countenance an enquiry into the 5
animal nature of human beings whilst rejecting out of hand the possibility of an enquiry 6
into the humanity of non-human animals (Ingold 1988b: 6). Human existence is conceived 7
to be conducted simultaneously on two levels, the social level of interpersonal, intersub- 8
jective relations and the natural ecological level of organism–environment interactions, 9
whereas animal existence is wholly conﬁned within the natural domain. Humans are both 40
persons and organisms, animals are all organism.
This is a view, however, that Cree and other northern hunters categorically reject. 2
Personhood, for them, is open equally to human and non-human animal (and even non- 3
animal) kinds. Here, once again, is Feit on the Waswanipi:
In the culturally constructed world of the Waswanipi the animals, the winds and many 6
other phenomena are thought of as being ‘like persons’ in that they act intelligently 7
and have wills and idiosyncracies, and understand and are understood by men. Causality, 118

HUMANS AND ANIMALS

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

therefore, is personal not mechanical or biological, and it is . . . always appropriate to
ask ‘who did it?’ and ‘why?’ rather than ‘how does that work?’
(1973: 116)
This rendering of the Cree perspective is echoed by Tanner, who points to the signiﬁcant implication of the idea that game animals live in social groups or communities akin
to those of human beings, namely ‘that social interaction between humans and animals
is made possible’ (1979: 137–8). Hunting itself comes to be regarded not as a technical
manipulation of the natural world but as a kind of interpersonal dialogue, integral to the
total process of social life wherein both human and animal persons are constituted with
their particular identities and purposes. Among the Wemindji Cree, qualities of personhood are likewise assigned to humans, animals, spirits and certain geophysical agents.
As Colin Scott writes: ‘human persons are not set over and against a material context of
inert nature, but rather are one species of person in a network of reciprocating persons’
(1989: 195).
Though the ethnographic accounts offered by Tanner and Scott are in striking agreement, their interpretations are not, and it is revealing to explore the contrast between
them. The problem hinges on the question of whether, when the Cree hunter refers to
animals or to the wind as he would to human persons, he does so within the compass of
what Feit, in the passage cited above, calls a ‘culturally constructed world’. Tanner is in
no doubt that they do. Thus he asserts that ‘game animals participate simultaneously in
two levels of reality, one “natural” and the other “cultural”’ (1979: 137). On the natural
level they are encountered simply as material entities, organic constituents of the object
world to be killed and consumed. On the cultural level, by contrast, they are ‘reinterpreted’ as anthropomorphic beings participating in a domain ‘modelled on conventional
Cree patterns of social and cultural organization’ (ibid.). In terms of this analysis, then,
animals are constructed as persons through their assimilation to a schema drawn from the
domain of human relations. This is entirely in accord with Gudeman’s theory of the
cultural modeling of livelihood, which I discussed in the previous section. Indeed,
Gudeman draws for ethnographic support, inter alia, on Tanner’s study. ‘The Mistassini
Cree’, he writes, ‘construct their hunting and trapping activities as an exchange between
themselves and animal spirits . . . and the exchange itself is patterned after ordinary human
relationships, such as friendship, coercion and love’ (Gudeman 1986: 148–9, citing Tanner
1979: 138, 148–50).
I have already shown, in the case of hunter-gatherer relations with the forest environment, how the constructionist argument is founded on an ontological dualism between
society and nature, which in this instance reappears as one between humanity and
animality. On one side, then, we have the world of human modelers of animals, on the
other the animal world modeled as human. If the people themselves profess to be aware
of but one world, of persons and their relationships, it is because, seeing their own social
ambience reﬂected in the mirror of nature, they cannot distinguish the reﬂection from
reality. Now by all accounts, as we have seen, the dualism of humanity and animality,
and the entailed restriction of personhood to human beings, is not endorsed by the Cree.
This does not mean, of course, that they fail to differentiate between humans and animals.
To the contrary, they are acutely concerned about such differences. For example, while
humans may have sexual relations with certain other humans, and may kill and consume
certain non-human animals, the consequences of categorical confusion – of sex with nonhumans or killing fellow human beings – would be disastrous (Scott 1989: 197).

Livelihood
The point is that the difference between (say) a goose and a man is not between an 1
organism and a person, but between one kind of organism-person and another. From the 2
Cree perspective, personhood is not the manifest form of humanity; rather the human is 3
one of many outward forms of personhood. And so when Cree hunters claim that a goose 4
is in some sense like a man, far from drawing a ﬁgurative parallel across two fundamen- 5
tally separate domains, they are rather pointing to the real unity that underwrites their 6
differentiation. Whereas Western thought sets out from an assumed dichotomy between 7
the human and the animal and then searches about for possible analogies or homologies, 8
the Cree trajectory – as Scott explains – ‘seems rather the opposite: to assume funda- 9
mental similarity while exploring the differences between humans and animals’ (1989: 10
195). To posit a ‘metaphorical’ equivalence between goose and man is not, then, to render 1
‘one kind of thing in terms of another’ (Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 5), as Western – 2
including Western anthropological – convention would have it. A more promising perspec- 3
tive is offered by Michael Jackson, who argues that metaphor should be apprehended as 4
a way of drawing attention to real relational unities rather than of ﬁguratively papering 5
over dualities. Metaphor, Jackson writes, ‘reveals, not the “thisness of a that” but rather 6
that “this is that”’ (1983: 132).3
It follows that the equivalence can work both ways. It is not ‘anthropomorphic’, as 8
Tanner suggests (1979: 136), to compare the animal to the human, any more than it is 9
‘naturalistic’ to compare the human to the animal, since in both cases the comparison 20
points to a level on which human and animal share a common existential status, namely 1
as living beings or persons. The move, if you will, is not from the literal to the ﬁgura- 2
tive, but from the actual to the potential – for personhood, at root, is the potential to 3
become a man, a goose, or any other of the innumerable forms of animate being. From 4
this perspective, it makes no signiﬁcant difference whether one renders animal actions in 5
human terms or human actions in animal terms. As Scott puts it:
One might observe that a consequence of the sort of analogical thinking that I have 8
been describing would be to anthropomorphize animals, but that would be to assume 9
the primacy of the human term. The animal term reacts with perhaps equal force on 30
the human term, so that animal behaviour can become a model for human relations. 1
(1989: 198) 2
This same argument can be applied, pari passu, to the metaphor ‘forest is as parent’, 4
considered in the last section. One could just as well say that ‘parent is as forest’, for the 5
force of the metaphor is to reveal the underlying ontological equivalence of human and 6
non-human components of the environment as agencies of nurturance.
What humans and non-humans have in common, for Cree as for other hunter-gatherers, 8
is that they are alive. Ostensibly, and barring certain geophysical phenomena that Cree 9
would regard as animate but that we might not, this is a conclusion with which Western 40
thinkers would not disagree. Yet in Western biology, as we saw in Chapter One (p. 19), 1
life tends to be understood as a passive process, as the reaction of organisms, bound by 2
their separate natures, to the given conditions of their respective environments. This carries 3
the implication that every organism is pre-speciﬁed, with regard to its essential nature, 4
prior to its entry into the life process – an implication that in modern biology appears in 5
the guise of the doctrine of genetic preformation. With this view, personal powers – of 6
awareness, agency and intentionality – can form no part of the organism as such, but must 7
necessarily be ‘added on’ as capacities not of body but of mind, capacities that Western 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

thought has traditionally reserved for humans. Even today, now that the possibility of
non-human animal awareness has arisen as a legitimate topic of scientiﬁc speculation, the
basic dualism of mind and body is retained – for the question is phrased as one about
the existence of animal minds (Grifﬁn 1976, 1984, see Ingold 1988c). Consciousness,
then, is the life of the mind.
For the Cree, life has a different meaning. Scott tells us that ‘the term pimaatisiiwin,
“life”, was translated by one Cree man as “continuous birth”’ (1989: 195). To be alive
is to be situated within a ﬁeld of relations which, as it unfolds, actively and ceaselessly
brings forms into being: humans as humans, geese as geese, and so on. Far from revealing
forms that are already speciﬁed, life is the process of their ongoing generation. Every living
being, then, emerges as a particular, positioned embodiment of this generative potential.
Hence personhood, far from being ‘added on’ to the living organism, is implicated in the
very condition of being alive: the Cree word for ‘persons’, according to Scott, ‘can itself
be glossed as “he lives”’ (1989: 195). Organisms are not just like persons, they are persons.
Likewise, consciousness is not supplementary to organic life but is, so to speak, its
advancing front – ‘on the verge of unfolding events, of continuous birth’, as Scott (ibid.)
renders the Cree conception.
Now the ontological equivalence of humans and animals, as organism-persons and as
fellow participants in a life process, carries a corollary of capital importance. It is that
both can have points of view. In other words, for both the world exists as a meaningful
place, constituted in relation to the purposes and capabilities of action of the being in
question. Western ontology, as we have seen, denies this, asserting that meaning does not
lie in the relational contexts of the perceiver’s involvement in the world, but is rather laid
over the world by the mind. Humans alone, it is said, are capable of representing an
external reality in this way, organising the data of experience according to their diverse
cultural schemata. So when the Cree claim, as indeed they do, that the same events
surrounding a hunt afford two possible interpretations, from the points of view, respectively, of the human hunter and of the animal hunted, the Western observer is inclined
to regard the former as literal and the latter as ﬁgurative, ‘as if ’ the animal were human
and so could participate with ‘real’ humans in a common world of meanings. And this
is precisely what Tanner does (1979: 136–7) when he re-presents to us – his readers –
as a ‘cultural’ reality (as opposed to a ‘natural’ one) what the Cree originally presented to
him as a ‘bear reality’ or ‘caribou reality’ (as opposed to a ‘human’ one). Note that the
distinction between natural and cultural levels of participation is not one that the Cree
make themselves. According to Scott, Cree has ‘no word corresponding to our term
“nature”’, nor does it have any ‘equivalent of “culture” that would make it a special
province of humans’ (1989: 195).
A creature can have a point of view because its action in the world is, at the same time,
a process of attending to it. Different creatures have different points of view because, given
their capabilities of action and perception, they attend to the world in different ways.
Cree hunters, for example, notice things about the environment that geese do not, yet by
the hunters’ own admission (Scott 1989: 202), geese also notice things that humans do
not. What is certain, however, is that humans ﬁgure in the perceptual world of geese just
as geese ﬁgure in that of humans. It is clearly of vital importance to geese that they should
be as attentive to the human presence as to the presence of any other potential predator.
On the basis of past experience, they learn to pick up the relevant warning signs, and
continually adjust their behaviour accordingly. And human hunters, for their part, attend
to the presence of geese in the knowledge that geese are attending to them. ‘The perceptions

Livelihood
and interpretations of Cree hunters’, Scott observes, ‘suggest that geese are quite apt at 1
learning in what contexts to expect predation, at learning to distinguish predatory from 2
non-predatory humans, and at communicating appropriate behavioural adaptations to 3
other geese’ (1989: 199).
In short, animals do not participate with humans qua persons only in a domain of 5
virtual reality, as represented within culturally constructed, intentional worlds, superim- 6
posed upon the naturally given substratum of organism–environment interactions. They 7
participate as real-world creatures, endowed with powers of feeling and autonomous action, 8
whose characteristic behaviours, temperaments and sensibilities one gets to know in the 9
very course of one’s everyday practical dealings with them. In this regard, dealing with 10
non-human animals is not fundamentally different from dealing with fellow humans. 1
Indeed the following deﬁnition of sociality, originally proposed by Alfred Schutz, could 2
– with the insertions indicated in brackets – apply with equal force to the encounter 3
between human hunters and their prey: ‘Sociality is constituted by communicative acts in 4
which the I [the hunter] turns to the others [animals], apprehending them as persons who 5
turn to him, and both know of this fact’ (Schutz 1970: 163). Humans may of course be 6
unique in their capacity to narrate such encounters, but no-one can construct a narrative, 7
any more than they could build a model, who is not already situated in the world and 8
thus already caught up in a nexus of relations with both human and non-human 9
constituents of the environment. The relations that Cree have with the latter are what 20
we, outside observers, call hunting.
PERCEIVING THE LANDSCAPE
Life, of course, is an historical process, embodied in organic forms that are fragile and 5
impermanent. Yet this process is carried on, for terrestrial species, upon the surface of the 6
earth, a surface whose contours, textures and features, sculpted by geological forces over 7
immense periods of time, appear permanent and immutable relative to the life-cycles of 8
even the most long-lived of organisms (Ingold 1989: 504). This surface is what geology 9
textbooks call the ‘physical landscape’. How do hunters and gatherers perceive this aspect 30
of their environment?
Among the Pintupi of the Gibson Desert of Western Australia, people say that the 2
landscape was formed, once and for all time, through the activities of theriomorphic beings, 3
ancestral to humans as well as to all other living things, who roamed the earth’s surface 4
in an era known conventionally as the Dreaming. The same idea is, in fact, current 5
throughout Aboriginal Australia, but in what follows I shall conﬁne my illustrative remarks 6
to the Pintupi. According to Fred Myers, Pintupi say that, as ancestral beings travelled 7
from place to place,
[they] hunted, performed ceremonies, fought, and ﬁnally turned to stone or ‘went into 40
the ground’, where they remain. The actions of these powerful beings – animal, human 1
and monster – created the world as it now exists. They gave it outward form, identity 2
(a name), and internal structure. The desert is crisscrossed with their lines of travel and, 3
just as an animal’s tracks leave a record of what has happened, the geography and 4
special features of the land – hills, creeks, salt lakes, trees – are marks of the ancestors’ 5
activities.
(1986: 49–50) 7

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

Such features are more than mere marks, however, for in their activities the ancestors did
not leave a trail of impressions behind them, like footprints in the sand, while they themselves moved on. They rather metamorphosed into the forms of the landscape as they
went along. Ever present in these forms, their movements are congealed in perpetuity.
On the land travelled by the ancestors in the Dreaming, people make their way in the
temporal domain of ordinary life, pursuing their own everyday activities. Though the paths
they take are not constrained to the lines of ancestral travel, in following tracks (as in
hunting) and in making tracks themselves they replicate the original, creative movement
of the ancestral beings, inscribing their own identities into the land as they go. As Roy
Wagner has put it, with reference to the neighbouring Walbiri people, ‘the life of a person
is the sum of his tracks, the total inscription of his movements, something that can be
traced out along the ground’ (Wagner 1986: 21, see also Chapter Eight, pp. 144–6). And
for the Pintupi, Myers writes that ‘for each individual, the landscape becomes a history
of signiﬁcant social events . . . previous events become attached to places and are recited
as one moves across the country’ (Myers 1986: 68). There is thus a second level in the
constitution of the landscape, one tied to the historical actions of ordinary human beings,
as opposed to the ‘transhistorical’ actions of the ancestors (1986: 55). On the ﬁrst level,
named places were created by the ancestral beings at the sites of their activities, or at
points where they entered or emerged from the ground, and, connected by the paths of
ancestral travel, these places make up what Myers calls a ‘country’ – a term he offers as
one possible rendering of the Pintupi word ngurra. But ngurra can also mean ‘camp’ –
that is, the place temporarily constituted by virtue of the everyday activities of a group
of people who happen to set up there. Such places, unlike the named places envisioned
as the camps of the ancestors in the Dreaming, do not endure for ever. Each is identiﬁed with the particular people who live there, and will be avoided for many years after
someone thus connected to the place has died. But ‘despite these identiﬁcations, . . . camps
are impermanent. Eventually they are overgrown and their associations forgotten, while
signiﬁcant new spaces are constantly being established’ (Myers 1986: 56–7).
If persons inscribe their identities into the landscape as historically constituted, it is
from the transhistorical level of the Dreaming that these identities are initially derived.
Thus each person takes his or her primary identity from a particular named place, and is
regarded as the incarnation of the ancestor whose activity made that place. That is why,
as Myers notes (1986: 50), ‘it is not unusual . . . to hear people describe actions of the
Dreaming in the ﬁrst person’. For in speaking about my ancestor, I am speaking about
myself. Throughout life, additional components of identity accrue through association
with other named places, such as where one was initiated or where one has long resided,
so that who one is becomes a kind of record of where one has come from and where one
has been. It follows that the network of places, linked by paths of ancestral travel, is at
the same time a network of relations between persons. When social relations are spoken
of, as they often are, in terms of relations between places, the comparison does not draw
a parallel across separate domains of society and the physical world, but rather reveals that
– at a more fundamental ontological level – these relations are equivalent. That level is
the Dreaming. It is a level, however, that is not directly given to experience, but rather
revealed in the actions and events of the phenomenal world that are its visible signs (Myers
1986: 49).
We might sum up this Pintupi understanding of the landscape in the following four
precepts. First, it is not a given substrate, awaiting the imprint of activities that may be
conducted upon it, but is itself the congelation of past activity – on the phenomenal level,

Livelihood
of human predecessors, but more fundamentally of ancestral beings. Secondly, it is not 1
so much a continuous surface as a topologically ordered network of places, each marked 2
by some physical feature, and the paths connecting them. Thirdly, the landscape furnishes 3
its human inhabitants with all the lineaments of personal and social identity, providing 4
each with a speciﬁc point of origin and a speciﬁc destiny. And therefore, fourthly, the 5
movement of social life is itself a movement in (not on) a landscape, and its ﬁxed refer- 6
ence points are physically marked localities or ‘sites’. In short, the landscape is not an 7
external background or platform for life, either as lived by the ancestors in the Dreaming 8
or as relived by their ordinary human incarnations in the temporal domain. It is rather 9
life’s enduring monument.
What can we learn from the Pintupi? It could be argued, of course, that their ideas of 1
the Dreaming – though not unique to themselves – are speciﬁcally Aboriginal ones, and 2
afford no grounds for generalisation beyond the Australian continent. Indeed, compar- 3
isons between Australia and other continents of hunter-gatherers are fraught with difﬁculty. 4
Nevertheless, in order to indicate that there are genuine similarities in the ways that hunters 5
and gatherers apprehend the landscape and their own position in it, I should like to refer 6
brieﬂy to another study from a quite different region of the world – Richard Nelson’s 7
1983 study of the Koyukon of Alaska.
The Koyukon say that the earth and all the beings that ﬂourish in it were created in an 9
era known as the ‘Distant Time’. Stories of the Distant Time include accounts of the 20
formation of prominent features of the landscape such as hills and mountains (1983: 16, 1
34). An elaborate code of rules, brought down from the Distant Time, establishes forms of 2
proper conduct that people are bound to follow; thus ‘the Koyukon must move with the 3
forces of their surroundings, not attempting to control, master or fundamentally alter them’ 4
(p. 240). As people move around in the landscape, in hunting and trapping, in setting up 5
camp in one locality after another, their own life histories are woven into the country:
The Koyukon homeland is ﬁlled with places . . . invested with signiﬁcance in personal 8
or family history. Drawing back to view the landscape as a whole, we can see it 9
completely interwoven with these meanings. Each living individual is bound into this 30
pattern of land and people that extends throughout the terrain and far back across time. 1
(Nelson 1983: 243) 2
Places, however, can possess meaning at different levels. Some have a fundamental spiri- 4
tual potency connected with the Distant Time story of their creation. Some, where people 5
have died, are avoided for as long as the memory persists. Others, again, are known for 6
particular hunting events or other personal experiences of encounters with animals. On 7
all these levels – spiritual, historical, personal – the landscape is inscribed with the lives 8
of all who have dwelt therein, from Distant Time human-animal ancestors to contem- 9
porary humans, and the landscape itself, rather than anything erected upon it, stands in 40
memory of these persons and their activities (Nelson 1983: 242–6).
Now let me turn to the anthropological interpretation of these ways of apprehending 2
the landscape. Astonishingly, we ﬁnd a complete inversion, such that meanings that the 3
people claim to discover in the landscape are attributed to the minds of the people them- 4
selves, and are said to be mapped onto the landscape. And the latter, drained of all 5
signiﬁcance as a prelude to its cultural construction, is reduced to space, a vacuum to the 6
plenum of culture. Thus Myers can write, of the Pintupi, that they have ‘truly cultural- 7
ized space and made out of impersonal geography a home, a ngurra’ (1986: 54). A moment 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

later, however, the Pintupi achievement reappears as an artefact of anthropological analysis:
‘we will consider country as if it were simply culturalized space’ (p. 57, my emphases).
The ontological foundation for this interpretative strategy is an initial separation between
human persons, as meaning-makers, and the physical environment as raw material for
construction; the ‘culturalisation of space’ is then what happens when the two are brought
into juxtaposition, such that social relations are mapped onto spatial relations. The Pintupi
are said to superimpose the Dreaming, a ‘distinctly Aboriginal cultural construction’
(p. 47), onto the ‘real’ reality of the physical landscape, causing the latter to recede from
view, cloaked by the ‘perceived’ reality enshrined in the stories people tell, of ancestral
beings and their activities. This, of course, ﬂatly contradicts Pintupi ontology, which is
premised on the fundamental indissolubility of the connection between persons and
landscape, and on the assumption that phenomenal reality is open to direct perception
whereas the order of the Dreaming is not, and can be apprehended only by way of its
visible signs.4
The same contradiction is apparent in Nelson’s account of the Koyukon. His experience of the discrepancy between the Koyukon attitude to the environment and that derived
from his own ‘Euro-American’ background led him, he tells us, to endorse the perspective of cultural relativism, whose basic premise he sets out as follows:
Reality is not the world as it is perceived directly by the senses; reality is the world as
it is perceived by the mind through the medium of the senses. Thus reality in nature
is not just what we see, but what we have learned to see.
(1983: 239)
That we learn to see is not in doubt, but learning in this view entails the acquisition of
cultural schemata for building representations of the world, in the mind, from data delivered by the senses. So the Koyukon, viewing the world in their mind’s eye through
the lens of received tradition, are supposed to see one reality; the Westerner, viewing it
in terms of the concepts of scientiﬁc ecology, sees another. There is, Nelson concludes,
no ‘single reality in the natural world, . . . absolute and universal’. Yet not only is the
existence of such a ‘real’ reality implied in the very notion that perceived realities are
representations, in the mind, of a naturally given world ‘out there’, but this mentalist
ontology also ﬂies in the face of what the Koyukon themselves, by Nelson’s own account,
are trying to tell us.
This is all about watching and being watched (1983: 14–32). Knowledge of the world
is gained by moving about in it, exploring it, attending to it, ever alert to the signs by
which it is revealed. Learning to see, then, is a matter not of acquiring schemata for
mentally constructing the environment but of acquiring the skills for direct perceptual
engagement with its constituents, human and non-human, animate and inanimate. To
recall a distinction I introduced in the last chapter, it is a process not of enculturation
but of enskilment. If the Koyukon hunter notices signiﬁcant features of the landscape of
which the Western observer remains unaware, it is not because their source lies in ‘the
Koyukon mind’ (Nelson 1983: 242) which imposes its own unique construction on a
common body of sensory data, but because the perceptual system of the hunter is attuned
to picking up information, critical to the practical conduct of his hunting, to which the
unskilled observer simply fails to attend. That information is not in the mind but in
the world, and its signiﬁcance lies in the relational context of the hunter’s engagement
with the constituents of that world. Moreover, the more skilled the hunter, the more

Livelihood
knowledgeable he becomes, for with a ﬁnely honed perceptual system, the world will 1
appear to him in greater richness and profundity. New knowledge comes from creative 2
acts of discovery rather than imagining, from attending more closely to the environment 3
rather than reassembling one’s picture of it along new conceptual lines.
It will at once be objected that I have taken no account of that vital component of 5
knowledge that comes to people through their instruction in traditional lore, for example 6
in the stories of the Dreaming among the Pintupi and of the Distant Time among the 7
Koyukon. Do not these stories, along with the accompanying songs, designs, sacred objects 8
and the like, amount to a kind of modelling of reality, a representation of the world that 9
native people might consult as Westerners would consult a map? I think not. People, once 10
familiar with a country, have no need of maps, and get their bearings from attending to 1
the landscape itself rather than from some inner representation of the same. Importantly, 2
Myers notes that among the Pintupi the meanings of songs remain obscure to those who 3
do not already know the country, and that individuals who are new to an area are ﬁrst 4
instructed by being ‘taken around, shown some of the signiﬁcant places, and taught to 5
avoid certain sites’ (Myers 1986: 150). One might question what use songs, stories and 6
designs could possibly have as maps if they are unintelligible to all but those who possess 7
such familiarity with the landscape as to manage quite well without devices of this kind. 8
I do not believe, however, that their purpose is a representational one. Telling a story 9
is not like weaving a tapestry to cover up the world or, as in an overworn anthropo- 20
logical metaphor, to ‘clothe it with meaning’. For the landscape, unclothed, is not the 1
‘opaque surface of literalness’ (Ho 1991) that this analogy suggests. Rather, it has both 2
transparency and depth: transparency, because one can see into it; depth, because the more 3
one looks the further one sees. Far from dressing up a plain reality with layers of metaphor, 4
or representing it, map-like, in the imagination, songs, stories and designs serve to conduct 5
the attention of performers into the world, deeper and deeper, as one proceeds from 6
outward appearances to an ever more intense poetic involvement. At its most intense, the 7
boundaries between person and place, or between the self and the landscape, dissolve 8
altogether. It is at this point that, as the people say, they become their ancestors, and 9
discover the real meaning of things.
Conventional anthropological interpretation tends to range, on two sides of a dichotomy, 1
peoples’ practical-technical interaction with environmental resources in the context of 2
subsistence activities, and their mytho-religious or cosmological construction of the 3
environment in the context of ritual and ceremony. Hunters and gatherers are said to be 4
distinctive, however, insofar as they do not seek physically to reconstruct the landscape 5
to conform with their cosmological conceptions, but rather ﬁnd these conceptions ‘ready 6
made’ in the world as given. On these grounds they are supposed still to occupy a ‘natural’ 7
rather than an ‘artiﬁcial’ or ‘built’ environment. Peter Wilson sets out this view very clearly: 8
The hunter/gatherer pins ideas and emotions onto the world as it exists: the landscape 40
is turned into a mythical topographical map, a grid of ancestor tracks and sacred sites, 1
as is typical among Australian aborigines . . . A construction is put upon the landscape 2
rather than the landscape undergoing a reconstruction, as is the case among sedentary 3
peoples, who impose houses, villages, and gardens on the landscape, often in place of 4
natural landmarks. Where nomads read or even ﬁnd cosmological features in an already 5
existing landscape, villagers tend to represent and model cosmic ideas in the structures 6
they build.
(1988: 50) 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

Once again, we ﬁnd that the view of the landscape as culturalised space entails the naturalisation of hunting and gathering. Only as represented in thought is the environment
drawn into the human world of persons; thus the practical business of life is reduced
to material interactions in an alien world of nature, in which humans ﬁgure as ‘mere
organisms’.
Yet the people themselves insist that the real-world landscape in which they move about,
set up camp and hunt and gather, is not alien at all but infused with human meaning –
that this meaning has not been ‘pinned on’ but is there to be ‘picked up’ by those with
eyes to see and ears to hear. They are, as their ethnographers have noted (with some
surprise, else they would not have cared to remark on the fact), thoroughly ‘at home’ in
the world. The Pintupi, Myers tells us, ‘seem truly at home as they walk through the
bush, full of conﬁdence’ (1986: 54). And the lands of the Koyukon, according to Nelson,
‘are no more a wilderness than are farmlands to a farmer or streets to a city dweller’
(1983: 246). As this statement implies, it is not because of his occupancy of a built
environment that the urban dweller feels at home on the streets; it is because they are
the streets of his neighbourhood along which he is accustomed to walk or drive in his
everyday life, presenting to him familiar faces, sights and sounds. And it is no different,
in principle, for the hunter-gatherer, as the inhabitant of an environment unscarred by
human engineering. As I have remarked elsewhere, ‘it is through dwelling in a landscape,
through the incorporation of its features into a pattern of everyday activities, that it
becomes home to hunters and gatherers’ (Ingold 1996a: 116).
My argument is that the differences between the activities of hunting and gathering,
on the one hand, and singing, storytelling and the narration of myth on the other, cannot
be accommodated within the terms of a dichotomy between the material and the mental,
between ecological interactions in nature and cultural constructions of nature. On the
contrary, both sets of activities are, in the ﬁrst place, ways of dwelling. The latter, as I
have shown, amount not to a metaphorical representation of the world, but to a form of
poetic involvement. But it is no different with the activities of hunting and gathering,
which entail the same attentive engagement with the environment, and the same
exploratory quest for knowledge. In hunting and gathering, as in singing and storytelling, the world ‘opens out’ to people. Hunter-gatherers, in their practices, do not seek
to transform the world; they seek revelation. The intentions of non-human animals, for
example, are revealed to Cree hunters in the outcomes of their endeavours. And Pintupi
are forever alert to signs in the landscape that may offer new clues to ancestral activity in
the Dreaming (Myers 1986: 67). In short, through the practical activities of hunting and
gathering, the environment – including the landscape with its fauna and ﬂora – enters
directly into the constitution of persons, not only as a source of nourishment but also as
a source of knowledge.
But reciprocally, persons enter actively into the constitution of their environments. They
do so, however, from within. For the Pintupi, the world was created in the Dreaming,
but the Dreaming is transhistorical, not prehistorical. The events of the Dreaming, though
they occurred at particular places, are themselves timeless, each one stretched to encompass an eternity, or what Stanner (1965: 159) called ‘everywhen’. And so the landscape,
brought into being in these events, is movement out of time. People, as the temporal
incarnation of ancestral beings, are not so much creators themselves as living on the inside
of an eternal moment of creation. Their activities, which replicate on a much smaller scale
the landforming activities of the ancestors, are therefore part and parcel of the becoming
of the world, and are bound to follow the course set by the Dreaming: life, as the Pintupi

Livelihood
say, is a ‘one-possibility thing’ (Myers 1986: 53). Likewise, Koyukon are bound to the 1
course of the Distant Time, and must move with it, never against it (Nelson 1983: 240). 2
This understanding of the landscape as a course to be followed could hardly be more 3
different from the Western understanding of the natural environment as a resistance to 4
be overcome, a physically given, material substrate that has ﬁrst to be ‘humanised’, by 5
imposing upon it forms whose origins lie in the imagination, before it can be inhabited. 6
WHAT DO HUNTERS AND GATHERERS ACTUALLY DO?
To this day, the anthropological status of hunters and gatherers has remained equivocal, 10
to say the least. Though no-one would any longer deny them full membership of the 1
human species, it is still commonly held that in deriving their subsistence from hunting 2
and trapping ‘wild’ animals and gathering ‘wild’ plants, honey, shellﬁsh and so on, they 3
are somehow comparable in their mode of life to non-human animals in a way that 4
farmers, herdsmen and urban dwellers are not. Nothing is more revealing of this attitude 5
than the commonplace habit of denoting the activities of hunting and gathering by the 6
single word ‘foraging’. I am not concerned here with the narrow sense of foraging in 7
which it has sometimes been contrasted with collecting (see, for example, Binford 1983: 8
339–46, Ingold 1986a: 82–7). I mean rather to draw attention to the way in which 9
‘foraging’ has been adopted in a very general sense as a shorthand for ‘hunting and gath- 20
ering’, ostensibly on the grounds of simple convenience. ‘Forager’, it is argued, is less 1
cumbersome than ‘hunter-gatherer’, and the term carries no unwarranted implications as 2
regards the relative priority of animal and vegetable foods, or of male and female labour. 3
But the concept of foraging also has an established usage in the ﬁeld of ecology, to 4
denote the feeding behaviour of animals of all kinds, and it is by extension from this ﬁeld 5
that the anthropological use of the term is explicitly derived. Thus, introducing a volume 6
of studies on ‘hunter-gatherer foraging strategies’, Winterhalder and Smith note that ‘the 7
subsistence patterns of human foragers are fairly analogous to those of other species and 8
are thus more easily studied with ecological models’ (1981: x). And it is precisely the deﬁ- 9
nition of human foragers as those who do not produce their food that legitimates the 30
comparison: ‘Foraging refers inclusively to tactics used to obtain nonproduced foodstuffs 1
or other resources, those not directly cultivated or husbanded by the human population’ 2
(Winterhalder 1981b: 16). In short, it appears that humans can be only either foragers 3
or producers; if the former, their subsistence practices are analogous to those of non- 4
human animals; if the latter, they are not. The producer is conceived to intervene in 5
natural processes, from a position at least partially outside it; the forager, by contrast, is 6
supposed never to have extricated him- or herself from nature in the ﬁrst place.
I have argued in this chapter that the world as perceived by hunters and gatherers is 8
constituted through their engagement with it, in the course of everyday, subsistence-related 9
practices. These practices cannot be reduced to their narrowly behavioural aspect, as strate- 40
gically programmed responses to external environmental stimuli, as implied in the notion 1
of foraging. Nor, however, can they be regarded as planned interventions in nature, 2
launched from the separate platform of society, as implied in the notion of production. 3
Neither foraging nor production is an adequate description of what hunters and gatherers do. 4
As an alternative, Bird-David suggests ‘procurement’:
Distinguished from ‘to produce’ and ‘production’, as also from ‘to forage’ and ‘foraging’, 7
‘to procure’ (according to the Shorter Oxford Dictionary) is ‘to bring about, to obtain 118

Hunting, gathering and perceiving

by care or effort, to prevail upon, to induce, to persuade a person to do something’.
‘Procurement’ is management, contrivance, acquisition, getting, gaining. Both terms are
accurate enough for describing modern hunter-gatherers who apply care, sophistication
and knowledge to their resource-getting activities.
(1992b: 40)
This is a suggestion I would endorse. The notion of procurement nicely brings out what
I have been most concerned to stress: that the activities we conventionally call hunting
and gathering are forms of skilled, attentive ‘coping’ in the world, intentionally carried
out by persons in an environment replete with other agentive powers of one kind and
another. The point may be most readily summarised by referring back to Figure 3.2. In
the upper diagram, representing the Western ontology, foraging would be positioned as
an interaction in the plane of nature, between the human organism and its environment,
whereas production would appear as an intervention in nature from the separate plane of
society. In the lower diagram, representing the hunter-gatherer ontology, there is but one
plane, in which humans engage, as whole organism-persons, with components of the
environment, in the activities of procurement.
My argument has been that the ‘naturalisation’ of the activities of hunting and gathering, as revealed in their apparently unproblematic redesignation as ‘foraging’, is a product
of the ‘culturalisation’ of the perceived environment. In the case of hunter-gatherers of
the tropical forest, we have seen how their perception of the forest environment, as being
in some respects like a human parent, has been interpreted anthropologically as due to
the application of a schema for metaphorically constructing it, and how, as a result, the
forest itself and hunter-gatherers’ interactions with it come to be excluded from the domain
in which they relate to one another as persons. In the case of the northern hunters, we
have likewise seen how the assumption that in their capacity as persons, humans can relate
to animals only as the latter are represented within human intentional worlds, leads to
the placement of real encounters of hunting beyond the bounds of these intentional worlds,
in a separate domain designated as ‘natural’. And ﬁnally, in examining Aboriginal perceptions of the landscape, we found that by treating the perceived world as culturalised space,
the real-world landscape in which people live and move comes to be rendered as an indifferent and impersonal physical substrate, raw material for imaginative acts of world-making.
In short, a cultural constructionist approach to environmental perception, far from challenging the prevailing ecological models of hunting and gathering as foraging, actually
reinforces them, creating by exclusion a separate logical space for organism–environment
interactions wherein these models are appropriately applied. Those who oppose the designation of hunter-gatherers as foragers (for example, Bird-David 1992b: 38) often do so
on the grounds that it makes them seem just like non-human animals, without however
questioning the applicability of the foraging model to the animals themselves. I believe
that by paying attention to what hunter-gatherers are telling us, this is just what we should
be questioning, and in doing so laying down a challenge not only to cultural anthropology but to ecological science as well. We may admit that humans are, indeed, just like
other animals; not, however, insofar as they exist as organisms rather than persons, as
constituent entities in an objective world of nature presented as a spectacle to detached
scientiﬁc observation, but by virtue of their mutual involvement, as undivided centres of
action and awareness, within a continuous life process. In this process, the relations that
human beings have with one another form just one part of the total ﬁeld of relations
embracing all living things (Ingold 1990: 220).

Livelihood
There can, then, be no radical break between social and ecological relations; rather, the 1
former constitute a subset of the latter. What this suggests is the possibility of a new kind 2
of ecological anthropology, one that would take as its starting point the active, percep- 3
tual engagement of human beings with the constituents of their world – for it is only 4
from a position of such engagement that they can launch their imaginative speculations 5
concerning what the world is like. The ﬁrst step in the establishment of this ecological 6
anthropology would be to recognise that the relations with which it deals, between human 7
beings and their environments, are not conﬁned to a domain of ‘nature’, separate from, 8
and given independently of, the domain in which they lead their lives as persons. For 9
hunter-gatherers as for the rest of us, life is given in engagement, not in disengagement, 10
and in that very engagement the real world at once ceases to be ‘nature’ and is revealed 1
to us as an environment for people. Environments are constituted in life, not just in 2
thought, and it is only because we live in an environment that we can think at all.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Four

From trust to domination
An alternative history of human–animal relations

Just as humans have a history of their relations with animals, so also animals have a history
of their relations with humans. Only humans, however, construct narratives of this
history. Such narratives range from what we might regard as myths of totemic origin to
supposedly ‘scientiﬁc’ accounts of the origins of domestication. And however we might
choose to distinguish between myth and science, if indeed the distinction can be made
at all, they have in common that they tell us as much about how the narrators view their
own humanity as they do about their attitudes and relations to non-human animals. In
this chapter I aim to show that the story we tell in the West about the human exploitation and eventual domestication of animals is part of a more encompassing story about
how humans have risen above, and have sought to bring under control, a world of nature
that includes their own animality.
In this story, a special role is created for that category of human beings who have yet
to achieve such emancipation from the natural world: known in the past as wild men or
savages, they are now more politely designated as hunters and gatherers. I shall be looking
at how hunter-gatherers have come to be stereotypically portrayed, in Western anthropological accounts, as surviving exemplars of the ‘natural’ condition of mankind, and more
particularly at how this is reﬂected in the depiction of hunters’ relations towards their
animal prey. I shall then go on to contrast this depiction with the understandings that
people who actually live by hunting and gathering have of their relations with the environmental resources on which they depend: again, since our concern is speciﬁcally with
relations towards animals, I shall concentrate on hunting rather than gathering whilst
recognising, of course, that it is not a simple matter to determine where the former ends
and the latter begins (Ingold 1986a: 79–100).
Taking the hunter-gatherer understandings as a baseline, I shall attempt to construct
an alternative account of the transformation in human–animal relations that in Western
discourse comes under the rubric of domestication. My concern, in particular, will be to
contrast human–animal relations under a regime of hunting with those under a regime
of pastoralism. And a leading premise of my account will be that the domain in which
human persons are involved as social beings with one another cannot be rigidly set apart
from the domain of their involvement with non-human components of the environment.
Hence, any qualitative transformation in environmental relations is likely to be manifested
similarly both in the relationships that humans extend towards animals and in those that
obtain among themselves in society.

Livelihood
Let me begin, then, with the portrayal of the savage hunter-gatherer in Western litera- 3
ture.1 There are countless instances, especially in the writings of nineteenth-century 4
anthropologists, of pronouncements to the effect that hunter-gatherers ‘live like animals’ 5
or ‘live little better than animals’. Remarks of this kind carry force only in the context of 6
a belief that the proper destiny of human beings is to overcome the condition of animality 7
to which the life of all other creatures is conﬁned. Darwin, for example, found nothing 8
shocking, and much to marvel at, in the lives of non-human animals, yet his reaction on 9
encountering the native human inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, during his round-the- 10
world voyage in the Beagle, was one of utter disgust. ‘Viewing such men’, he conﬁded to 1
his journal, ‘one can hardly make oneself believe that they are fellow-creatures and inhab- 2
itants of the same world’ (Darwin 1860: 216). It was not just that their technical inferiority 3
left them completely at the mercy of their miserable environment; they also had no control 4
over their own impulses and desires, being by nature ﬁckle, excitable and violent. ‘I could 5
not have believed’, Darwin wrote, ‘how wide was the difference between savage and civilised 6
man; it is greater than between a wild and domesticated animal, inasmuch as in man 7
there is a greater power of improvement’ (1860: 208).
Now Darwin, like many of his contemporaries and followers, was in no doubt that 9
these human hunter-gatherers were innately inferior to modern Europeans. This is a view 20
that no longer commands acceptance today. If you wanted to compare, say, the innate 1
capacities of humans and chimpanzees, it should make no difference whatever whether 2
your human subjects were – say – Tasmanian Aboriginal hunter-gatherers or British airline 3
pilots.2 Nevertheless the belief persists in many quarters that even though hunter-gatherers 4
are fully human so far as their species membership is concerned, they continue to live 5
alongside other animals within a pristine world of nature. Indeed this idea of hunters and 6
gatherers, as the human inhabitants of such a world, is virtually given by deﬁnition. To 7
see why this should be so, we need to return to that very dichotomy which Darwin used 8
as the measure of the distance from savagery to civilisation, namely that between the wild 9
and the domestic.
Hunting and gathering, of course, are terms that denote particular kinds of activities. 1
How, then, are these activities to be deﬁned? The conventional answer is that hunters 2
and gatherers exploit ‘wild’ or non-domesticated resources, whereas farmers and herdsmen 3
exploit domesticated ones (see, for example, Ellen 1982: 128). The precise meaning of 4
domestication has remained a topic of scholarly debate for well over a century, and I shall 5
return in a moment to examine some of the suppositions that underlie this debate. Sufﬁce 6
it to say at this point that every one of the competing deﬁnitions introduces some notion 7
of human control over the growth and reproduction of animals and plants. Wild animals, 8
therefore, are animals out of control. Hunter-gatherers, it seems, are no more able to achieve 9
mastery over their environmental resources than they are to master their own internal 40
dispositions. They are depicted as though engaged, like other animal predators, in the 1
continual pursuit of fugitive prey, locked in a struggle for existence which – on account 2
of the poverty of their technology – is not yet won. Indeed the ubiquity, in Western 3
archaeo-zoological literature, of the metaphors of pursuit and capture is extremely striking: 4
hunters forever pursue, but it is capture that represents the decisive moment in the onset 5
of domestication (Ducos 1989: 28). Feral animals, in turn, are likened to convicts on the 6
loose. Notice how the relation between predator and prey is presented as an essentially 7
antagonistic one, pitting the endurance and cunning of the hunter against the capacities 118

HUMANITY, NATURE AND HUNTER-GATHERERS

From trust to domination

for escape and evasion of his quarry, each continually augmented by the other through
the ratchet mechanism of natural selection. The encounter, when it comes, is forcible and
violent.
Behind this opposition between the wild and the domestic there lies a much more
fundamental metaphysical dualism – one that seems peculiar to the discourse which, as a
convenient shorthand, we can call ‘Western’, to the extent of being its deﬁning feature.
This is the separation of two, mutually exclusive domains of being to which we attach
the labels ‘humanity’ and ‘nature’. All animals, according to the principle of this separation, belong wholly in the world of nature, such that the differences between species are
differences within nature. Humans, however, are the sole exception: they are different
because the essence of their humanity transcends nature; and by the same token, that part
of them that remains within nature presents itself as an undifferentiated amalgam of animal
characteristics (Ingold 1990: 210). Thus human beings, uniquely among animals, live a
two-tier existence, half-in nature and half-out, both as organisms with bodies and as persons
with minds. Now as Raymond Williams has pointed out:
to speak of man ‘intervening’ in natural processes is to suppose that he might ﬁnd
it possible not to do so, or decide not to do so. Nature has to be thought of . . . as
separate from man, before any question of intervention or command, and the method
and ethics of either, can arise.
(1972: 154)
It follows that when we speak of domestication as an intervention in nature, as we are
inclined to do, humanity’s transcendence over the natural world is already presupposed.
The same goes for the concept of production, classically deﬁned by Friedrich Engels as
‘the transforming reaction of man on nature’ (1934: 34). In order to produce, humans
have to achieve such command or mastery over nature as to be able to impress their own,
calculated designs upon the face of the earth. Thus ‘the further removed men are from
animals, . . . the more their effect on nature assumes the character of premeditated, planned
action directed towards deﬁnite preconceived ends’ (Engels 1934: 178). In other words,
to the extent that the human condition transcends nature, so nature herself comes to stand
as raw material to human projects of construction. In their realisation, these projects establish a division, within the material world, between the natural and the artiﬁcial, the pristine
and the man-made, nature-in-the-raw and nature transformed. Hunters and gatherers, as
the human inhabitants of a still pristine environment, cannot produce, for in the very act
of production the world is irreversibly altered from its natural state. The virgin forest, for
example, becomes a neatly ordered patchwork of cultivated ﬁelds, naturally occurring raw
materials are turned into tools and artefacts, and plants and animals are bred to forms
that better serve human purposes. The ﬁeld, the plough and the ox, though they all belong
to the physical world, have been engineered to designs that in every case had their origins
in the minds of men, in human acts of envisioning.
Since our present concern is with the history of human–animal relations, or rather with
a particular narration of that history, I want to stress the way ‘domestication’ ﬁgures in
this account as a feat of engineering, as though the ox were man-made, an artiﬁcial
construction put together like the plough. Of course the possibility of actually engineering
animals has opened up only very recently, and remains more in the realm of ﬁction than
fact. Darwin, to his credit, was at pains to stress that the power of humans to intervene
in natural processes is in reality rather limited: above all, humans cannot create novel

Livelihood
variants, but can only select retroactively from those that arise spontaneously. ‘It is an 1
error’, Darwin wrote, ‘to speak of man “tampering with nature” and causing variability’ 2
(1875: 2). Nevertheless, and despite Darwin’s careful distinction between intentional and 3
unintentional selection, the belief has persisted that the husbandry of animals, to qualify 4
at all as productive activity, must necessarily entail the deliberate, planned modiﬁcation 5
of the species involved. Now for pastoralists and farmers, who cannot exactly engineer the 6
forms or behaviours of their animals and plants, the nearest they can come to it is 7
‘controlled breeding’ (Bökonyi 1969: 219; 1989: 22). And so it is in the modiﬁcations 8
brought about by such breeding – or more technically by ‘artiﬁcial selection’ – that the 9
essence of domestication has been supposed to lie. Thus it came to be assumed that to 10
husband animals was, in essence, to breed them, both practices being lumped indiscrim- 1
inately under the concept of domestication. Instances where one appeared without the 2
other, such as the reindeer of northern Eurasian pastoralists which fall within the range 3
of variation of the ‘wild’ form (Ingold 1980: Ch. 2), were dismissed as unstable, transi- 4
tional states of ‘semi-domestication’.
The separation of humanity and nature implicit in the deﬁnition of domestication as 6
a process of artiﬁcial selection reappears in a competing deﬁnition which emphasises 7
its social rather than its biological aspect. ‘Domestication’, Ducos writes, ‘can be said to 8
exist when living animals are integrated as objects into the socio-economic organisation 9
of the human group’ (1978: 54; 1989; see also Ingold 1986a: 113, 168, 233). They 20
become a form of property which can be owned, inherited and exchanged. Property, 1
however, is conceived here as a relation between persons (subjects) in respect of things 2
(objects), or more generally, as a social appropriation of nature. Human beings, as social 3
persons, can own; animals, as natural objects, are only ownable. Thus the concept of 4
appropriation, just as the concept of intervention, sets humanity, the world of persons, 5
on a pedestal above the natural world of things. As I have remarked elsewhere, in connec- 6
tion with the concept of land tenure, ‘one cannot appropriate that within which one’s 7
being is wholly contained’ (Ingold 1986a: 135). It follows that hunters and gatherers, 8
characterised in Western discourse as exemplars of man in the state of nature, ‘at or near 9
the absolute zero of cultural development’ (ibid.), can no more own their resources than 30
they can intervene in their reproductive processes. The advent of domestication, in both 1
senses, had to await the breakthrough that liberated humanity from the shackles of nature, 2
a breakthrough that was marked equally by the emergence of institutions of law and 3
government, serving to shackle human nature to a social order.
Implied here is the evolutionary premise that the level of being that sets mankind above 5
the animal kingdom had to be achieved, in the course of an ascent from savagery to civil- 6
isation, just as it has to be achieved in the development of every individual from childhood 7
to maturity.3 That man’s rise to civilisation was conceived to have had its counterpart in 8
the domestication of nature is evident from the interchangeable use of the concept of 9
culture to denote both processes. Edward Tylor’s Primitive Culture of 1871, the ﬁrst 40
comprehensive study of human cultural variation, began with the words ‘Culture or 1
Civilisation’, by which he meant the cultivation of intellectual potentialities common to 2
humanity (1871, I: 1, see Ingold 1986b: 44). Darwin, for his part, introduced his equally 3
compendious study, The variation of animals and plants under domestication, with the 4
remark that ‘from a remote period, in all parts of the world, man has subjected many 5
animals and plants to domestication or culture’ (1875: 2). The cultivation of nature thus 6
appears as the logical corollary of man’s cultivation of himself, of his own powers of reason 7
and morality. As the former gave rise to modern domesticated breeds, so did the latter 118

From trust to domination

culminate in the emergence of that most perfect expression of the human condition,
namely civil society.
Let me conclude this section by returning to Darwin’s observation of the native inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego. When it came to his own kind, Darwin remained forever
convinced of the necessity and inevitability of progress towards civilisation, yet he was
unequivocal in his estimation that the Fuegians had not made it. In the spheres of religion, law, language and technology, they fell far short of a truly human level of existence.
Thus:
We have no reason to believe that they perform any sort of religious worship, . . . their
different tribes have no government or chief, . . . the language of these people, according
to our notions, scarcely deserves to be called articulate, . . . their [technical] skill in
some respects may be compared to the instinct of animals, for it is not improved by
experience.
(1860: 208, 217–18)
Biologically, Darwin seems to be saying, these people are certainly human beings, they
are of the same species as ourselves, yet in terms of their level of civilisation they are so
far from being human that their existence may justiﬁably be set on a par with that of the
animals. That being so, any inﬂuence that they may have had on the non-human animals
in their environment, and on which they depend, cannot differ in kind from the inﬂuence that such animals have had on one another.

HOW HUNTERS AND GATHERERS RELATE TO THEIR ENVIRONMENTS
So much for the construction of hunter-gatherers, as somewhat ambiguously human, within
the framework of concepts bequeathed by Western thought. Let me turn now to the
hunter-gatherers themselves. How do those peoples who derive a livelihood, at least in
part, from hunting and gathering, actually relate to the manifold constituents of their
environments?
Much of our information about the traditional ways of life of hunters and gatherers –
prior to their transformation or destruction in the wake of European invasion of their
lands – comes from the writings of early anthropologists, missionaries, traders and explorers.
They tended to depict hunter-gatherer life as a constant struggle for existence. Equipped
with the most rudimentary technology in a harsh environment, hunters and gatherers were
thought to have to devote every moment of their lives to the quest for food. In this
respect, Darwin’s description of the natives of Tierra del Fuego, apparently beset by hunger
and famine and without the wit to improve their miserable condition, was entirely typical.
More recent ethnographic studies, however, have shown this picture to be grossly exaggerated, if not entirely false. The new view of hunter-gatherer economy that emerged from
these studies was put forward in its most outspoken form in a now celebrated article by
Marshall Sahlins, originally presented to the 1966 Symposium on ‘Man the Hunter’, and
provocatively entitled ‘The original afﬂuent society’ (subsequently revised and published
in Sahlins 1972: Ch. 1).
Unlike the individual in modern Western society who always wants more than he can
get, however well-off he may be, the wants of the hunter-gatherer, Sahlins argued, are
very limited. What one has, one shares, and there is no point in accumulating material
property that would only be an impediment, given the demands of nomadic life. Moreover,

Livelihood
for hunter-gatherers who know how to get it, food is always abundant. There is no concept 1
of scarcity. Hunter-gatherers fulﬁl their limited needs easily and without having to expend 2
very much effort. Two points go along with this. The ﬁrst is an apparent lack of fore- 3
sight, or of concern for the future. Hunter-gatherers, in Sahlins’s depiction, take what 4
they can get opportunistically, as and when they want it. And what they have they consume. 5
The important thing, for them, is that food should ‘go round’ rather than that it should 6
‘last out’. Whatever food is available is distributed so that everyone has a share, even 7
though this means that there may be none left on the morrow. No attempt is made to 8
ration food out from one day to the next, as explorers do when they go on expeditions. 9
After all, for hunter-gatherers the ‘expedition’ is not time out from ordinary life but is 10
rather life itself, and this life rests on the assumption that more food will eventually be 1
found (Ingold 1986a: 211–12). The second point, which follows directly from this, is 2
that hunter-gatherers are unconcerned about the storage of food. Stored surpluses impede 3
mobility, and given that food is all around in the environment, hunter-gatherers treat the 4
environment itself as their storehouse, rather than setting aside supplies of harvested food 5
for the future.
One of the studies on which Sahlins drew for evidence in presenting this picture of 7
hunter-gatherer afﬂuence was that undertaken by James Woodburn, of the Hadza of 8
Tanzania. But Woodburn himself, in a series of recent articles, has sought to qualify this 9
view by distinguishing between different kinds of hunter-gatherer economy (Woodburn 20
1980, 1982, 1988). The major distinction is between what he calls immediate-return and 1
delayed-return economies. In an immediate-return system, people go out on most days to 2
obtain food, which they consume on the day they obtain it or very soon after. The equip- 3
ment they use is simple and quickly made without involving much time or effort, nor do 4
they invest any effort in looking after the resources they exploit. Moreover, there is little 5
or no storage of harvested food. This picture, according to Woodburn, is consistent with 6
the Hadza data, and also with Sahlins’s general picture of hunter-gatherer afﬂuence. In a 7
delayed-return system, by contrast, there may be a substantial advance investment of 8
labour in the construction of hunting or trapping facilities or (for ﬁshermen) boats and 9
nets. People might devote considerable effort to husbanding their resources, and there may 30
also be extensive storage.
The signiﬁcance of this distinction lies in what it suggests about peoples’ commitments 2
both to the non-human environment and to one another. Such commitments, Woodburn 3
thinks, are likely to be far greater in a delayed-return system than in an immediate-return 4
one. Obviously, people depend in an immediate-return system, just as much as they do 5
in a delayed-return one, both on the resources of their environment and on the support 6
of other people. But what is striking about the immediate-return system is the lack of 7
investment in, or commitment towards, particular resources or persons. An individual, say 8
in Hadza society, relies on other people in general, and on the resources of the environ- 9
ment in general, rather than building up relationships with particular people and particular 40
resources. As Woodburn puts it, ‘people are not dependent on speciﬁc other people, for 1
access to basic requirements’ (1982: 434).
The more, however, that we learn about hunter-gatherer perceptions of the environ- 3
ment, and of their relations with it, the more unlikely this picture of the immediate-return 4
system seems. If what Woodburn says about the Hadza is correct, then they appear more 5
as the exception than the rule. Over and over again we encounter the idea that the environ- 6
ment, far from being seen as a passive container for resources that are there in abundance 7
for the taking, is saturated with personal powers of one kind or another. It is alive.4 And 118

From trust to domination

hunter-gatherers, if they are to survive and prosper, have to maintain relationships with
these powers, just as they must maintain relationships with other human persons. In many
societies, this is expressed by the idea that people have to look after or care for the country
in which they live, by ensuring that proper relationships are maintained. This means
treating the country, and the animals and plants that dwell in it, with due consideration
and respect, doing all one can to minimise damage and disturbance.
Let me present one example, which will serve to direct our attention from the general
context of hunters’ and gatherers’ relations with the environment towards the more speciﬁc
context of the hunters’ relations with their animal prey. The Cree of northeastern Canada,
as we saw in Chapter One (pp. 13–14), suppose that animals intentionally present themselves to the hunter to be killed. The hunter consumes the meat, but the soul of the
animal is released to be reclothed with ﬂesh. Hunting here, as among many northern
peoples, is conceived as a rite of regeneration: consumption follows killing as birth follows
intercourse, and both acts are integral to the reproductive cycles, respectively, of animals
and humans. However, animals will not return to hunters who have treated them badly
in the past. One treats an animal badly by failing to observe the proper, respectful procedures in the processes of butchering, consumption and disposal of the bones, or by causing
undue pain and suffering to the animal in killing it. Above all, animals are offended by
unnecessary killing: that is, by killing as an end in itself rather than to satisfy genuine
consumption needs. They are offended, too, if the meat is not properly shared around all
those in the community who need it. Thus, meat and other usable products should on
no account be wasted (see Feit 1973, Tanner 1979, Brightman 1993, cf. Ingold 1986a:
246–7).
This emphasis on the careful and prudent use of resources, and on the avoidance of
waste, seems a far cry from the image, presented by Sahlins, of original afﬂuence, of people
opportunistically collecting whatever is on offer. Moreover the idea that success in present
hunting depends on personal relationships built up and maintained with animal powers
through a history of previous hunts, quite contradicts Woodburn’s notion of immediate
returns. For in the Cree conception, the meat that the hunter obtains now is a return on
the investment of attention he put in on a previous occasion – when hunting the same
animal or its conspeciﬁcs – by observing the proper procedures. Indeed it could be argued
that in their concern to look after their environments, and to use them carefully, huntergatherers practise a conscious policy of conservation. They could, in other words, be said
to manage their resources, as has actually been suggested in one recent collection of anthropological studies of North American and Australian hunter-gatherers, which was pointedly
entitled Resource Managers (Williams and Hunn 1982).
Yet the environmental conservation practised by hunter-gatherers, if such it is, differs
fundamentally from the so-called ‘scientiﬁc’ conservation advocated by Western wildlife
protection agencies. Scientiﬁc conservation is ﬁrmly rooted in the doctrine, which I have
already spelled out, that the world of nature is separate from, and subordinate to, the
world of humanity. One corollary of this doctrine is the idea that merely by virtue of
inhabiting an environment, humans – or at least civilised humans – are bound to transform it, to alter it from its ‘natural’ state. As a result, we tend to think that the only
environments that still exist in a genuinely natural condition are those that remain beyond
the bounds of human civilisation, as in the dictionary deﬁnition of a wilderness: ‘A tract
of land or a region . . . uncultivated or uninhabited by human beings’. Likewise the wild
animal is one that lives an authentically natural life, untainted by human contact. It will,
of course, have contacts with animals of many other, non-human species, but whereas

Livelihood
these latter contacts are supposed to reveal its true nature, any contact with human beings 1
is supposed to render the animal ‘unnatural’, and therefore unﬁt as an object of properly 2
scientiﬁc inquiry. Juliet Clutton-Brock (1994) has drawn our attention to the way in 3
which, by according to domestic animals a second-class status in this regard, the investi- 4
gation of their behaviour has been impeded. Domestic animals, it seems, are to be exploited 5
but not studied; wild animals to be studied but not exploited.
Scientiﬁc conservation operates, then, by sealing off portions of wilderness and their 7
animal inhabitants, and by restricting or banning human intervention. This is like putting 8
a ‘do not touch’ notice in front of a museum exhibit: we can observe, but only from a 9
distance, one that excludes direct participation or active ‘hands-on’ involvement. It is 10
consequently no accident that regions designated as wilderness, and that have been brought 1
under externally imposed regulations of conservation, are very often regions inhabited by 2
hunters and gatherers. Allegedly lacking the capability to control and transform nature, 3
they alone are supposed to occupy a still unmodiﬁed, ‘pristine’ environment. The pres- 4
ence of indigenous hunter-gatherers in regions designated for conservation has often proved 5
acutely embarrassing for the conservationists. For there is no way in which native people 6
can be accommodated within schemes of scientiﬁc conservation except as parts of the 7
wildlife, that is as constituents of the nature that is to be conserved. They cannot them- 8
selves be conservers, because the principles and practice of scientiﬁc conservation enjoin 9
a degree of detachment which is incompatible with the kind of involvement with the 20
environment that is essential to hunting and gathering as a way of life.
The sense in which hunters and gatherers see themselves as conservers or custodians of 2
their environments should not, then, be confused with the Western scientiﬁc idea of 3
conservation. This latter, as I have shown, is rooted in the assumption that humans – as 4
controllers of the natural world – bear full responsibility for the survival or extinction of 5
wildlife species. For hunter-gatherers this responsibility is inverted. In the last resort, it is 6
those powers that animate the environment that are responsible for the survival or extinc- 7
tion of humans. Summarising the view of the Koyukon of Alaska, Richard Nelson writes: 8
The proper role of humankind is to serve a dominant nature. The natural universe is 30
nearly omnipotent, and only through acts of respect and propitiation is the well-being 1
of humans ensured . . . In the Koyukon world, human existence depends on a morally 2
based relationship with the overarching powers of nature. Humanity acts at the behest 3
of the environment. The Koyukon must move with the forces of their surroundings, 4
not attempting to control, master or fundamentally alter them. They do not confront 5
nature, they yield to it.
(Nelson 1983: 240) 7
For the Koyukon, as for other hunting and gathering peoples, there are not two separate 9
worlds, of humanity and nature. There is one world, and human beings form a rather 40
small and insigniﬁcant part of it.
Given this view of the world, everything depends on maintaining a proper balance in 2
one’s relationships with its manifold powers. Thus, rather than saying that hunters and 3
gatherers exploit their environments, it might be better to say that they aim to keep up 4
a dialogue with it. I shall turn in the next section to what this means in terms of hunters’ 5
relations with animals. At this juncture, the point I wish to stress is that for hunters and 6
gatherers, there is no incompatibility between conservation and participation. It is through a 7
direct engagement with the constituents of the environment, not through a detached, 118

From trust to domination

hands-off approach, that hunters and gatherers look after it. Indeed, caring for an environment is like caring for people: it requires a deep, personal and affectionate involvement,
an involvement not just of mind or body but of one’s entire, undivided being. We do
not feel forced in the social world – for example in the ﬁeld of our relations with kin –
to choose between either exploiting others for personal proﬁt or avoiding all direct contact.
Yet in the context of relations with animals, this is precisely the choice that is forced on
us by the conventional dichotomy between wildness and domestication. It is time now to
suggest some alternative terms.

FROM TRUST TO DOMINATION
Trust
It should by now be clear that the characterisation of hunting as the human pursuit of
animals that are ‘wild’, though it speaks volumes about our Western view of hunters,
is quite inappropriate when it comes to the hunters’ view of animals. For the animals are
not regarded as strange, alien beings from another world, but as participants in the same
world to which the people also belong. They are not, moreover, conceived to be bent on
escape, brought down only by the hunter’s superior cunning, speed or force. To the
contrary, a hunt that is successfully consummated with a kill is taken as proof of amicable
relations between the hunter and the animal that has willingly allowed itself to be taken.
Hunters are well-known for their abhorrence of violence in the context of human relations,5 and the same goes for their relations with animals: the encounter, at the moment
of the kill, is – to them – essentially non-violent. And so, too, hunting is not a failed
enterprise, as it is so often depicted in the West: a failure marked by the technical inability
to assert or maintain control; pursuit that is not ultimately crowned by capture. It is
rather a highly successful attempt to draw the animals in the hunters’ environment into
the familiar ambit of social being, and to establish a working basis for mutuality and
coexistence.
For hunters and gatherers, animals and plants in the environment play a nurturing role,
as do human caregivers. This is the kind of understanding that Nurit Bird-David seeks
to convey by means of her notion, introduced in the previous chapter (pp. 43–4), of
‘the giving environment’ (Bird-David 1990). Focusing on peoples of the tropical forest
for whom gathering is rather more important than hunting, Bird-David suggests that
hunters and gatherers model their relationships with life-giving agencies in their environments on the institution of sharing, which is the foundation for interpersonal relations
within the human community. Thus in their nurturing capacity, these non-human
agencies ‘share’ with you, just as you share what you receive from the environment with
other people. Both movements, from non-human to human beings and among the
latter themselves, are seen to constitute a single ‘cosmic economy of sharing’ (Bird-David
1992a). However, while people may indeed draw an analogy between the relations with
animals and plants activated in hunting and gathering, and the relations among humans
activated in sharing, it seems to me that these two sets of relations are, at a more fundamental level of principle, not just analogous but identical. This principle which, I maintain,
inheres equally in the activities of sharing and in those of hunting and gathering, is that
of trust.
The essence of trust is a peculiar combination of autonomy and dependency. To trust
someone is to act with that person in mind, in the hope and expectation that she will do

Livelihood
likewise – responding in ways favourable to you – so long as you do nothing to curb her 1
autonomy to act otherwise. Although you depend on a favourable response, that response 2
comes entirely on the initiative and volition of the other party. Any attempt to impose a 3
response, to lay down conditions or obligations that the other is bound to follow, would 4
represent a betrayal of trust and a negation of the relationship. For example, if I force 5
my friend to assist me in my enterprise, this is tantamount to a declaration that I do not 6
trust him to assist me of his own accord, and therefore that I no longer count him as a 7
friend at all. Offended by my inﬁdelity, his likely response will be to withdraw his favour 8
towards me. Trust, therefore, always involves an element of risk – the risk that the other 9
on whose actions I depend, but which I cannot in any way control, may act contrary to 10
my expectations (see Gambetta 1988, for some excellent discussions of this point).
Now this combination of autonomy and dependency is, I believe, the essence of what 2
is commonly reported in ethnographic studies of hunting and gathering societies under 3
the rubric of sharing. People in hunter-gatherer communities do depend on one another 4
for food and for a variety of everyday services, though these exchanges may be the surface 5
expression of a deeper concern with companionship, characterised by Tom Gibson as ‘shared 6
activity in itself ’ (Gibson 1985: 393). Noteworthy in Gibson’s account is the connection 7
he draws between companionship and autonomy: ‘a relationship based on companionship 8
is voluntary, freely terminable and involves the preservation of the personal autonomy of 9
both parties’ (1985: 392). He contrasts this kind of relationship with the kind that is 20
involuntary, non-terminable and places the parties under obligation (see Ingold 1986a: 1
116–17). Bird-David (1990) draws essentially the same contrast under the terms ‘giving’ 2
and ‘reciprocating’, referring respectively to the relationships that hunter-gatherers and 3
cultivators see themselves as having with the environment of the tropical forest. Clearly, 4
both hunter-gatherers and cultivators depend on their environments. But whereas for culti- 5
vators this dependency is framed within a structure of reciprocal obligation, for 6
hunter-gatherers it rests on the recognition of personal autonomy. In my terms, the contrast 7
is between relationships based on trust and those based on domination. I shall turn to the 8
latter in a moment, but ﬁrst I should like to specify more precisely the meaning of trust 9
in the context of relations between hunters and their animal prey.
I shall do so by drawing a further, analytic distinction between trust and conﬁdence 1
(following Luhmann 1988). Both terms are commonly and casually used in characterisa- 2
tions of hunter-gatherer attitudes towards the environment. Sahlins, for example, uses 3
the terms freely and interchangeably in his account of the ‘pristine afﬂuence’ of hunter- 4
gatherer economic arrangements, marked, he claims, by
a trust in the abundance of nature’s resources rather than despair at the inadequacy of 7
human means. My point is that otherwise curious heathen devices became under- 8
standable by the people’s conﬁdence, a conﬁdence which is the reasonable human 9
attribute of a generally successful economy.
(1972: 29, my emphases) 1
Now Sahlins writes as though, for hunters and gatherers, the environment existed as a 3
world of nature ‘out there’, quite separate from the world of human society and its inter- 4
ests. In this he uncritically projects onto the hunter-gatherer way of thinking a 5
nature/society dichotomy which, as we have seen, is of Western provenance. According 6
to this view, nature – which the people make no attempt to control or modify – is seen 7
to go its own way, subject to ups and downs regardless of human actions or dispositions 118

From trust to domination

towards it. If it yields, or fails to yield, this is not because it has the hunter-gatherer in
mind. And the hunter-gatherer has to assume that it will yield, since life itself is predicated on this expectation. The alternative, in Luhmann’s words, ‘is to withdraw
expectations without having anything with which to replace them’ (1988: 97).
Now all of us have to make these kinds of assumptions all the time: they are what
enable us to get by in a world full of unforeseen and unconsidered dangers. The world
may stop revolving or be knocked off course by a meteoric collision, but we have to
assume that it will not, and for the most part the possibility never enters our heads.
Likewise, according to Sahlins, hunter-gatherers assume the providence of nature and do
not consider the possibility of starvation. It is this attitude that I denote by the concept
of conﬁdence. And the crucial aspect of conﬁdence to which I wish to draw attention is
that it presupposes no engagement, no active involvement on our part, with the potential sources of danger in the world, so that when trouble does strike it is attributed to
forces external to the ﬁeld of our own relationships, forces which just happen to set the
‘outside world’, under its own momentum, on a collision course with our expectations.
But with the attitude that I denote by the concept of trust, it is quite otherwise. Trust
presupposes an active, prior engagement with the agencies and entities of the environment on which we depend; it is an inherent quality of our relationships towards them.
And my contention is that in this strict sense, trust rather than conﬁdence characterises
the attitude of hunters and gatherers towards their non-human environment, just as it
characterises their attitude towards one another.
The animals in the environment of the hunter do not simply go their own way, but
are supposed to act with the hunter in mind. They are not just ‘there’ for the hunter to
ﬁnd and take as he will; rather they present themselves to him. The encounter, then, is a
moment in the unfolding of a continuing – even lifelong – relationship between the hunter
and the animal kind (of which every particular individual encountered is a speciﬁc
instance). The hunter hopes that by being good to animals, they in turn will be good to
him.6 But by the same token, the animals have the power to withhold if any attempt is
made to coerce what they are not, of their own volition, prepared to provide. For coercion, the attempt to extract by force, represents a betrayal of the trust that underwrites
the willingness to give. Animals thus maltreated will desert the hunter, or even cause him
ill fortune. This is the reason why, as I mentioned above, the encounter between hunter
and prey is conceived as basically non-violent. It is also the reason why hunters aim to
take only what is revealed to them and do not press for more. To describe this orientation as ‘opportunism’ is misleading, for it is not a matter of taking what you can get but
of accepting what is given. The same applies in the context of intra-community sharing:
one may indeed ask for things that others have, but not for more. ‘Practically, would-berecipients request what they see in the possession of others and do not request them to
produce what they do not appear to have’ (Bird-David 1992a: 30).
By regarding the relation between hunters and their prey as one of trust, we can also
resolve the problem inherent in Woodburn’s distinction between immediate-return and
delayed-return systems. Woodburn was concerned to discover the basis for the pronounced
emphasis on personal autonomy in many hunter-gatherer societies, and he put it down
to the lack of speciﬁc commitments and enduring relationships in an immediate-return
economy. Yet we ﬁnd that at least among hunters, people are enmeshed in highly particularistic and intimate ties with both human and non-human others. Contrary to
expectations, however, their sense of autonomy is not compromised. Woodburn’s error,
as we can now see, was to assume that dependency on speciﬁc other people entails loss

Livelihood
of autonomy. This is not necessarily so, for it is precisely in relations of trust that autonomy 1
is retained despite dependency. But trust, as I have noted, inevitably entails risk, and this 2
is as much the case in hunters’ relations with animals as it is within the human commu- 3
nity. Thus, of the ‘other-than-human’ persons that inhabit the world of the Ojibwa, 4
Hallowell observes – taking up the perspective of an Ojibwa subject – that
I cannot always predict exactly how they will act, although most of the time their behav- 7
iour meets my expectations . . . They may be friendly and help me when I need them 8
but, at the same time, I have to be prepared for hostile acts, too. I must be cautious 9
in my relations with other ‘persons’ because appearances may be deceptive.
(1960: 43) 1
That is why hunters attach such enormous importance to knowledge and its acquisition. 3
This is not knowledge in the natural scientiﬁc sense, of things and how they work. It is 4
rather as we would speak of it in relation to persons: to ‘know’ someone is to be in a 5
position to approach him directly with a fair expectation of the likely response, to be 6
familiar with that person’s past history and sensible to his tastes, moods and idiosyncrasies. 7
You get to know other human persons by sharing with them, that is by experiencing their 8
companionship. And if you are a hunter, you get to know animals by hunting. As I shall 9
show in Chapter Sixteen, the weapons of the hunter, far from being instruments of control 20
or manipulation, serve this purpose of acquiring knowledge. Through them, the hunter 1
does not transform the world, rather the world opens itself up to him. Like words, the 2
hunter’s tools are caught up in chains of personal (not mechanical) causation, serving to 3
reveal the otherwise hidden intentions of non-human agents in a world where, recalling 4
Feit’s remark concerning the Cree, it is ‘always appropriate to ask “who did it?” and 5
“why?” rather than “how does that work?”’ (1973: 116). In short, the hunter does not 6
seek, and fail to achieve, control over animals; he seeks revelation. Robin Ridington has 7
put the point concisely in his observation that hunter-gatherers, ‘instead of attempting to 8
control nature . . . concentrate on controlling their relationship with it’ (1982: 471).
Domination
It is quite otherwise with pastoralists.7 Like hunters, they depend on animals, and their 3
relationship with these animals may similarly be characterised by a quality of attentive, 4
and at times even benevolent regard. Herdsmen do indeed care for their animals, but it 5
is care of a quite different kind from that extended by hunters. For one thing, the animals 6
are presumed to lack the capacity to reciprocate. In the world of the hunter, animals, too, 7
are supposed to care, to the extent of laying down their lives for humans by allowing 8
themselves to be taken. They retain, however, full control over their own destiny. Under 9
pastoralism, that control has been relinquished to humans. It is the herdsman who takes 40
life-or-death decisions concerning what are now ‘his’ animals, and who controls every 1
other aspect of their welfare, acting as he does as both protector, guardian and execu- 2
tioner. He sacriﬁces them; they do not sacriﬁce themselves to him (Ingold 1986a: 272–3). 3
They are cared for, but they are not themselves empowered to care. Like dependants in 4
the household of a patriarch, their status is that of jural minors, subject to the authority 5
of their human master (Ingold 1980: 96). In short, the relationship of pastoral care, quite 6
unlike that of the hunter towards animals, is founded on a principle not of trust but of 7
domination.8

From trust to domination

These principles of relationship are mutually exclusive: to secure the compliance of the
other by imposing one’s will, whether by force or by more subtle forms of manipulation,
is – as we have seen – an abrogation of trust, entailing as it does the denial rather than
the recognition of the autonomy of the other on whom one depends. The very means by
which the herdsman aims to secure access to animals would, for the hunter, involve a
betrayal which would have the opposite effect of causing them to desert. The instruments
of herding, quite unlike those of hunting, are of control rather than revelation: they include
the whip, spur, harness and hobble, all of them designed either to restrict or to induce
movement through the inﬂiction of physical force, and sometimes acute pain (I return to
these in Chapter Fifteen, pp. 306–8). Should we conclude, then, that while the concept
of wildness is clearly inapplicable to describe the hunter’s perception of animals with
whom he enjoys a relation of trust and familiarity, the opposite concept of domestication
– with its connotations of mastery and control – is perfectly apt to describe the pastoralist’s
relation with the animals in his herd?
The answer depends on precisely how we understand the nature of this mastery and
control, and this, in turn, hinges on the signiﬁcance we attach to the notion of physical
force. Consider the slave-driver, whip in hand, compelling his slaves to toil through the
brute inﬂiction of severe pain. Clearly the autonomy of the slave in this situation to act
according to his own volition is very seriously compromised. Does this mean that the
slave responds in a purely mechanical way to the stroke of the whip? Far from it. For
when we speak of the application of force in this kind of situation, we impute to the
recipient powers of resistance – powers which the inﬂiction of pain is speciﬁcally intended
to overwhelm. That is to say, the use of force is predicated on the assumption that the
slave is a being with the capacity to act and suffer, and in that sense a person. And when
we say that the master causes the slave to work, the causation is personal, not mechanical: it lies in the social relation between master and slave, which is clearly one of
domination. In fact, the original connotation of ‘force’ was precisely that of action intentionally directed against the resistance of another sentient being, and the metaphorical
extension from the domain of interpersonal relations to that of the movements of inanimate and insentient things, like planets or billiard balls, is both relatively recent and highly
specialised (see Walter 1969: 40 for a discussion of this point).
Now if by the notion of domestication is implied a kind of mastery and control similar
to that entailed in slavery, then this notion might indeed be applicable to describe the
pastoralist’s relation with the animals in his herd. Richard Tapper argues, along precisely
these lines, that where ‘individual animals are taken out of their natural species community and subjugated to provide labour for the human production process, . . . their feeding
under the control of their human masters’, one may reasonably describe the ‘human–
animal relations of production’ thereby established as ‘slave-based’ (Tapper 1988: 52–3).
In those societies of the ancient world in which slavery was the dominant relation of
production, the parallel between the domestic animal and the slave appears to have been
self-evident. The Romans, for example, classiﬁed slaves and cattle, respectively, as instrumentum genus vocale and instrumentum genus semi-vocale (Tapper 1988: 59 fn. 3), while
Vedic texts, according to Benveniste (1969: 48), have a term pasu for animate possessions
that admits two varieties, quadrupedal (referring to domestic animals) and bipedal (referring to human slaves). Perhaps the most extraordinary piece of evidence comes from
the work of the Japanese scholar, K. Maekawa, on the temple economy of Sumeria in
the third millennium BC. From his analysis of Sumerian texts, Maekawa shows that the
temple-state of Lagash maintained one population of captured female slaves to work as

Livelihood
weavers, and another population of cattle for the supply of milk. In each population, 1
female offspring were retained to secure its continuation, while male offspring were 2
castrated and put to work: the men in hauling boats up-river, the oxen in pulling the 3
plough (cited in Tani 1996: 404–5).
In a remarkable extension of the argument for the parallel between the domestic animal 5
and the slave, Yutaka Tani has drawn attention to a technique for managing pastoral herds 6
of sheep or goats that is widely distributed in the Mediterranean and Middle East. A 7
selected male animal is castrated and trained to respond to the vocal commands of the 8
shepherd. On rejoining the herd, this animal, known as a ‘guide-whether’, acts as an inter- 9
mediary between the shepherd (the dominator) and his ﬂock (the dominated). For while 10
obedient to its master, the whether also sets an example, in its behaviour, which is followed 1
by all the other animals in the ﬂock. Now barring a small number of males kept for 2
breeding purposes, most of these animals are female. The position of the whether, a 3
castrated male charged with the guidance of a herd of females, is thus functionally anal- 4
ogous to the position of the human eunuch, in the court of the emperor, charged with 5
guarding the females of his harem. The reliability and trustworthiness of the eunuch, like 6
that of the guide-whether, derives from his exclusion from the reproductive process. But 7
despite his high rank, the eunuch remains a slave, wholly dependent on imperial favour 8
for his position. Noting the similarity between the techniques of management employed, 9
respectively, by the shepherd to control his ﬂock and by the emperor to control his harem, 20
Tani wonders whether the latter might be derived from the former (or, less probably, vice 1
versa). The idea may seem far-fetched, and the historical evidence, as Tani admits, is 2
inconclusive. Yet it seems more than coincidental that the technique of using the guide- 3
whether is distributed ‘in the same areas of the Mediterranean and Middle East as where 4
the political institution of the eunuch ﬁrst appeared and from where it diffused’ (Tani 5
1996: 388–91, 403).
However obvious the parallel may have seemed, to people of the ancient world, between 7
the domination and control of slaves and of pastoral herds, it is an idea that is deeply 8
alien to modern Western thought. For viewing both kinds of relationship, with slaves and 9
with livestock, through the lens of a dichotomy between humanity and nature, we are 30
convinced that the master–slave relationship, occurring between human beings, exists 1
on the level of society, whereas domestication amounts to a social appropriation of – or 2
intervention in – the separate domain of nature, within which animal existence is fully 3
contained. In a revealing comment, Marx argued that relations of domination, such as 4
obtain between master and slave, cannot obtain between humans and domestic animals, 5
because the latter lack the power of intentional agency: ‘Beings without will, such as 6
animals, may indeed render services, but their owner is not thereby lord and master’ (1964: 7
102; see Ingold 1980: 88). Domination and domestication are here distinguished, on 8
the premise that the one is a form of social control exercised over subject-persons, and 9
the other a form of mechanical control exercised over object-things. But this is not, to 40
my knowledge, a distinction that any pastoral people make themselves. They may rank 1
animals hierarchically below humans, as in ancient society slaves were ranked hierarchi- 2
cally below freemen, but they are not assigned to a separate domain of being. And although 3
the relations pastoralists establish with animals are quite different from those established 4
by hunters, they rest, at a more fundamental level, on the same premise, namely that 5
animals are, like human beings, endowed with powers of sentience and autonomous action 6
which have either to be respected, as in hunting, or overcome through superior force, as 7
in pastoralism.

From trust to domination

To sum up: my contention is that the transition in human–animal relations that in
Western scholarly literature is described as the domestication of creatures that were once
wild, should rather be described as a transition from trust to domination. I have suggested
that the negative stereotype of the hunter’s relation to his prey, marked by the absence
of control, be replaced by a more positive characterisation as a certain mode of engagement. But I have also shown that the emergence of pastoralism does not depend, as
orthodox deﬁnitions of domestication imply, upon humans’ achieving a state of being that
takes them above and beyond the world in which all other creatures live. Thus the transition from trust to domination is not to be understood as a movement from engagement
to disengagement, from a situation where humans and animals are co-participants in the
same world to one in which they hive off into their own separate worlds of society and
nature. Quite to the contrary, the transition involves a change in the terms of engagement.
Whether the regime be one of hunting or of pastoralism, humans and animals relate to
one another not in mind or body alone but as undivided centres of intention and action,
as whole beings. Only with the advent of industrial livestock management have animals
been reduced, in practice and not just in theory, to the mere ‘objects’ that theorists of
the Western tradition (who, barring the occasional pet, had little or no contact with
animals in the course of their working lives) had always supposed them to be (Tapper
1988: 52–7). Indeed this objectiﬁcation of animals, having reached its peak in the agropastoral industry, is as far removed from the relations of domination entailed in traditional
pastoral care as it is from the relations of trust entailed in hunting.
Moreover, as alternative modes of relationship, neither trust nor domination is in any
sense more or less advanced than the other. It is important, in particular, to guard against
the tendency to think of relations based on trust as morally, or intrinsically ‘good’, and
of those based on domination as intrinsically ‘bad’. They are simply different. Trust, as
I have shown, is a relation fraught with risk, tension and ambiguity. It is well to remember
Hallowell’s point, apropos Ojibwa ontology, that ‘appearances my be deceptive’ (1960:
43). The underside of trust, as Hallowell shows so clearly, is chronic anxiety and suspicion. Thus to argue that hunter-gatherer relations with the environment are based on a
principle of trust is not to present yet another version of the arcadian vision of life in
harmony with nature. Nor, by the same token, should the movement from trust to domination be regarded as one that replaced harmony by discord, or that set humanity on the
path of its irrevocable alienation from nature. When hunters became pastoralists they
began to relate to animals, and to one another, in different ways. But they were not taking
the ﬁrst steps on the road to modernity.

CONCLUSION
Writing of Koyukon hunters of Alaska, Nelson remarks that, for them, ‘the conceptual
distance between humanity and nature is narrow’ (1983: 240). On the evidence of his
own account, and many others, it would be more true to say that there is no conceptual
distance at all, or rather that what we distinguish as humanity and nature merge, for them,
into a single ﬁeld of relationships. And indeed, we ﬁnd nothing corresponding to the
Western concept of nature in hunter-gatherer representations, for they see no essential
difference between the ways one relates to humans and to non-human constituents of the
environment. We have seen how both sharing (among humans) and hunting (of animals
by humans) rest on the same principle of trust, and how the sense in which hunters claim
to know and care for animals is identical to the sense in which they know and care for

Livelihood
other human beings. One could make the same argument for pastoralism: I have shown 1
elsewhere, in the case of northern Eurasian reindeer herdsmen, how the transition from 2
hunting to pastoralism led to the emergence, in place of egalitarian relations of sharing, 3
of relations of dominance and subordination between herding leaders and their assistants 4
(Ingold 1980: 165–9). Evidently a transition in the quality of relationship, from trust to 5
domination, affects relations not only between humans and non-human animals, but also, 6
and equally, among human beings themselves. Hallowell’s observation that in the world 7
of the Ojibwa, ‘vital social relations transcend those which are maintained with human 8
beings’ (1960: 43) could apply just as well to other hunting peoples, and indeed to pastoral- 9
ists as well.
This observation, however, plays havoc with the established Western dichotomies 1
between animals and society, or nature and humanity. The distinction between the human 2
and the non-human no longer marks the outer limits of the social world, as against that 3
of nature, but rather maps a domain within it whose boundary is both permeable and 4
easily crossed. It comes as no surprise, then, that anthropology, as an intellectual product 5
of the Western tradition, has sought to contain the damage by relativising the indigenous 6
view and thereby neutralising the challenge it presents to our own suppositions. Thus we 7
are told that the hunter-gatherer view is just another cultural construction of reality. When 8
hunters use terms drawn from the domain of human interaction to describe their rela- 9
tions with animals, they are said to be indulging in metaphor (Bird-David 1992a). But 20
to claim that what is literally true of relations among humans (for example, that they 1
share), is only ﬁguratively true of relations with animals, is to reproduce the very dichotomy 2
between animals and society that the indigenous view purports to reject. We tell ourselves 3
reassuringly that this view the hunters have, of sharing with animals as they would with 4
people, however appealing it might be, does not correspond with what actually happens. 5
For nature, we say, does not really share with man.9 When hunters assert the contrary it 6
is because the image of sharing is so deeply ingrained in their thought that they can no 7
longer tell the metaphor from the reality. But we can, and we insist – on these grounds 8
– that the hunters have got it wrong.
This strikes me as profoundly arrogant. It is to accord priority to the Western meta- 30
physics of the alienation of humanity from nature, and to use our disengagement as the 1
standard against which to judge their engagement. Faced with an ecological crisis whose 2
roots lie in this disengagement, in the separation of human agency and social responsi- 3
bility from the sphere of our direct involvement with the non-human environment, it 4
surely behoves us to reverse this order of priority. I began with the point that while both 5
humans and animals have histories of their mutual relations, only humans narrate such 6
histories. But to construct a narrative, one must already dwell in the world and, in the 7
dwelling, enter into relationships with its constituents, both human and non-human. I 8
am suggesting that we rewrite the history of human–animal relations, taking this condition 9
of active engagement, of being-in-the-world, as our starting point. We might speak of it 40
as a history of human concern with animals, insofar as this notion conveys a caring, attentive 1
regard, a ‘being with’. And I am suggesting that those who are ‘with’ animals in their 2
day-to-day lives, most notably hunters and herdsmen, can offer us some of the best possible 3
indications of how we might proceed.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Five

Making things, growing plants,
raising animals and bringing up
children
We have . . . large and various orchards and gardens . . . And we make (by art) in the
same orchards and gardens trees and ﬂowers to come earlier or later than their seasons,
and to come up and bear more speedily than by their natural course they do. We make
them also by art greater much than their nature, and their fruit greater and sweeter
and of differing taste, smell, colour and ﬁgure, from their nature . . . We have also
parks and inclosures of all sorts of beasts and birds . . . By art likewise we make them
greater or taller than their kind is, and contrariwise dwarf them, and stay their growth;
we make them more fruitful and bearing than their kind is, and contrariwise barren
and not generative. Also we make them differ in colour, shape, activity, many ways.
So wrote Francis Bacon in 1624, outlining his Utopian vision of the New Atlantis, a
society dedicated to the mastery of nature through rigorous application of the principles
of rational science (Bacon 1965: 449–50). In this society every kind of living thing, both
animal and vegetable, can be made by art so that it better serves human purposes. In what
follows I aim to show how this notion of making has come to rest at the heart of what
we mean by production, in relation not only to the manufacture of artefacts but also, and
more especially, to the breeding – or ‘artiﬁcial selection’ – of plants and animals. The
idea of production as making, I argue, is embedded in a grand narrative of the human
transcendence of nature, in which the domestication of plants and animals ﬁgures as the
counterpart of the self-domestication of humanity in the process of civilisation. I go on
to consider how people who actually live by gardening, tilling the soil or keeping livestock understand the nature of their activity, drawing on examples from South America,
Melanesia and West Africa. Taking these understandings as a starting point, I shall then
take a fresh look at what it means to cultivate plants and to husband animals. My conclusion is that the work of the farmer or herdsman does not make crops or livestock, but
rather serves to set up certain conditions of development within which plants and animals
take on their particular forms and behavioural dispositions. We are dealing, in a word,
with processes of growth.

THE HUMAN TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE
According to the received categories of archaeological and anthropological thought, there
are basically just two ways of procuring a livelihood from the natural environment,
conventionally denoted by the terms collection and production. The distinction between
them was ﬁrst coined by Friedrich Engels. In a note penned in 1875, Engels pointed
to production as the most fundamental criterion of what he saw as a kind of ‘mastery’

Livelihood
of the environment that was distinctively human: ‘The most that the animal can achieve 1
is to collect; man produces, he prepares the means of life . . . which without him nature 2
would not have produced. This makes impossible any unqualiﬁed transference of the laws 3
of life in animal society to human society’ (1934: 308). The essence of production, for 4
Engels, lay in the deliberate planning of activity by intentional and selfconscious agents. 5
Animals, through their activities, might exert lasting and quite radical effects on their 6
environments, but these effects are by and large unintended: the non-human animal, 7
Engels thought, did not labour in its surroundings in order to change them; it had no 8
conception of its task. The human, by contrast, always has an end in mind.
Curiously, however, whenever Engels turned to consider concrete examples of human 10
mastery in production, he drew them exclusively from the activities of agriculture and 1
pastoralism, through which plants, animals and the landscape itself had been demonstrably 2
transformed through human design (1934: 34, 178–9). Opposing the foraging behaviour 3
of non-human species to the human husbandry of plants and animals, Engels left a gap 4
that could only be ﬁlled by calling into being a special category of humans known to him 5
and his contemporaries as ‘savages’. As a hunter of animals and a gatherer of plants, the 6
savage had, as it were, come down from the trees but had not yet left the woods: suspended 7
in limbo between evolution and history, he was a human being who had so far failed to 8
realise the potential afforded by his unique constitution. Ever since, the humanity of 9
hunter-gatherers has been somehow in question. They may be members of the species, 20
Homo sapiens, but their form of life is such as to put them on a par with other animal 1
kinds which also derive their subsistence by collecting whatever is ‘to hand’ in the environ- 2
ment. As the archaeologist Robert Braidwood wrote in 1957, ‘a man who spends his whole 3
life following animals just to kill them to eat, or moving from one berry patch to another, 4
is really living just like an animal himself’ (Braidwood 1957: 22).
This latent ambiguity also allowed the archaeologist, V. Gordon Childe, to take up the 6
distinction between collection and production – in terms virtually identical to those 7
proposed by Engels – to draw a line not between humans and animals, but between 8
‘neolithic’ people and their successors on the one hand, and ‘palaeolithic’ hunters and 9
gatherers on the other. In crossing this line, the ancestors of present-day farmers, herdsmen 30
and urban dwellers were alleged to have set in motion a revolution in the arts of subsis- 1
tence without parallel in the history of life. Ushered in by the invention of the science 2
of selective breeding, it was a revolution that turned people, according to Childe, into 3
‘active partners with nature instead of parasites on nature’ (1942: 55). Though contem- 4
porary authors might phrase the distinction somewhat differently, the notion of 5
food-production as the singular achievement of human agriculturalists and pastoralists has 6
become part of the stock-in-trade of modern prehistory. And understanding the origins 7
of food-production has become as central a preoccupation for prehistorians as has under- 8
standing the origins of humankind for palaeoanthropologists: where the latter seek the 9
evolutionary origins of human beings within nature, the former seek the decisive moment 40
at which humanity transcended nature, and was set on the path of history.
Underlying the collection/production distinction, then, is a master narrative about how 2
human beings, through their mental and bodily labour, have progressively raised them- 3
selves above the purely natural level of existence to which all other animals are conﬁned, 4
and in so doing have built themselves a history of civilisation. Through their trans- 5
formations of nature, according to this narrative, humans have also transformed them- 6
selves. It is a fact about human beings, states Maurice Godelier, that alone among animals, 7
they ‘produce society in order to live’ – and in so doing, ‘create history’ (1986: 1, original 118

Things, plants, animals and children

emphases). By this he means that the designs and purposes of human action upon the
natural environment – action that yields a return in the form of the wherewithal for
subsistence – have their source in the domain of social relations, a domain of mental realities (‘representations, judgements, principles of thought’) that stands over and above the
sheer materiality of nature (1986: 10–11).
Godelier goes on to distinguish ﬁve ‘kinds of materiality’, depending upon the manner
and extent to which human beings are implicated in their formation. First is that part of
nature which is wholly untouched by human activity; secondly there is the part that has
been changed on account of the presence of humans, but indirectly and unintentionally;
the third is the part that has been intentionally transformed by human beings and that
depends upon their attention and energy for its reproduction; the fourth part comprises
materials that have been fashioned into instruments such as tools and weapons, and the
ﬁfth may be identiﬁed with what we would conventionally call the ‘built environment’ –
houses, shelters, monuments, and the like (Godelier 1986: 4–5). In this classiﬁcation the
critical division falls between the second and third kinds, for it is also taken to mark the
distinction between the wild and the domestic. The third part of nature is taken to consist,
primarily, of domesticated plants and animals, whereas the biotic components of the ﬁrst
and second parts are either wild or, at most, in a condition of pre-domestication. Moreover
Godelier points to the domestication of plants and animals as a paradigmatic instance
of the transforming action of humanity upon nature. This leaves us, however, with two
unresolved problems.
The ﬁrst concerns the status of hunters and gatherers who have sought not to transform their environments but rather to conserve them in a form that remains, so far as
possible, unscarred by human activity. If, as Godelier claims, ‘human beings have a history
because they transform nature’ (1986: 1), are we to conclude that humans who do not
transform nature lack history? For his own part, Godelier resists this conclusion: ‘I cannot
see any theoretical reason to consider the forms of life and thought characteristic of hunters,
gatherers and ﬁshers as more natural than those of the agriculturalists and stockbreeders
who succeeded them’ (1986: 12). The activities of hunter-gatherers, he asserts, are like
those of all human beings at all times, and unlike those of all non-human animals, in
that they are prompted by mental representations that have their source in the intersubjective domain of society. Yet apart from the construction of tools and shelters
(corresponding to the fourth and ﬁfth kinds of materiality), these representations are not
materialised in the physical substrate of nature. Hunter-gatherers have a history, but theirs
is a history that is written neither in the pages of documents nor upon the surface of the
land. It is inscribed exclusively upon the plane of mental rather than material reality.
Overturning the classical conception of hunter-gatherers as arch-representatives of
humanity in the state of nature, Godelier reaches the rather paradoxical conclusion that
it is in their societies that the boundary between the mental and the material, between
culture and nature, is most clearcut. The more that the material world is subordinated to
the ends of art, the more the world of ideas is rendered in physical form, the less clearcut
the nature/culture distinction appears to be (1986: 4).
The second problem is one to which Godelier alludes in a footnote, but fails to take
further. It is that for most non-Western people, ‘the idea of a transformation of nature
by human beings has no meaning’ (1986: 2, fn. 1). Thus the peoples of the past who
were initially responsible for domesticating plants and animals must have had quite
different ideas about what they were doing. In the next section I shall present a range of
comparable ideas drawn from the ethnography of contemporary non-Western societies.

Livelihood
The point to stress at this juncture is that the idea of history as consisting in the human 1
transformation of nature, like the ideas of nature itself and of society as an entity coun- 2
terposed to nature, has a history of its own in the Western world. By tracing this history 3
back to its roots we may ﬁnd that it has grown out of a set of understandings very different 4
from those familiar to us today, yet much closer to the apparently exotic cosmologies of 5
non-Western ‘others’.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to document the history of Western thinking 7
about humanity and nature (Glacken’s [1967] massive treatise on the subject remains 8
unsurpassed). Sufﬁce it to note that the essence of the kind of thought we call ‘Western’ 9
is that it is founded in a claim to the subordination of nature by human powers of reason. 10
Entailed in this claim is a notion of making things as an imprinting of prior conceptual 1
design upon a raw material substrate. Human reason is supposed to provide the form, 2
nature the substance in which it is realised. We have already encountered this idea of 3
making in the writings of Bacon, but more than two hundred years later it served as the 4
fulcrum of Marx’s theory of value, according to which it was the work of shaping up the 5
material from its raw to its ﬁnal state that bestowed value on what was already ‘given’ in 6
nature. It made no difference, in principle, whether that work was represented by the 7
labour of the artisan, in the manufacture of equipment, or by that of the farmer or stock- 8
breeder, in the husbandry of plants and animals. Both were conceived as instances of 9
productive making – the human transformation of nature.
Yet in arriving at his theory of value, Marx turned on its head an idea of even greater 1
antiquity, though one whose systematic elaboration had to await the writings of the French 2
Physiocrats, Quesnay and Turgot, in the eighteenth century. For these writers too, the 3
role of the artisan was to imprint a rational design upon material supplied by nature. But 4
in doing so, he created no new value. To the contrary, his work was understood to involve 5
nothing more than a rearrangement of what nature had already brought into existence. 6
The real source of wealth, according to Physiocracy, was the land, and lay in its inherent 7
fertility. And for this reason, the activities of those who worked the land, in growing crops 8
and raising animals, were understood to be fundamentally different in character from the 9
activities of those whose tasks lay in the ﬁeld of manufacture.
In an elegant analysis, Stephen Gudeman (1986: 80–4) has shown how the economic 1
doctrines of Physiocracy were closely modelled on the theory of perception and cognition 2
proposed some seventy years previously by John Locke. In Locke’s economy of know- 3
ledge, the natural world is a source of raw sensations impinging upon the receptor organs 4
of the passive human observer. The mind then operates on these received sensory data, 5
separating and combining them to form complex ideas. In just the same way, according 6
to the Physiocrats, the land furnishes its inhabitants with basic raw materials, to which 7
human reason adds form and meaning. As Gudeman puts it, ‘in this “intellectual” 8
economics, agriculture is to artisanship as sensation was to mental operation’ (1986: 83). 9
The role of the farmer is to receive the substantive yield of the land, that of the artisan 40
is to deliver the formal designs of humanity. Where the farmer’s work is productive, in 1
that it results in an inﬂux of wealth to the human community, it is nevertheless passive 2
since the creative agency in bringing forth this wealth was attributed to the land itself 3
and, behind that, to divine intervention. Conversely the artisan’s work is non-productive, 4
since it adds nothing to human wealth, but is nevertheless active since it is impelled by 5
reason (Gudeman 1986: 87).
In this view, although it would still be fair to describe the act of making things as a 7
human transformation of nature, such making is not the equivalent but the very opposite 118

Things, plants, animals and children

of production, just as artisanship is the opposite of agriculture. Production is a process of
growing, not making. The farmer, and for that matter the raiser of livestock, submits to
a productive dynamic that is immanent in the natural world itself, rather than converting
nature into an instrument to his own purpose. Far from ‘impressing the stamp of their
will upon the earth’, to adopt Engels’s imperialistic phrase (1934: 179), those who toil
on the land – in clearing ﬁelds, turning the soil, sowing, weeding, reaping, pasturing their
ﬂocks and herds, or feeding animals in their stalls – are assisting in the reproduction of
nature, and derivatively of their own kind.
In classical Greece, too, agriculture and artisanship were clearly opposed, belonging –
as Vernant remarks (1983: 253) – ‘to two different ﬁelds of experience which are to a
large extent mutually exclusive’. The contrast between growing things and making things
was delightfully phrased by the Sophist author Antiphon, writing in the ﬁfth century BC,
who invites us to imagine an old wooden bed, buried in the ground, taking root and
sprouting green shoots. What comes up, however, is not a new bed, but fresh wood! Beds
are made, but wood grows (Vernant 1983: 260). As a grower of crops rather than a maker
of artefacts, the farmer was not seen to act upon nature, let alone to transform it to human
ends. Work on the land was more a matter of falling into line with an overarching order,
at once natural and divinely ordained, within which the ﬁnalities of human existence were
themselves encompassed. Even were it technically possible to transform nature, the very
idea would have been regarded as an impiety (Vernant 1983: 254).
If there is a certain parallel here with the doctrines of Physiocracy, despite the immense
lapse of time, it is doubtless because both classical Greek and eighteenth century
Physiocratic authors were able to draw on a fund of practical experience in working on
the land. When it came to farming, they knew what they were talking about. But with
regard to artisanship, their respective notions could not have been more different. For
according to classical Greek writers, the forms which the artisan realised in his material
issued not from the human mind, as constructs of a rational intelligence, but were themselves inscribed in the order of nature. Thus the idea of making as an imposition of
rational design upon raw material would have been entirely alien to Greek thought. ‘The
artisan is not in command of nature; he submits to the requirements of the form. His
function and his excellence is . . . to obey’ (Vernant 1983: 294). This, of course, is the
precise inverse of Godelier’s assertion that in the husbandry of plants and animals, in
making tools and constructing buildings – that is, in the production of the third, fourth
and ﬁfth kinds of materiality – it is nature that submits to the requirements of human
form. The idea that production consists in action upon nature, issuing from a superior
source in society, is an essentially modern one.

INDIGENOUS UNDERSTANDING: FOUR ETHNOGRAPHIC EXAMPLES
Our next step is to turn to consider some of the ways in which contemporary non-Western
people understand their relations with cultivated plants and domestic animals. In what
follows I shall present four ethnographic examples. The ﬁrst is taken from Philippe
Descola’s (1994) study of the Achuar Indians of the Upper Amazon, the second draws
on Marilyn Strathern’s (1980) work on the people of the Mount Hagen region of the
Papua New Guinea Highlands, and the third comes from a study by Walter van Beek
and Pieteke Banga (1992) of the Dogon of Mali, in West Africa. For my fourth and ﬁnal
example I return to South America, and to the study by Stephen Gudeman and Alberto
Rivera (1990) of the peasant farmers of Boyacá, in Colombia.

Livelihood
The Achuar cultivate a great variety of plant species, of which the most ubiquitous is 3
manioc, in gardens that have been cleared through a ‘slash-and-burn’ technique from 4
primary forest. The focus of domestic life is the house, which stands at the centre of its 5
garden, surrounded in turn by a vast expanse of forest. Though a man is expected to 6
prepare a garden plot for each of his wives, the cultivation, maintenance and harvesting 7
of plots is exclusively women’s work. All members of the household regularly participate 8
in gathering activities, which are concentrated in familiar areas of the forest within close 9
reach of the garden. Beyond that is the zone of hunting, a risky space in which men 10
dominate, and to which women venture only when accompanied by their husbands.
Gathering, for the Achuar, is a relaxed affair – an occasion for a pleasant day out. But 2
hunting is a quite different matter. Men’s relations with the animals they hunt are modelled 3
on the human relation of afﬁnity: like human in-laws, the creatures of the forest are 4
inclined to be touchy, and their feelings have continually to be assuaged with liberal doses 5
of seductive charm. Above all, it is necessary to keep on the right side of the ‘game 6
mothers’, the guardian spirits of the animals, who exercise the same kind of control over 7
their charges as do human mothers over their own children and domestic animals (Descola 8
1994: 257). Motherhood, however, also extends to a woman’s relations with the plants 9
she grows in her garden. She has, as it were, two sets of offspring, the plants in her garden 20
and the children in her home, and since the two are in competition for the nurturance 1
she can provide, relations between them are far from harmonious. Manioc, for example, 2
is attributed with the power to suck the blood of human infants. Thus despite its peaceful 3
appearance, the garden is as full of menace as is the surrounding forest (1994: 206).
Applying orthodox concepts of anthropological analysis, we might be inclined to oppose 5
the forest and the garden along the lines of a distinction between the wild and the domes- 6
ticated, as though the edge of the woods also marked the outer limits of the human 7
socialisation of nature, and the point of transition at which production gives way to collec- 8
tion. But this, as Descola shows, would be profoundly at odds with Achuar understandings. 9
For in the construction and maintenance of their gardens, the Achuar do not see them- 30
selves as engaged in a project of domesticating the pristine world of the forest; indeed the 1
colonial image of the conquest of nature is entirely foreign to their way of thinking. For 2
them, the forest is itself a huge garden, albeit an untidy one, and the relations between 3
its constituents are governed by the same principles of domesticity that structure the 4
human household, yet on a superhuman scale. The tension between garden plants and 5
children mirrors, on a reduced scale, the tension between forest creatures and human 6
hunters; likewise a woman’s care for her crops and domestic animals is writ large in the 7
care of the ‘game mothers’ for the species in their charge. In short, the Achuar garden 8
ﬁgures as a microcosm of the forest: ‘it is not so much the cultural transformation of a 9
portion of wild space as the cultural homology in the human order of a cultural reality 40
of the same standing in the superhuman order’. Human society is a scaled-down version 1
of the society of nature, the garden plot ‘temporarily realizes the virtualities of a homely 2
wilderness’ (Descola 1994: 220).
The people of Mount Hagen
The people of the Mount Hagen region of Papua New Guinea (henceforth ‘Hageners’) 7
grow crops – especially taro, yams and sweet potato – in forest clearings; they also raise 118

The Achuar of the Upper Amazon

Things, plants, animals and children

pigs. They have a word, mbo, for the activity of planting, which is also used for things
that are planted such as cuttings pushed into the ground. By extension it can refer to any
other point of growth within the general ﬁeld of human relations: thus a breeding pig
can be mbo in respect of the herd it will engender, and people can be mbo in respect of
their placement in clan territory. The antithesis of mbo is rømi. This latter term is used
for things or powers that lie beyond the reach of human nurture. The principal cultivated
tubers have their wild counterparts, and these are rømi, as are wild pigs and other forest
creatures. There are also rømi spirits who tend these wild plants and animals, just as people
tend their gardens and pigs (Strathern 1980: 192). Indeed at ﬁrst glance, the terms mbo
and rømi seem to have their more or less exact equivalent in our conventional notions of
‘wild’ and ‘domestic’ respectively.
Completely absent from the Hagen conception, however, is the notion of a domestic
environment ‘carved out’ from wild nature. Mbo does not refer to an enclosed space of
settlement, as opposed to the surrounding bush or forest. Hageners do not seek to subjugate or colonise the wilderness; while the spirit masters of forest creatures have their spheres
of inﬂuence as humans have theirs, the aim is ‘not to subdue but to come to terms with
them’ (1980: 194). Rømi is simply that which lies outside the limits of human care and
sociability. Signiﬁcantly, while the opposed term mbo takes its primary meaning from the
act of planting, it is not used for any other stage of the horticultural process, nor for
garden land itself (1980: 200). In planting one does not transform nature, in the sense
of imposing a rational order upon a given materiality. Rather, one places a cutting in the
ground so that it may take root and grow.1 As its roots extend into the soil, so the plant
draws nourishment from its environment, gradually assuming its mature form.
Like the Achuar, Hageners draw a parallel between growing plants and growing children. The child, placed at birth within a ﬁeld of nurture – as the plant is placed in the
soil – steadily grows into maturity as a responsible, self-aware being, drawing sustenance
from its relationships with others even as the latter, like the plant’s roots, extend ever
further outwards into the social environment (1980: 196). There is no sense, however, in
which the child starts life as a thing of nature, to which a moral dimension of rules and
values is added on through a process of socialisation. The child does not begin as rømi,
and become mbo. It is mbo from the outset, by virtue of its planting within the ﬁeld of
human relationships. So too, in their cultivation of tubers and raising of pigs, Hageners
do not impose a social order upon an environment consisting of ‘nature in the raw’. They
rather constitute, as inherently social, the very environment within which their plants and
animals come into being, take root and grow to maturity.

The Dogon of Mali
Like many other African peoples (Morris 1995: 305–6), the Dogon draw a sharp contrast
between the categories of ana (village) and oru (bush). In and around the village, people
cultivate the staple crop of millet, and keep gardens of onions and tobacco. But they also
depend on the bush in many ways. It is a source of ﬁrewood for cooking, brewing and
ﬁring pottery. Timber is needed, too, for building houses and granaries, and for fencing
gardens. The bush also yields meat, relishes and treefruits, leaves for use as cattle fodder,
and various medicinal herbs. However, the dependence of the village on the bush goes
much deeper than this list of products would indicate. For in the Dogon view, the bush
is nothing less than the source of life itself, and with it of all knowledge, wisdom, power
and healing. But by the same token, it is greatly to be feared. It is a zone of movement

Livelihood
and ﬂux, in which all the ﬁxedness and certainties of village life are dissolved. Everything 1
shifts and changes – even trees and rocks can walk from place to place. The many spirits 2
that roam the bush can exchange body parts with living people, human hunters venturing 3
there become like the animals they hunt, and as they do so their existence in the present 4
is swallowed up in a temporal horizon that merges past and future, life and death (van 5
Beek and Banga 1992: 67–8).
Dogon cosmology envisages a kind of entropic system in which the maintenance of 7
the village depends upon a continual inﬂow of vital force from the bush, which is worn 8
down and used up in the process. If the village is a place of stability, where things stay 9
put and proper distinctions are maintained, it is also a place of stagnation. In an almost 10
exact inversion of the modern Western notion of food production as the manifestation 1
of human knowledge and power over nature, here it is nature – in the form of the bush 2
– that holds ultimate power over human life, while the cultivated ﬁelds and gardens are 3
sites of consumption rather than production, where vital force is used up. ‘Knowledge 4
dissipates . . . and power evaporates unless reinvigorated from the bush’ (van Beek and 5
Banga 1992: 69).
Peasant farmers of Boyacá
The rural folk of Colombia say that it is the earth that gives them their food; the role of 20
human beings is to assist it in bringing forth its crops. As one farmer is reported to have 1
put it: ‘Man helps the land; the earth produces the fruit’ (Gudeman and Rivera 1990: 2
25). Likewise hens give eggs, sheep give lambs and cows calves. Here, too, the farmer is 3
called upon to assist in the animals’ labour much as a midwife assists at a birth. But the 4
ultimate source of the ‘strength’ or ‘force’ (la fuerza) that enables people to work, animals 5
to reproduce and crops to grow lies in the land itself. The earth is conceived as a repos- 6
itory of strength created and sustained by God (1990: 18). Thus crops draw strength 7
from the land, humans in turn gain strength by consuming their crops (or the produce 8
of animals whose strength was drawn from their consumption of fodder), and expend 9
that strength in work on the land that enables it to yield up yet more of its strength to 30
the cycle.
Gudeman and Rivera detect in this folk model distinct echoes of eighteenth-century 2
Physiocracy. Indeed they go so far as to suggest that it offers a window on much earlier 3
notions current among farming peoples of the Old World, which still resonate through 4
the practices of Colombian rural folk as well as through the texts of European political 5
economists. The Physiocratic view that only the land yields value, which the farmer 6
harnesses on behalf of society, has its counterpart in the Colombian farmers’ notion that 7
human life is powered by the strength of the earth. Both views, moreover, invert the 8
modern Western conception that sees in the land not an active agent but an inert source 9
of raw materials to be shaped up to a human design. Marx wrote of the earth as fore- 40
most among the instruments of labour, and ever since we have tended to think of 1
production as a process wherein land is placed in the service of humanity (Meillassoux 2
1972). But Colombian rural folk place themselves in the service of the land. And they 3
regard their capacity to work not as some inner aspect of their being, as in the Marxian 4
concept of ‘labour-power’, but as God’s gift of strength, bestowed through the land and 5
its produce, and expended in their activity (Gudeman and Rivera 1990: 103–4).

Things, plants, animals and children

MAKING THINGS, FINDING THINGS AND GROWING THINGS
Let me now return to the opposition with which I began, between production and collection. There is no doubt that the primary meaning of production in the age of manufacture
is, to recall Bacon’s phrase, ‘making by art’. The term refers, in other words, to the
construction of artiﬁcial objects by rearranging, assembling and transforming raw materials supplied by nature. And if the opposite of ‘to produce’ is ‘to collect’, then collection
must mean picking up one’s supplies, as it were ‘ready-made’, from the environment. But
how can you ‘make’ a pig, a yam, or a crop of millet? And how, for that matter, can
such things be made in advance?
I believe this modern emphasis on production as making accounts for the special significance that tends to be attached to the so-called ‘artiﬁcial selection’ of plants and animals
as the key criterion for distinguishing food-production from food-collection, and hence
for determining the point of transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture and
pastoralism. The ability that Bacon dreamed of, literally to ‘make’ an animal or plant in
any way we want it, is only now coming to be realised due to developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering. For farmers and herdsmen of the past, it has never been
a realistic possibility. What they could do, however, was isolate a breeding population
within which they could select individuals for reproduction according to their conformity
to an ideal type. Just as the distinction between the artefact and the naturally given object
(such as a living organism) depends on the notion that the former is built upon a design
that is extrinsic rather than intrinsic to the material (Monod 1972: 21), so likewise artiﬁcial selection can only be distinguished from natural selection on the grounds that it is
guided by a ‘preconceived end’, an ideal suspended within the collective representations
of the human community. This is probably why the notion of domestication has come
to be so closely tied up with that of breeding: it is the closest thing to constructing the
forms of plants and animals to blueprints of human design. And this, in turn, is why
prehistorians investigating the origins of food-production are inclined to look for evidence
of the morphological divergence of the plant or animal species in question from its original ‘wild’ form, as proof that production was going on.
This procedure, however, generates its own anomalies. For in many parts of the world,
both in the past and still today, people are apparently engaged in the husbandry of plants
and animals that do not differ appreciably from their wild counterparts. Kept as pets in
the houses of the Achuar are a range of ‘domestic wild animals’ – various primates, birds
and peccary (Descola 1994: 90). The forests of Highland New Guinea are full of wild
domestic pigs, as well as a variety of plants that also appear in cultivated swiddens. And
the ﬁelds of neolithic villagers in Southwest Asia were sown with ‘domesticated wild
barley’ (Jarman 1972). Now the source of these anomalies lies in the very dichotomy
between collection and production. In terms of this dichotomy, human beings must either
ﬁnd their food ready-made in nature or make it themselves. Yet ask any farmer and he
or she will say, with good cause, that the produce of the farm is no more made than it
is found ready-made. It is grown. So our question must be as follows. Granted that by
making things we mean the transformation of pre-existing raw materials, what do we mean
by growing things? On the answer to this question must hinge the distinctions between
gathering and cultivation, and between hunting and animal husbandry.
Two common themes to emerge from the ethnographic cases presented in the previous
section point towards a solution. First, the work that people do, in such activities as ﬁeld
clearance, fencing, planting, weeding and so on, or in tending their livestock, does not

Livelihood
literally make plants and animals, but rather establishes the environmental conditions for 1
their growth and development. They are ‘mothered’, nurtured, assisted – generally cosseted 2
and helped along. Secondly, growing plants and raising animals are not so different, in 3
principle, from bringing up children. Of course it is true that modern Western discourse, 4
too, extends the notions of cultivation and breeding across human, animal and plant 5
domains, referring in the human case to a reﬁnement of taste and manners (Bouquet 6
1993: 189–90). Such reﬁnement, however, is represented as a socially approved form of 7
mastery over supposedly innate human impulses, and is the counterpart to the kind of 8
mastery over the environment that is implied by the notion of domestication as the social 9
appropriation of nature. When Achuar women compare their children to the plants in 10
their gardens, or when Hageners use the language of planting for both children and pigs, 1
they do not have this model of socialisation in mind. As Strathern puts it: ‘the child grows 2
into social maturity rather than being trained into it’ (1980: 196). What each generation 3
provides, whether in growing plants, raising animals or bringing up children, are precisely 4
the developmental conditions under which ‘growth to maturity’ can occur.2
Where does this leave the distinctions between gathering and cultivation, and between 6
hunting and animal husbandry? The difference surely lies in no more than this: the rela- 7
tive scope of human involvement in establishing the conditions for growth. This is not only 8
a matter of degree rather than kind, it can also vary over time. Weeds can become culti- 9
gens, erstwhile domestic animals can turn feral. Moreover a crucial variable, I would 20
suggest, lies in the temporal interlocking of the life-cycles of humans, animals and plants, 1
and their relative durations. The lives of domestic animals tend to be somewhat shorter 2
than those of human beings, but not so short as to be of a different order of magnitude. 3
There is thus a sense in which people and their domestic animals grow older together, 4
and in which their respective life-histories are intertwined as mutually constitutive strands 5
of a single process. The lives of plants, by contrast, can range from the very short to the 6
very long indeed, from a few months to many centuries.
Now as Laura Rival has pointed out, the planned intervention in and control over 8
nature that we conventionally associate with the idea of domestication can only be envis- 9
aged in respect of plants ‘whose growth is much faster relative to human growth and 30
maturation processes’ (Rival 1993: 648). It is as though humans could stand watch over 1
the development of their crops without growing signiﬁcantly older themselves. But the 2
more slow-growing and long-lived the plant, the more artiﬁcial this assumption appears 3
to be. In the case of the most enduring plants of all – such as certain large trees – the 4
assumption becomes wholly untenable. Indeed for the most part, trees do not ﬁt at all 5
comfortably within the terms of the orthodox distinction between the wild and the domes- 6
ticated, which may account for the curious fact that despite their manifest importance to 7
people (as our Dogon example shows), they are all but absent from archaeological and 8
anthropological discussions of the nature and origins of food production. Of an ancient 9
tree that has presided over successive human generations it would seem more appropriate 40
to say that it has played its part in the domestication of humans rather than having been 1
domesticated by them.3 In short, what is represented in the literature, under the rubric 2
of domestication, as a transcendence and transformation of nature may be more a reﬂec- 3
tion of an increasing reliance on plants and animals that, by comparison with humans, 4
are relatively fast-growing and short-lived.
I have suggested that regimes of plant and animal husbandry may best be distinguished 6
in terms of the ways in which human beings involve themselves in establishing the condi- 7
tions for growth. For example, in the cultivation of gardens, more is done to assist the 118

Things, plants, animals and children

growth of plants than when they are gathered from the bush. To grasp this idea, all that
is required is a simple switch of perspective: instead of thinking about plants as part of
the natural environment for human beings, we have to think of humans and their activities as part of the environment for plants. But behind this switch there lies a point of
much more fundamental signiﬁcance. If human beings on the one hand, and plants and
animals on the other, can be regarded alternately as components of each others’ environments, then we can no longer think of humans as inhabiting a social world of their own,
over and above the world of nature in which the lives of all other living things are
contained. Rather, both humans and the animals and plants on which they depend for a
livelihood must be regarded as fellow participants in the same world, a world that is at
once social and natural. And the forms that all these creatures take are neither given in
advance nor imposed from above, but emerge within the context of their mutual involvement in a single, continuous ﬁeld of relationships.4
With this conclusion in mind, let me return to Godelier’s ﬁve kinds of materiality,
which were also distinguished according to the manner and extent of human involvement
in their existence. In what way does Godelier’s formulation differ from our own? The
answer is that for Godelier, the formative role of humans lies in their capacity as beings
who, to various degrees, act upon, intervene in, or do things to, a domain of nature that
is external to their socially constituted selves. According to the argument I have presented,
by contrast, human beings do not so much transform the material world as play their
part, along with other creatures, in the world’s transformation of itself (I return to this
formulation in Chapter Eleven, pp. 200–1). In this view, nature is not a surface of materiality upon which human history is inscribed; rather history is the process wherein both
people and their environments are continually bringing each other into being. This is one
way of interpreting Marx’s celebrated yet enigmatic remark that ‘history itself is a real
part of natural history – of nature developing into man’ (Marx 1964: 143, original
emphases). By the same token, it is also man developing into nature. Or in other words,
human actions in the environment are better seen as incorporative than inscriptive, in the
sense that they are built or enfolded into the forms of the landscape and its living inhabitants by way of their own processes of growth.
I have been concerned, in this chapter, to dissolve the conventional dichotomy between
production and collection. In so doing, however, I seem to have ended up with another,
equally intractable dichotomy, namely between making and growing. I have observed that
in the tradition of Western thought, the idea of making – understood as the inscription
of conceptual form upon material substance – has been extended from the manufacture
of artefacts to the breeding of plants and animals, as exempliﬁed in the passage from
Bacon’s New Atlantis with which I began. It has even been extended to the raising of
children – insofar as this is regarded as a process of socialisation whereby approved norms
and values are superimposed upon the raw material of new-born human infants. In every
case it is supposed that a design or representation that has its source in the domain of
society is imprinted upon the substrate of external nature. In arguing against this view, I
have suggested that bringing up children or raising livestock, just as much as the cultivation of crops, is a process in which plants, animals or people are not so much made as
grown, and in which surrounding human beings play a greater or lesser part in establishing the conditions of nurture.
I have but one further point to make in conclusion. The orthodox Western account,
as we have seen, extends the idea of making from the domain of inanimate things to that
of animate beings. I want to suggest, quite to the contrary, that the idea of growing might

Livelihood
be extended in the reverse direction, from the animate to the inanimate. What we call 1
‘things’, too, are grown. In practice, there is more to the manufacture of artefacts than 2
the mechanical transcription of a design or plan, devised through an intellectual process 3
of reason, onto an inert substance. For as I shall show in Chapter Eighteen, the forms of 4
artefacts are not given in advance but are rather generated in and through the practical 5
movement of one or more skilled agents in their active, sensuous engagement with the 6
material. That is to say, they emerge – like the forms of living beings – within the rela- 7
tional contexts of the mutual involvement of people and their environments. Thus there 8
is, in the ﬁnal analysis, no absolute distinction between making and growing, since what 9
we call ‘making things’ is, in reality, not a process of transcription at all but a process of 10
growth.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Six

A circumpolar night’s dream

Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a ﬁre;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, ﬁre, at every turn.
William Shakespeare, A Midsummer
Night’s Dream (3, i, 97–100)

INTRODUCTION: OF THINGS AND BEINGS
We are accustomed to calling animals and plants ‘living things’. But we call ourselves
‘human beings’. Let us agree that plants and animals, human and non-human, are all
organisms. The question then arises: is an organism a thing or a being? This is by no
means an issue of mere semantics, for on the answer hangs our understanding of life
itself. If life is a property of things, then it must be reducible to some internal principle,
the possession of which distinguishes the class of objects we call organisms from classes
of other kinds, and which – from its position within the organism – drives the latter’s
development and its interactions with the environment. But if life is tantamount to
being, then we have to regard the organism not so much as a living thing than as the
material embodiment of a certain way of being alive. In other words, we should think of
the organism not as containing life, or expressing it, but as emergent within the life
process itself.
Now natural science, including the science of evolutionary biology, has developed in
the West as an inquiry into the objective properties of things. Thus the applicability of
evolutionary biology to humans depends upon our accepting that they, in a sense, are
things as well. Yet they are us, and were we but things, how would we be able to recognise ourselves for what we are? Paradoxically, if organisms are things, then to see ourselves
as organisms we must be more than organisms. Indeed it is precisely by this ‘excess’ that
we are inclined to deﬁne the scope of our common humanity. Whereas an animal such
as a bear or a chimpanzee is all organism, the human being is said to be an organism
‘plus . . .’ (Collins 1985). Its organic nature is supposedly topped up with some additional
factor – call it mind or self-awareness – that can be found not by external observation
but only by the knowledge we have of ourselves as possessing speciﬁc identities, feelings,
memories and intentions.
Herein lies the curious, split-level image of human existence which is such a characteristic feature of modern thought and science. Surely, as science insists, humans are part
of nature. They are biological organisms, composed of the same stuff, and having evolved

Livelihood
according to the same principles, as organisms of every other kind. Like other creatures, 1
they are born, grow old and die, they must eat to live, protect themselves to survive and 2
mate to reproduce. But if that were all there is to it, how could there be science? It would 3
seem that the very possibility of a scientiﬁc account of humankind as a species of nature 4
is only open for a creature for whom being is knowing, one that can so detach its conscious- 5
ness from the trafﬁc of its bodily interactions in the environment as to treat the latter as 6
the object of its concern. To be human in this sense – to exist as a knowing subject – 7
is, we commonly say, to be a person. So is the scientist a person rather than an organism? 8
How can we exist both inside the world of nature and outside of it, as organisms and 9
persons, at one and the same time?
There seems to me to be only one way out of the paradoxes and contradictions entailed 1
in modern science’s attitude to humanity. This is to build on the premise that all organ- 2
isms, including human ones, are not things but beings. As beings, persons are organisms, 3
and being organisms, they – or rather we – are not impartial observers of nature but 4
participate from within in the continuum of organic life. In order to demonstrate the 5
possibility of an account of the living world founded on this premise, and to spell out 6
some of its implications, I shall draw in this chapter on one particular anthropological 7
study of how people in a non-Western society perceive themselves and the world around 8
them. This is the account by A. Irving Hallowell of what it means to be a person among 9
the northern Ojibwa, indigenous hunters and trappers of the forests to the east of Lake 20
Winnipeg and north of Lake Superior in Canada.1
Hallowell’s article, ‘Ojibwa ontology, behavior and world view’ (OO), ﬁrst published 2
in 1960, is in my estimation one of the great classics of northern circumpolar ethnog- 3
raphy.2 I have turned to it over and over again for inspiration, and every reading has 4
yielded some new insight. I must emphasise, however, that what follows is not intended 5
as a contribution to Ojibwa ethnography. I have not carried out ﬁeldwork in the region, 6
nor do I have the deep familiarity with the literature on these people that would qualify 7
me for such a task. Rather, I offer some reﬂections which, though stimulated by a reading 8
of Hallowell’s work, are primarily motivated by the goal set out above – that is, of restoring 9
human beings to the organic lifeworld in a way that does not, at the same time, reduce 30
them to mere objects of nature. These reﬂections are not, however, entirely without ethno- 1
graphic substance, for they resonate both with themes that crop up with remarkable 2
regularity in the literature on northern circumpolar societies,3 and with my own outlook 3
which has undoubtedly been shaped by the experience of working in this region.
ANIMALS AS PERSONS
It is customary, in the West, to assume that to speak of persons is to tell of the thoughts, 8
intentions and actions of human beings. ‘Person’ and ‘human’ are all but synonyms – to 9
the extent that to ask whether non-human animals can be persons seems almost perverse. 40
Nevertheless, people in Western societies do very often treat animals, or speak of them, 1
as if they were persons. Let me brieﬂy present two examples of this tendency. The ﬁrst 2
lies in attitudes towards household pets. Many people who are convinced that, as a general 3
rule, animals cannot be persons, are quick to make an exception of their pets. But if you 4
ask them why pets are persons, or at least rather like persons, whereas other animals are 5
not, they will probably say that on account of having been raised in human households, 6
virtually as members of the family, these particular animals have become almost human 7
themselves. They are credited with human feelings and responses, spoken to and expected 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

to understand, given names, put through life-cycle rituals, and sometimes even dressed in
clothing. Thus, far from softening or obscuring the boundary between humanity and
animality, the special treatment of pets constitutes the exception that proves the rule:
namely that, in the West, to be a person is to be human. Animals can only be persons
to the extent that some of our humanity has, so to speak, ‘rubbed off’ on them through
close contact with human members of the household. And just as the animal can never
become fully human, its personhood, too, can never be more than partially developed.
That is why pets are often treated as somehow retarded, locked in perpetual childhood.
However old they are, they are never allowed to grow up, but are rather treated as cases
of arrested development.
The second example of the Western tendency to liken animals to persons concerns
fables, especially those composed for children. Our story-books are full of tales in which
human characters are turned or turn themselves into wolves, bears, mice, frogs, birds, ﬁsh,
and a host of other creatures. Some of these stories are of great antiquity. But whatever
they may have meant for people in the distant past, for contemporary audiences and
readers there is never any suggestion that they are anything but stories. The animal characters, often depicted in strikingly human form, stand in metaphorically for human ones,
and serve to illustrate distinctively human dispositions and foibles – the cunning fox, the
innocent deer, the conceited toad, the noble lion, and so on. In short, the animal characters are used to deliver a commentary on the nature of human society. Moreover no
child, raised in contemporary Western society, would make the mistake of confusing such
animal stories with natural history books, of supposing that ‘The Princess and the Frog’
is an observer’s account of the behaviour of amphibians, or that ‘Little Red Riding Hood’
is an account of the habits of the wolf. Children are taught, at a very early age, to distinguish between telling stories and recounting the ‘facts’.
Both these examples, of pet-keeping and fables, illustrate a propensity, technically known
as anthropomorphism, to ascribe human qualities to non-human beings. In the one case,
the ascription is metonymic (the animal is an extension of the human), in the other case
it is metaphoric (the animal substitutes for the human). Either way, so long as we continue
to assume that only humans can truly be persons, the attribution of personhood to animals
is bound to be anthropomorphic.4 The Ojibwa, however, do not make this assumption.
Persons, in the Ojibwa world, can take a great variety of forms, of which the human is
just one. They can also appear in a variety of animal guises, as meteorological phenomena
such as thunder or the winds, as heavenly bodies such as the sun, and even as tangible
objects such as stones that we would have no hesitation in regarding as inanimate. None
of these manifold forms in which persons appear is any more basic, or ‘literal’, than the
others. Moreover, as we shall see, persons can be encountered not only in waking life but
also, and equally palpably, in dreams and in the telling of myths. And most importantly,
they can change their form. Indeed for the Ojibwa this capacity for metamorphosis is one
of the key aspects of being a person, and is a critical index of power: the more powerful
the person, the more readily a change of form may be effected.
Though persons may appear in animal form, not all animals are persons. One can
usually tell if an animal is a person, because its behaviour will be out of the ordinary.
But some animals are always extraordinary. One such is the bear. The hunter, on encountering a bear, will act towards it as a person who can understand what is being said and
will respond according to its own volition (OO, p. 36). There is nothing in the least
anthropomorphic about this. The hunter is not regarding the bear as if it were human.
To the contrary, it is perceived to be unequivocally ursine. Unlike the pet in a Western

Livelihood
society, the personhood of the bear does not depend upon its previous contacts with 1
humans – indeed it need not have had any such contacts at all. For the same reason, the 2
bear is just as much a ‘full person’ as is the human hunter. Ojibwa relate to persons in 3
animal form as grown-ups, not as children. And whereas anthropomorphised animal- 4
persons in the West are treated as beings that need to be looked after and controlled by 5
their human guardians, the animal-persons in the environment of the Ojibwa are consid- 6
ered to be on the same level as, if not more powerful than, human beings themselves. 7
Likewise, the animals that ﬁgure as persons in the traditional narratives of the Ojibwa 8
are not anthropomorphic characters. Their tales, like our own, are replete with incidents 9
in which humans turn into animals, or marry animals, or give birth to animals, and vice 10
versa. But these are not fables, nor are they intended to deliver an allegorical commen- 1
tary on the human condition. They are tales about events that really took place, in the 2
histories of real persons, and in the same world that people ordinarily experience in the 3
course of their quotidian lives. What they recount is based on detailed, accurate observa- 4
tion of the landscape, of weather conditions and of the behaviour of animals. The 5
mythological ﬁgure of the Thunder Bird, for example, can make itself manifest in the 6
form of a peal of thunder or a kind of hawk. There is a striking correspondence between 7
the normal seasonal occurrence of thunderstorms and the period during which migratory 8
birds wintering in the south appear in Ojibwa country. In one myth, a man who marries 9
a Thunder Bird woman and goes off to live with his in-laws (the mythic ‘masters’ of 20
various species of hawk) ﬁnds himself having to eat what they call ‘beaver’, but what to 1
him are frogs and snakes – which are, indeed, the principal foods of the sparrow hawk.5 2
And the nests of the Thunder Birds can be physically identiﬁed in the landscape as collec- 3
tions of stones in high, inaccessible locations (OO, pp. 32–3).
In short, what distinguishes the Thunder Bird from any ordinary hawk is nothing like 5
what, for us, distinguishes the Wolf of Little Red Riding Hood from the wolf of the 6
forest. The distinction is not between animals of fantasy and of fact, but rather between 7
animals that are persons and animals that are not. Animal persons are no more fantastic 8
than human ones. Ojibwa do, nevertheless, differentiate between narratives of past expe- 9
rience of these two sorts of person. Hallowell calls them ‘myths’ and ‘stories’ respectively 30
(OO, pp. 26–7). Stories recount events in the lives of human beings, from the anecdotal 1
to the legendary. Myths, by contrast, tell of the lives of non-human persons – or, to be 2
more precise, the myths are these persons, who, in the telling, are not merely commem- 3
orated but actually made present for the assembled audience, as though they had been 4
brought to life and invited in. For this reason, the narration of myth is a ritualised event, 5
and there are restrictions on who can tell it and when it can be told. But despite these 6
formalities, myths are no less true, or more phantasmagoric, than stories. The difference 7
is simply that in myths, the protagonists are persons of the ‘other-than-human’ class, other- 8
wise known and addressed by the inclusive kinship term, ‘grandfathers’.
OTHER-THAN-HUMAN GRANDFATHERS
All persons, whether human or not, share the same fundamental structure. This structure 3
consists, in Hallowell’s words, of ‘an inner vital part that is enduring and an outward 4
form which can change’ (OO, p. 42). The inner essence, or soul, holds the attributes of 5
sentience, volition, memory and speech. Any being that possesses these attributes is a 6
person, irrespective of the intrinsically unstable form in which it appears. Now while 7
human persons and other-than-human grandfathers are alike in this regard, such that no 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

absolute division in kind can be drawn between them, they do differ in degree – that is,
in the amount of power a person possesses and hence in their capacity for metamorphosis.
Grandfathers are more powerful than living humans. Most powerful are the Sun, the Four
Winds, the Thunder Birds, and the spirit ‘masters’ of all the different species of animals.
These beings are immortal, but can change their form with relative ease, appearing now
as a human, now as an animal, now perhaps as some meteorological phenomenon – as
we have seen with the Thunder Bird. In myth the Bird can ﬁgure as a man or woman,
in dreams it shows up as a hawk, in waking life it announces its presence as a thunderclap. By contrast, only the most powerful human persons, such as sorcerers and shamans,
can change into a non-human form and make it back again – and then only with some
danger and difﬁculty. Sorcerers, for example, can transform themselves into bears in order
better to pursue their nefarious activities.
However for most humans, metamorphosis means death: indeed the only change of
form that all humans undergo is brought about upon their demise. As with any metamorphosis, death involves an alteration of manifest appearance, while the vital essence of
the person continues its existence in some other form. Spirits of the dead are that much
more powerful, and can manifest themselves in the guise of either ghosts (which may be
seen or heard) or animals, often birds.6 But whereas the power of human persons always
increases when they die, there is only one way in which they can grow in power during
their lifetimes, and that is through the guardianship or tutelage of one or more grandfathers. For men in particular, grandfatherly assistance is considered crucial for coping with
the vicissitudes of life. In the past, every boy, on reaching puberty, would embark upon
a prolonged period of fasting. Alone in the forest, he would hope to dream of his future
guardian, from whom he would receive blessings that would see him through all kinds of
difﬁculties in later life – so long as he met certain necessary obligations towards the grandfather concerned. In one account, for example, a boy encountered a human-like ﬁgure in
his dream, who then turned into a golden eagle. This person was the ‘master’ of the eagles.
The boy, too, was transformed into an eagle in his dream – thus winged and feathered,
he ﬂew to the south with his new protector, before returning to the point whence he
originally departed (Hallowell, Culture and Experience (CE), 1955, p. 178).
Now the idea that a human being can be turned into a bear prowling in the forest, or
an eagle soaring in the sky, is simply inconceivable within the normal canons of Western
thought. Any creature born of human parents, it is supposed, is bound within the limitations of the human bodily frame, whatever environmental circumstances may be
encountered during its lifetime. It is these bodily speciﬁcations that are ﬁxed and enduring,
whereas ways of thinking, feeling, speaking and behaving – adding up to what is conventionally known as ‘culture’ – are variable, even within the life-history of a single individual.
This seems to be the precise inverse of the Ojibwa model of the person, according to
which it is the variable body that clothes a constant spiritual essence comprising the powers
of self-awareness, intentionality, sentience, and speech. In their encounter with EuroAmericans, Ojibwa were evidently troubled by the incompatibility between these different
ontologies of personal being. John Tanner, a white man who grew up among Ojibwa
people during the early nineteenth century and subsequently wrote of his experiences,
claimed that the ursine sorcerer, prowling around at night, was actually a man dressed up
in a bear skin (CE, p. 177). This, and other similar statements by both native and nonnative informants, may be understood, according to Hallowell, as ‘rationalizations advanced
by individuals who are attempting to reconcile Ojibwa beliefs and observation with the
disbelief encountered in their relations with whites’ (OO, p. 37).

Livelihood
Rendering metamorphosis as a kind of dressing up is certainly one way of explaining it 1
– or rather, explaining it away – in terms that Westerners would understand. The person’s 2
bodily form does not actually change, it is merely concealed beneath an outer clothing, a 3
disguise. Yet as Viveiros de Castro has noted (1998), the description of metamorphosis 4
as an enclothing of the soul, far from being a peculiar response to ontological disjuncture, 5
is very widely reported in the ethnography of native Amerindian peoples. Contrary to 6
Hallowell’s interpretation, it seems that the idea of dressing up is not, in itself, foreign 7
to indigenous understanding. What is foreign is rather the idea that the function of cloth- 8
ing is to disguise or conceal. In Amerindian cosmology, clothing does not cover up the 9
body, it is a body (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 482). It serves, in other words, not to conceal 10
but to enable, furnishing the distinctive equipment – including skills and dispositions as 1
well as anatomical devices – by which a person can carry on a particular kind of life in the 2
world. Viveiros de Castro (ibid.) likens the adoption of a speciﬁc bodily form to the diver’s 3
donning of a wet-suit, the purpose of which is not to disguise the wearer as a ﬁsh, but to 4
enable him to swim like one. Thus metamorphosis is not a covering up, but an opening 5
up, of the person to the world. A person who can take on many forms can turn up in all 6
kinds of situations, now in one form, now in another, each one affording a different 7
perspective. The greater the person’s powers of metamorphosis, the wider the range of their 8
practical possibilities of being, and hence the more extensive the breadth of their experience 9
and the scope of their phenomenal presence.
The idea that by clothing himself with the bodily forms of one animal after another, 1
the wearer is enabled to proceed through a series of trials calling for diverse strengths and 2
capabilities, is beautifully illustrated by an Ojibwa story collected by Homer Huntington 3
Kidder in the 1890s. The storyteller was Jacque LePique, a character of mixed parentage 4
and ﬂuent in English and Canadian French as well as Ojibwa and Cree. The tale concerns 5
a man named Iron Maker who, along with eleven companions, sank to the bottom of a 6
lake after their boat had capsized. Following an encounter at the lake bottom with an old 7
man, an old woman and a snake, Iron Maker found himself gasping for breath at the 8
surface of the water.
He thought of the beaver, whereupon the beaver came to him and gave him his body. 1
He swam towards the shore, but before he could reach it, he felt himself losing the 2
power to keep the shape of the beaver. So he thought of the otter. Then the otter gave 3
him his body, and in that form he reached land.
There Iron Maker found himself naked in his own body. It was freezing weather 5
. . . He would have died of cold but for the help of four other animals which, one after 6
another, lent him their bodies to get home: First the bear, in whose shape he went a 7
good way, then the lynx, then the raccoon, and after that the ox (buffalo).
When Iron Maker no longer had the power to keep the shape of the ox, he was 9
pretty near his lodge. He ran home naked and fell at the door half dead with cold. 40
(in Bourgeois 1994: 69) 1
Like Puck in Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream – whose lines head this chapter, 3
and who threatened to appear in the forms, successively, of a horse, a hound, a hog, a 4
headless bear and a ﬁre – Iron Maker made it home from the bottom of the lake, ﬁrst 5
as a beaver, then as an otter, then as a bear, a lynx, a raccoon and an ox.
Now all of this leaves us with a problem of the following kind. We may accept that a 7
person can change their form at will, knowing all the while that the character in question 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

exists, like Shakespeare’s Puck, only as a dramatis persona in a masque or play, who is
actually being impersonated by an ordinary human actor. But if I were to report, in all
sincerity, having encountered such a character as Puck or Iron Maker in real life, I doubt
whether much credence would be given to my claims. People would say that if I was not
actually lying, then I must be suffering from delusions, leaving me incapable of telling
fact from fantasy, or reality from dreams. Yet these are precisely the sorts of claims that
Ojibwa make. Are they, then, lying or deluded?
Accusations of both kinds have been levelled often enough, against Ojibwa people and
others who think like them, reinforcing the stereotype of the primitive Indian who can
neither think logically nor be trusted. Anthropologists, by temperament and training, are
inclined to be rather more sympathetic to native accounts. By and large, however, they
adopt an expository strategy not unlike that of the theatre-goer attending a performance
of Shakespeare’s Dream, amounting to a willing suspension of disbelief. This strategy
makes it possible to get on with the job of understanding what people are telling us,
without our having to worry about whether there is any foundation in reality for what
they have to say (see Chapter One, p. 14). Hallowell himself does just this, when he
argues that what, for the Ojibwa, are attributes of personhood form part of a comprehensive ‘worldview’ that is projected onto reality-as-we-know-it. His concern is to
understand the world view, not the fundamental nature of reality. Yet he goes on to stress
that Ojibwa do not, themselves, ‘personify’ natural objects (OO, p. 29). For example, the
sun is perceived as a person of the ‘other-than-human’ class; it is not perceived initially
as a natural object onto which ‘person’ attributes are subsequently projected. It is not, in
other words, made into a person; it is a person, period.
Now there is more than a hint of duplicity here. It would be a mistake, says Hallowell,
to suppose that Ojibwa personify objects, yet from his standpoint as an anthropological
observer, this appears to be precisely what they are doing. Evidently what Hallowell takes
to be a particular cultural construction of an external reality is, in Ojibwa eyes, the only
reality they know. For the Ojibwa, the sun is a person because it is experienced as such;
for Hallowell the sun is not really a person but is constructed as such in the minds of
the Ojibwa. And if it is not really a person, then it cannot really undergo metamorphosis.
By this move, Ojibwa metaphysics appear to pose no challenge to our own ontological
certainties. Turning our backs on what Ojibwa people say, we continue to insist that ‘real’
reality is given independently of human experience, and that understanding its nature is
a problem for science. Must we then conclude that the anthropological study of indigenous understandings, whatever its intrinsic interest, can tell us nothing about what the
world is really like, and that it therefore has no bearing on natural scientiﬁc inquiry?

LIVING THINGS AND BEING ALIVE
This question returns us to the paradox I raised in the introduction. The notion that
persons, as beings in the world, can appear in both human and other-than-human forms
may sound strange, but it is not half as strange as the notion that to become a person –
to be in a position to know and reﬂect upon the nature of existence – means taking
oneself out of the world. The challenge for us now is to bring the person, as it were, back
‘down to earth’, to restore it to the primary context of its engagement within an environment. Taking this condition of engagement as our point of departure, can we ﬁnd some
way of making sense of Ojibwa understandings concerning such matters as metamorphosis? Can we, in other words, ground these understandings in the real experience of

Livelihood
persons in a lifeworld rather than attributing them to some overarching cosmological 1
schema for its imaginative reconstruction? To begin to address this challenge, we need to 2
go back to a question which is even more fundamental than that of what makes a person. 3
What makes something alive, or animate?
Hallowell recounts a fascinating anecdote concerning the nature of stones:
I once asked an old man: Are all the stones we see about us here alive? He reﬂected a 7
long while and then replied, ‘No! But some are.’ This qualiﬁed answer made a lasting 8
impression on me.
(OO, p. 24) 10
Now Hallowell had been led to ask this question on account of a peculiarity in the gram- 2
matical structure of the Ojibwa language. Like other languages in the Algonkian family 3
to which it belongs, a formal distinction is allegedly made in this language between 4
‘animate’ and ‘inanimate’ nouns. Stones are grammatically animate, and Hallowell was 5
keen to know why. The answer he received, however, was puzzling in two respects. First, 6
there is the general question of how something as apparently inert as a stone can possibly 7
be alive. But secondly, why should some stones be animate and others not? As Hallowell 8
recognises (OO, p. 23), the categorical distinction between animate and inanimate is not 9
one that Ojibwa articulate themselves, but was rather imposed by Western linguists who 20
brought with them their own conventional understanding of what these terms mean. 1
Before attempting to resolve the puzzle of the stones, we have, therefore, to pause to 2
consider the meaning of the animate as a category of Western thought.
Ever since Plato and Aristotle, it has been customary in the West to envisage the world 4
of nature as made up of a multitude of discrete objects, things, each with its own integrity 5
and essential properties. These things may be grouped into classes of varying degrees of 6
inclusiveness on the basis of selected properties that they are perceived to possess in 7
common. One major class, known as ‘animate’, comprises all those things that are said 8
to possess the property of life. All remaining things, that do not possess this property, are 9
‘inanimate’. There has been much debate about what it takes for something to be alive: 30
vitalists argued for the existence of some mysterious life-force that they thought was infused 1
into all organisms; mechanists dismissed the idea as unscientiﬁc hocus-pocus, but in their 2
enthusiasm to reduce organisms to clockwork they virtually dissolved the animate into the 3
category of the inanimate. The problem was only resolved, after a fashion, by the discovery 4
of the DNA molecule, popularly hailed as the ‘secret of life’, which seemed to offer a 5
basis for distinguishing living things that satisﬁed the objective canons of natural science. 6
Throughout all this debate, however, one fundamental idea has remained unquestioned, 7
namely that life is a qualifying attribute of objects. We look for it in a world that already 8
consists of things-in-themselves, whose essential nature is given without regard to their 9
positioning and involvement within wider ﬁelds of relations.
Now these are the kinds of things – stones, trees, birds, and so on – that are denoted 1
by words of the class grammarians call ‘nouns’. Thus to place the Ojibwa word for stone 2
in the grammatical category ‘animate noun’ is to assume that so far as the language is 3
concerned, all stones are things with the essential attribute of life. The same would go 4
for trees, the sun and moon, thunder, and artefacts like kettles and pipes, the words for 5
which are likewise placed in the ‘animate’ class (OO, p. 23). Judging from his qualiﬁed 6
response, this is something that even the old man whom Hallowell questioned on the 7
matter would have found hard to accept. Reﬂecting on his answer, Hallowell concludes 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

that ‘the Ojibwa do not perceive stones, in general, as animate, any more than we do.
The crucial test is experience. Is there any personal testimony available?’ (OO, p. 25).
And indeed, such testimony can be adduced: Hallowell heard tell of an instance in which,
during a ceremony, a stone was observed to roll over and over, following the master of
the ceremony around the tent, another in which a boulder with contours like a mouth
would actually open its ‘mouth’ when tapped by its owner with a knife, and yet another
where a man asked a particular stone whether it belonged to him and received a negative
response!
The critical feature of all these examples is that the liveliness of stones emerges in the
context of their close involvement with certain persons, and relatively powerful ones at
that. Animacy, in other words, is a property not of stones as such, but of their positioning
within a relational ﬁeld which includes persons as foci of power.7 Or to put in another
way, the power concentrated in persons enlivens that which falls within its sphere of inﬂuence. Thus the animate stone is not so much a living thing as a ‘being alive’. This
immediately makes sense of the old man’s remark, for whether a stone is alive or not will
depend upon the context in which it is placed and experienced. It also explains why
animacy is attributed to artefacts (like kettles and pipes) that are closely bound up with
the lives of persons. But by the same token, it makes a nonsense of the categorical distinction between living and non-living things. It is simply not the case, as Scott Atran
conﬁdently asserts, that people universally divide ‘natural objects’ into two classes, such
that every object either is, or is not, of a ‘living kind’ (Atran 1990: 56). The point is not
that Ojibwa draw classiﬁcatory distinctions along different lines, but rather that in their
ontology, life is not a property of objects at all, but a condition of being.
Indeed strictly speaking, there are no ‘natural objects’ in the Ojibwa world to classify.
As Mary Black has shown through a reanalysis of Hallowell’s ethnography, it is not by
their natures that Ojibwa identify the objects in their everyday environment, as though
each were independently endowed with a ﬁxed combination of distinctive features. Rather
these objects are apprehended ‘in terms of characteristics that deﬁne them as unstable,
changing and inconsistent’. The nature of the things one encounters, their essence, is not
given in advance but is revealed only ‘after-the-fact’, and sometimes only after the lapse
of some considerable period of time, in the light of subsequent experience – which of
course may differ from one person to another. This Ojibwa way of dealing with perception is, as Black puts it, fundamentally antitaxonomic, reducing to a shambles any attempt
to bring it within the bounds of a neatly ordered system of classiﬁcatory divisions (Black
1977a: 101–4). Black’s own ﬁeld research, conducted among the Ojibwa in the 1960s,
lends support to these conclusions. The one thing on which her informants were agreed
was in their dismissal of the tidy classiﬁcations of formal linguistic analysis. They did not
regard classes such as animate and inanimate as mutually exclusive, and objects could
freely shift from one class to the other, depending on the context (Black 1977b: 143).
Most signiﬁcantly for our current concerns, Black also notes that the Ojibwa term
bema.diziwa.d, which comes closest to ‘living things’, literally translates as ‘those who
continue in the state of being alive’. Yet the term might be more accurately glossed, she
suggests, as ‘those who have power’. Now Hallowell tells us that the Ojibwa word for life
‘in the fullest sense’, including health, longevity and good fortune, is pimädäziwim. As
such, it is something that every person strives to achieve (OO, p. 45). But life in this
sense is not given, ready-made, as an attribute of being that may then be expressed in
one way or another. It is rather a project that has continually to be worked at. Life is a
task.8 As an ongoing process of renewal, it is not merely expressive of the way things are,

Livelihood
but is the very generation of being. And power, in effect, is the potential of the life process 1
to generate beings of manifold forms. Thus conceived, it is a property not of individuals 2
in isolation but of the total ﬁeld of relations in which they are situated. Only within such 3
a ﬁeld can a person strive for pimädäziwim (OO, p. 48).
Let me return, for a moment, to the case of the rolling stone that followed its master 5
around the ceremonial tent. On what grounds was it judged to be alive? Clearly, the crit- 6
ical criterion was that it had been observed to move. It did not move of its own volition, 7
since it was controlled by the power of the master; nevertheless the stone acted, it was 8
not acted upon – for example by being pushed or pulled. But once again, in coming to 9
terms with this phenomenon, we must be wary of the characteristically Western assump- 10
tion that the world is full of things which may or may not move of their own accord, 1
depending on whether they are of the animate or inanimate class. As we have seen, it 2
would make no more sense to the Ojibwa than it does to us to suppose that the stone 3
exists as a living thing, as though the property of life were an aspect of its substantive 4
nature, of its ‘thinginess’, as distinct from its movement in the world.9 The movement is 5
not an outward expression of life, but is the very process of the stone’s being alive. The 6
same could be said of trees, which are included in Hallowell’s list of things formally clas- 7
siﬁed in Ojibwa grammar as ‘animate’ (OO, p. 23). The Western biologist would doubtless 8
be more inclined to regard the tree than the stone as a ‘living thing’, by appeal to some 9
aspect of its substantive nature such as DNA or carbon chemistry. For the hunter in the 20
woods, however, what makes a tree alive are its distinctive movements as they are regis- 1
tered in experience: the swaying of its boughs in the wind, the audible ﬂuttering of leaves, 2
the orientation of branches to the sun. Recall that the winds and the sun are persons for 3
the Ojibwa, and can move trees much as powerful humans can move stones.
Different beings, whether or not they qualify as persons, have characteristic patterns of 5
movement – ways of being alive – which reveal them for what they are. The sun, for 6
example, has its own regular pattern of rising and setting, a regularity that, in Hallowell’s 7
words, ‘is of the same order as the habitual activities of human beings’ (OO, p. 29). If 8
we were to consider the sun in abstraction from its observed movement across the sky, 9
then it would indeed appear to be a mere physical body, and its movement a mechan- 30
ical displacement. But this is not how it is presented to us in immediate experience. 1
Rather, the movement is as much a part of the way the sun is as my own habitual move- 2
ments are of the way I am. And these movements, of the sun in the heavens, of trees in 3
the wind, of animals and human beings as they go about their everyday tasks, do not take 4
place against the backdrop of a nature that is ﬁxed, with its locations and distances all 5
laid out in advance. For they are part and parcel of that total life process, of continuous 6
generation, through which the world itself is forever coming into being. In short, living 7
beings do not move upon the world, but move along with it.10 I return to this theme in 8
Chapter Eleven (pp. 198–201).
THE MEANING OF EXPERIENCE
At this point I would like to return to Hallowell’s observation, apropos the vitality of 3
stones, that ‘the crucial test is experience’ (OO, p. 25). What are we to understand by 4
this key word, ‘experience’? And what, precisely, is being tested? One approach to answering 5
these questions might be to argue as follows. There exists on the one hand a real world 6
‘out there’, customarily called nature, whose forms and composition are given quite inde- 7
pendently of the human presence, and on the other hand a world of ideas or mental 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

representations, which bears a relation of only partial correspondence to this external
reality. Some things in the world are not represented in the mind, but some images in
the mind have no counterpart in the real world. It is experience that mediates between
the two worlds, providing both the raw material – in the form of sensory data – from
which ideas are constructed, and the opportunities to test them by empirical observation.
Thus at ﬁrst glance we might form the impression that a certain stone actually moved;
this could then be checked by further examination which would either conﬁrm or refute
the initial hypothesis.
For the Ojibwa, however, knowledge does not lie in the accumulation of mental content.
It is not by representing it in the mind that they get to know the world, but rather by
moving around in their environment, whether in dreams or waking life, by watching,
listening and feeling, actively seeking out the signs by which it is revealed. Experience,
here, amounts to a kind of sensory participation, a coupling of the movement of one’s
own awareness to the movement of aspects of the world. And the kind of knowledge it
yields is not propositional, in the form of hypothetical statements or ‘beliefs’ about the
nature of reality, but personal – consisting of an intimate sensitivity to other ways of
being, to the particular movements, habits and temperaments that reveal each for what it
is. Indeed such knowledge, closely analogous to that which the skilled craftsman has of
his raw material, is not easily articulated in propositional form, and would seem to be
devalued by any attempt to do so – to disembed it from its grounding in the context of
the knower’s personal involvement with the known. This is probably the reason why a
young man who, through a dream encounter, has secured the blessing of an other-thanhuman ‘grandfather’, is forbidden under normal circumstances to speak of his experience
in any detail (OO, p. 46). You keep such things to yourself – although others can tell,
from your subsequent attitudes and behaviour, that you have a new guardian in your life.
‘The concept of the “natural”’, Hallowell tells us, ‘is not present in Ojibwa thought’
(OO, p. 28).11 Experience, therefore, cannot mediate between mind and nature, since
these are not separated in the ﬁrst place. It is rather intrinsic to the ongoing process of
being alive to the world, of the person’s total sensory involvement in an environment. What
then does experience put to the test? Let me try to answer this question by way of another
example. Visual sightings of the Thunder Bird in its hawk-like manifestation are exceedingly rare, yet one boy’s report of such a sighting – initially greeted with some scepticism
– was ﬁnally accepted when his description was found to match precisely that offered by
another man who had encountered the same bird in a dream (OO, p. 32, see also Callicott
1982: 305). People can lie about their encounters with other-than-human persons, sometimes with dire consequences, but in this case the boy must have been telling the truth.
How, otherwise, could he have described the bird so accurately? However the conditions
of truth, in this case, lie not in the correspondence between an external reality and its
ideal representation, but in the authenticity of the experience itself. Rather than conﬁrming
the factual existence of the Thunder Bird as an experience-independent datum of nature,
the boy’s vision was proof of his exceptional powers of perception. It is these powers that
are being constantly tested by experience.
Moreover experiences of this kind are formative. They contribute to the shaping of a
person’s own sense of self, and of their attitudes and orientations towards the world. Or
in short, experience is intrinsic to the generative process wherein persons – both human
and other-than-human – come into being and pursue the goal of life, each within the
ﬁeld of their relations with others. And as Hallowell pointed out in his classic article on
‘The self and its behavioral environment’ (CE, Ch. 4), the process is a mutual one. The

Livelihood
formation of the self is, at one and the same time, the formation of an environment for 1
that self, and both emerge out of a common process of maturation and personal experi- 2
ence. Through this process, ‘an intelligible behavioral environment has been constituted 3
for the individual that bears an intimate relation to the kind of being he knows himself 4
to be and it is in this behavioral environment that he is motivated to act’ (CE, pp. 85–6). 5
The self, in this view, is not the captive subject of the standard Western model, enclosed 6
within the conﬁnes of a body, and entertaining its own conjectures about what the outside 7
world might be like on the basis of the limited information available to it. On the contrary, 8
for Hallowell – as indeed for the Ojibwa who have exercised such an obvious and profound 9
inﬂuence on his thought – the self exists in its ongoing engagement with the environ- 10
ment: it is open to the world, not closed in.
At ﬁrst glance, however, this view of the self seems inconsistent with the structure of 2
personhood that Hallowell attributes to the Ojibwa. Recall that this structure consists of 3
an inner part that endures and an outward appearance that is susceptible to transforma- 4
tion. Does this not imply that the self is enclosed within its bodily garb? We have already 5
seen how the Ojibwa, in common with many other Amerindian peoples, liken the body 6
to a suit of clothing donned by the soul. Not infrequently, indeed, it is compared to a 7
box-like container. But just as clothing does not necessarily imply disguise or cover-up, 8
so containment is not equivalent to enclosure, conﬁnement, or immobilisation. Rather, 9
the body as container is conceived as a kind of vehicle that serves to extend the spatiotem- 20
poral range of a person’s movement, inﬂuence and experience. Thus what Hallowell, in 1
his characterisation of the Ojibwa person, calls its inner essence is not trapped inside the 2
outward form but rather lies behind it – behind the superﬁcial world of appearances. To 3
penetrate beneath the surface of the person is not, then, to go inside into the mind rather 4
than outside into the world. It is rather to dissolve the very boundary that separates mind 5
from world, and ultimately to reach a level where they are one and the same. Nothing 6
better illustrates this point than the difference between Western and Ojibwa interpreta- 7
tions of dreaming.
DREAMING AND METAMORPHOSIS
People in the West are encouraged to think of dreams as hallucinations, comprising a 2
stream of free-ﬂoating images that exist only in the interiority of the unconscious mind, 3
a mind that is freed during sleep from its bodily bearings in the real world. Thus we 4
consider the dreamworld to be the very opposite of the solid, physical world ‘out there’, 5
just as illusion is opposed to reality, fantasy to fact. For the Ojibwa, by contrast, the world 6
of dreams, like that of myth, is continuous with that of one’s waking life. Just as myths 7
are understood as the past experiences of other-than-human persons, so dreams are among 8
the past experiences of human selves (CE, p. 181). In their dreams, humans meet the 9
grandfatherly protagonists of myth, and carry on activities with them in a familiar land- 40
scape, albeit viewed from an unfamiliar perspective, revealing secrets of the environment 1
that one may not have noticed before but whose presence is invariably conﬁrmed by subse- 2
quent inspection. This is not to say that Ojibwa confuse dream experiences with those 3
they have while wide awake. The difference is that in dreams, the vital essence of the 4
person – the self – is afforded a degree of mobility, not only in space but also in time, 5
normally denied in waking life. While the body of the sleeper is readily visible at some 6
ﬁxed location, the self may be roaming far aﬁeld (OO, p. 41). A sorcerer, for example, 7
may be observed lying asleep in his tent, but in his dream he meets you while you were 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 101 •

out hunting in the forest. And sure enough, when you were hunting recently, you had
an unnerving encounter with a bear. The bear was the sorcerer, who was ‘bearwalking’
(OO, p. 36).12
Both Western and Ojibwa people might agree that in a certain sense, dreaming liberates the mind from its bodily housing. But whereas in the Western conception, this
amounts to a taking leave of reality, for the Ojibwa it allows complete freedom of
movement within the earthly and cosmic space of ordinary life (Callicott 1982: 304). The
dreaming mind, far from cutting its already tenuous and provisional connection with
the real world, is able to penetrate that world to the point where mind and world become
indistinguishable. This difference of interpretation has its roots in fundamental ontological
assumptions. Mainstream Western philosophy starts from the premise that the mind is
distinct from the world; it is a facility that the person, presumed human, brings to the
world in order to make sense of it. When it is not busy making sense of the world, during
‘time off’, it dreams. For the Ojibwa, on the other hand, the mind subsists in the very
involvement of the person in the world. Rather than approaching the world from a position
outside of it, the person in Ojibwa eyes can only exist as a being in the world, caught
up in an ongoing set of relationships with components of the lived-in environment.
And the meanings that are found in the world, instead of being superimposed upon it
by the mind, are drawn from the contexts of this personal involvement. Thus the dreaming
self in its nocturnal journeys, far from taking a break from the demands of coping with
reality, sets out in search of meanings that will help to make sense of the experiences of
waking life.
With these observations in mind, let me return to the problem of metamorphosis. How
are we to respond to the objections of the sceptic to the effect that whatever people may
say, humans cannot really turn into eagles or bears, or thunder into a kind of hawk, or
vice versa? From an Ojibwa perspective, this objection is not so much false as beside the
point. Metamorphosis may not occur in ordinary waking life, but it certainly occurs in
dreams. And as Hallowell is at pains to stress, ‘there is nothing psychologically abstruse
about the incorporation of dreams into the category of self-related experiences’ (CE,
p. 96). The awareness of the self is as phenomenally real when one is dreaming as when
one is awake, and these dream experiences are built into the constitution of the self by
memory processes that are no different from those working on the experiences of waking
life. Consider the case of the boy who, in the midst of a storm, witnessed the Thunder
Bird in its hawk-like guise. What if he was only dreaming? Even when awake, we too
can sometimes let our imaginations wander, and see things that are not ‘really’ there. But
from the point of view of the experience of the self, it makes no difference whether the
boy was awake, day-dreaming or actually asleep. He still saw the bird, was moved to
wonder by its presence, and remembered the encounter for the rest of his life. Experiences
undergone when asleep are just as much a part of autobiographical memory as are experiences when awake (OO, p. 42).
If, then, we accept that whether awake or asleep, the person’s encounters are those of
a being-in-the-world, it follows, as Hallowell puts it, ‘that metamorphosis can be personally experienced’ (CE, p. 180). Far from covering over a solid substrate of literal reality
with layer upon layer of illusion, what dreams do is to penetrate beneath the surface of
the world, to render it transparent, so that one can see into it with a clarity and vision
that is not possible in ordinary life. In dreams, for the Ojibwa, the world is opened up
to the dreamer, it is revealed. This is why they attach such a tremendous importance to
dreaming as a source of knowledge, for the knowledge revealed through dreams is also a

Livelihood
source of power. Of course this knowledge is of a different kind from what people in the 1
West call science. As I pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, the very project 2
of natural science is premised on the detachment of the human subject from the world 3
that is the object of his or her inquiry. The Ojibwa, starting off from the opposite premise 4
– that the subject can exist only as a being in the world – have arrived at something quite 5
different: not a natural science but a poetics of dwelling (on this contrast, see Chapter 6
One, pp. 25–6). And it is within the context of such a poetics that Ojibwa ideas about 7
metamorphosis, the personhood of the sun, the winds and thunder, the liveliness of stones, 8
and so on, should be understood.
THE SOUNDS OF SPEECH
I shall return, in the conclusion to this chapter, to the relation between poetics and science. 3
Before doing so, I should like to elaborate further on the contrast between Western and 4
Ojibwa models of the person with particular reference to the criterion which, more than 5
anything else, is adduced to justify claims to the unique status of humanity: namely the 6
capacity for speech. For the Ojibwa, according to Hallowell, the essential powers of person- 7
hood include, besides speech, sentience, volition and memory. Those of us brought up in 8
the Western tradition of thought would have no particular problem with this idea. We 9
do have a problem, however, when it comes to the attribution of these powers to non- 20
human animals, and even more of a problem in attributing them to things that we would 1
regard as inanimate. To give a lead into this problem, let me recount one more anecdote 2
from Hallowell’s Ojibwa study. An old man and his wife are sitting in their tent, and a 3
storm is raging outside. There is thunder and lightning. The thunder comes in a series 4
of claps. The old man listens intently. Then he turns to his wife and asks, quite casually 5
and in a matter-of-fact tone of voice, ‘Did you hear what was said?’ ‘No’, she replies, ‘I 6
didn’t catch it’ (OO, p. 34). What are we to make of this?
Certainly, so long as we remain with a Western view of the nature of sentience, voli- 8
tion, memory and speech, the story seems incredible. The language of agency that we are 9
accustomed to use posits a being, the agent, who is endowed with will and purpose, and 30
whose existence and identity are given independently of any action that he or she chooses 1
to initiate. Thus I may or may not choose to speak, or I may decide to say one thing 2
rather than another, but as a being with intentions and purposes – that is, as a person – 3
I am not the same as my speech. Likewise I may choose to clap my hands, but as a phys- 4
ical event in the world, the clap exists apart from myself – the person who claps. Notice 5
the similarity between this notion of agency, as an inherent attribute of persons as distinct 6
from their overt behaviour, and the notion of animacy built into the Western notion of 7
‘living things’, which, as we have already seen, construes life as a substantive property of 8
objects as distinct from their movement in the world.
Does the thunder, then, clap like I do? Though we might say ‘the thunder claps’, we 40
know perfectly well that we are speaking ﬁguratively, as though there were some being in 1
the heavens with intentions and purposes rather like our own, and who claps like a human 2
person, except on a more awesome scale. In reality, we are sure there is no such cosmic 3
being. And to get around the problem of how something can occur without an agent to 4
produce it, we may use an alternative form of words, such as ‘there was a clap of thunder’. 5
The point is that thunder does not exist separately from its clap, in the way that I am 6
supposed to exist separately from mine. Rather, the clap is thunder; it is the acoustic form 7
of thunder’s phenomenal presence in the world. Through the clap, the thunder audibly 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 103 •

exists for those who hear it. Let me put this contrast in another way, while keeping for
the moment to the terms of the Western model of personal agency. When I speak, or for
that matter when I clap, it is because I have an idea. My concern is to communicate that
idea, and I do so by means of coded signs or signals which travel in the medium of sound.
By converting ideas in the mind into physical impulses in the world, information is transmitted. But the thunder is not transmitting a message. Of course it affects us; we are
moved by the sound, perhaps a little scared. But we do not look for a message in the
sound or ask, as did the old man in Hallowell’s story, ‘Did you hear what was said?’
As this example shows, Western thought systematically distinguishes the sounds of
speech, along with other sound-producing gestures whose purpose is to give outward
expression to inner ideas or mental states, from the sounds of nature that are just there
but have not been produced by anybody. My clap and the thunderclap fall on either side
of this division. And the dichotomy between interior mental states and their outward
physical or behavioural expression that underwrites this conception of the distinctiveness
of speech also applies to the way we tend to think about other aspects of personhood –
sentience, volition, memory. Thus volition implies the intentionality of action, but Western
thought sees intentionality as residing not in the action itself but in a thought or plan
that the mind places before the action and which the latter is supposed to execute. Likewise
we are inclined to think of memory as a store of images in the mind, rather than of
remembering as an activity situated in the world. And we talk about sentience in terms
of inner states or ‘feelings’, instead of focusing on the perceptual activity of feeling the
world around us. In short the self, as the locus of ideas, plans, memories and feelings,
seems to exist as a substantive entity quite independently of where it is and what it does.
Behind all this is a model of the person which, as we have already seen, identiﬁes the
self with an interior intelligence, the conscious mind, enclosed by its physical container,
the body. According to this model, the body picks up sensory signals from the world
around it and passes them to the mind, which processes them to form images or representations. Through a logical manipulation of these representations, the mind formulates
plans of action, which are then passed as instructions for the body to execute in the world.
The mind itself may be envisaged as many-layered, with outer layers of consciousness
covering over deeper, more subterranean levels of the unconscious. Locked up in there,
directly known only to ourselves, are our thoughts, feelings and memories, which can only
be released, and made known to others, by way of their bodily enactment in speech and
gesture. The Ojibwa model of the person, however, is quite different. As shown schematically in Figure 6.1, this model does not posit the self in advance of the person’s entry
into the world; rather, the self is constituted as a centre of agency and awareness in the
process of its active engagement within an environment. Feeling, remembering, intending
and speaking are all aspects of that engagement, and through it the self continually comes
into being.
In short, the Ojibwa self is relational (Bird-David 1999: S77–8). If we were to ask
where it is, the answer would not be ‘inside the head rather than out there in the world’.
For the self exists, or rather becomes, in the unfolding of those very relations that are set
up by virtue of a being’s positioning in the world, reaching out into the environment –
and connecting with other selves – along these relational pathways. Taking this view of
the person, as Hallowell does, it is clear that no physical barrier can come between mind
and world. ‘Any inner–outer dichotomy’, he asserts, ‘with the human skin as boundary,
is psychologically irrelevant’ (CE, p. 88). But this is precisely the dichotomy, as we have
seen, by which speech and similar expressive gestures are conventionally distinguished from

Livelihood
MIND
WORLD
perceptual input
feelings
memories
plans
ideas
behavioural output
BODY
THE OJIBWA MODEL
SELF
ENVIRONMENT
 feeling
remembering
 intending
 speaking
Figure 6.1 Western and Ojibwa models of the person.
the sounds of nature. To take Hallowell at his word means having to adopt a quite 8
different view of speech, not as the outward expression of inner thoughts, but as one of 9
the ways in which the self manifests its presence in the world. Thus when I speak or clap, 30
I myself am not separate from the sound I produce – of my voice or the mutually percus- 1
sive impact of my hands. These sounds are part of the way I am, they belong to my being 2
as it issues forth into the environment. In other words, speech is not a mode of trans- 3
mitting information or mental content; it is a way of being alive.
Now if we take this view of speech, there is no longer anything so odd about supposing, 5
as the Ojibwa do, that thunder can speak, and that other people can hear. The rumbling 6
of thunder is the manifestation of its presence in the world, just as the sounds of human 7
speaking, singing, clapping or drumming are manifestations of ours. Likewise in ‘conjuring 8
performances’ (Hallowell 1942, 1976: 459), when the voices of grandfatherly other-than- 9
human persons are heard to issue from the interior of a barrel-shaped tent which is 40
constantly shaken about by their activity, each character makes his presence felt, and is 1
recognised by the audience, on account of the peculiarity of his speech, including features 2
of voice, vocabulary and intonation. Thus the world in which the Ojibwa dwell is poly- 3
glot, full of beings with their own diverse styles of speaking or singing.13 As people move 4
through the forest in hunting, or hear myths being recited, or sit around the outside of 5
the conjuring lodge, they constantly listen out for the sounds that are the signatures of 6
these manifold life-forms, and respond with speech-sounds of their own. Non-human 7
sounds like thunder or animal calls, the voices of other-than-human persons, and the 118
THE WESTERN MODEL

A circumpolar night’s dream • 105 •

speech of human beings are alike in that they not only have the power to move those
who hear them, but also take their meaning from the contexts in which they are heard.
In these respects, no fundamental line of demarcation can be drawn between the sounds
of nature and of human speech.
Is there any signiﬁcance, then, in the fact that the thunder was heard instead of seen?
There is a long tradition in the history of Western thought, which I review at length in
Chapter Fourteen, of distinguishing between vision and hearing along the lines that the
former is remote and objective, cutting the viewer off from things seen, whereas the latter
is intimate and subjective, establishing a kind of interpenetration or resonance between
the listener and the world. There are some hints, in Hallowell’s account, that the Ojibwa
might make a similar kind of distinction. Thus he tells us that under no circumstances can
the inner essence of the person, the soul, be a direct object of visual perception. ‘What
can be perceived visually is only that aspect of being that has some form or structure . . .
The only sensory mode under which it is possible to directly perceive the presence of souls
. . . is the auditory one’ (CE, pp. 179–80). This is why the other-than-human persons
of the shaking tent ceremony are heard but never seen. So far as the audience is concerned
these persons are their voices, just as thunder is its clap. In both cases sound is of
the essence of being rather than its outward expression. However there are counterindications, too, that Ojibwa might not, or at least not always, make such a radical distinction between seeing and hearing.
One such indication is that ghosts, the outward form of spirits of the dead, can be
heard as well as seen. They are known to whistle (CE, p. 174). But more signiﬁcantly,
the notion that vision presents us with a world of objective forms rests upon an assumption that is incompatible with the relational model of the person presented above. This
assumption, which is implicit in most studies of visual perception by Western psychologists, is that seeing things involves the formation of images in the mind on the basis of
sensory data drawn from the play of light upon the retinal surfaces of the eyes. Now in
an earlier section on the meaning of experience for the Ojibwa, I showed that for a being
who is alive to its surroundings, experience does not mediate between things in the world
and representations in the mind, but is intrinsic to the sensory coupling, in perception
and action, of the awareness of the self to the movement of those features of the environment selected as foci of attention. This view of experience calls for a quite different
understanding of vision. It would be premised on the notion of the perceiver as an active
participant in an environment rather than a passive recipient of stimuli, one whose vision
penetrates the world rather than holding up a mirror to it. David Smith, writing of the
Chipewyan of the northwest Canadian subarctic, has drawn attention to the importance
of precisely this kind of vision to their ‘bush sensibility’. The hunter and trapper, making
his way through bush or forest, has at all times to watch what is going on. Yet as Smith
also shows, regarded as a form of dynamic, sensory resonance, seeing does not differ in
principle from hearing, and when it comes to people’s pragmatic, ﬁrst-hand experience of
moving around in the environment, they are so closely intertwined as to be inseparable
(Smith 1998: 413–14, see also Chapter Fourteen, pp. 276–81). I suspect that this is as
true for the Ojibwa as it is for the Chipewyan, and therefore that vision and hearing are
not, in fact, sharply differentiated in their practice.14
Before leaving the topic of hearing and speech, one more issue remains to be dealt
with. It arises from Hallowell’s remark, apropos the old man’s questioning of his wife
about the thunder, that ‘he was reacting to this sound in the same way as he would
respond to a human being, whose words he did not understand’ (OO, p. 34). We have

Livelihood
seen that the Ojibwa lifeworld is polyglot, inhabited by manifold beings each with their 1
own particular pattern of speech. It is tempting to compare these different patterns to the 2
diverse languages of human communities, as though understanding the sounds of thunder, 3
the winds, the various forms of animal life, and so on were a problem of translation, of 4
rendering meanings expressed in a multitude of foreign tongues in terms of one’s own. 5
Was the old man, then, asking his wife to translate for him? Were the words of the 6
thunder spoken so quickly that, with his imperfect grasp of the language, he failed to 7
grasp what had been said? Now the metaphor of translation implies a certain view of 8
language or speech, as a vehicle for the outward expression of inner ideas. To translate 9
is, then, to ‘carry across’ an idea encoded in one expressive medium into the terms of 10
another. I have argued, however, that in attributing the power of speech to thunder, 1
Ojibwa do not suppose that it is trying to transmit ideas to humans, but rather that its 2
presence in the world, like that of other beings whether human or other-than-human, can 3
take an acoustic form. Responding to that presence with sensitivity and understanding is 4
not therefore a matter of translation. It is more a matter of empathy.
Consider, for example, the response of a mother to the cry of her baby. Because of the 6
special relationship between them, she hears that cry – it is immediately intelligible to her 7
in a way that the cries of other infants are not. To be understood, the cry does not ﬁrst 8
have to be rendered intelligible through translation into a language that she and others 9
can comprehend. I would suggest that the old man in Hallowell’s story may have heard 20
the thunder in the same way. He, too, must have had a special relationship with the 1
Thunder Bird. Indeed in one of his last papers on the Ojibwa, ﬁrst published in 1966, 2
Hallowell adds a crucial qualiﬁcation to his earlier interpretation of the story of the old 3
man, the old woman and the thunder. ‘By and large’, he observes, ‘the Ojibwa do not 4
attune themselves to receiving messages every time a thunderstorm occurs’. Thus to under- 5
stand the old man’s response we have to realise that he had had previous contacts with 6
the Thunder Bird in the dreams of his puberty fast (Hallowell 1976: 459). He was there- 7
fore sensitised to the sound of thunder in a way that ordinary Ojibwa (including his wife) 8
were not. He could empathise with it. Of course, total empathy is as impossible to achieve 9
as perfect translation. But they proceed in quite different ways. Rather than shifting into 30
another register of expression, the achievement of empathy means taking on another way 1
of being. Full understanding, in short, is attained not through translation but through meta- 2
morphosis. And this happens, above all, in dreams.
NATURALISM AND ANIMISM
Are the Ojibwa animists? In recent anthropology the concept of animism has had a rather 7
bad press, on account of its liberal use in the past to brand, as primitive superstition, 8
systems of belief which allegedly attribute spirits or souls to things, living or non-living, 9
which to any rational, thinking person are ‘obviously’ mere objects of nature (for a review 40
of these usages, see Bird-David 1999: S67–8). Philippe Descola, however, suggests a way 1
of considering animism that is rather more respectful of indigenous understandings. 2
Animism, he writes, is ‘a kind of objectiﬁcation of nature [which] endows natural beings 3
not only with human dispositions, granting them the status of persons with human 4
emotions and often the ability to talk, but also with social attributes – a hierarchy of posi- 5
tions, behaviours based on kinship, respect for certain norms of conduct’ (Descola 1992: 6
114). Though Descola draws his ethnographic illustrations from Amazonian societies, this 7
characterisation of what he calls ‘animic systems’ would seem readily applicable to the 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 107 •

Ojibwa case as depicted in Hallowell’s account. Critically, in such a system, relations
between persons – that is, social relations – can override the boundaries of humanity as
a species. Thus, as Hallowell reports, ‘the world of personal relations in which the Ojibwa
live is a world in which vital social relations transcend those which are maintained with
human beings’ (OO, p. 43). To this one might add that a person’s social relations are
carried on in the same space as, and are continuous with, relations with other constituents
of their environment, that is with non-persons. There is, then, no radical break between
the domains of social and ecological relations.
Following Descola’s lead, we might set out to draw a systematic comparison between
the animism of peoples like the Ojibwa and the naturalism of Western thought and science.
Whereas animism takes the relational character of the world as an ontological a priori,
against which the ‘naturalness’ of beings – the material forms in which they appear –
stands out as unstable and problematic, naturalism takes it for granted that nature really
exists, as an ontological domain of order and necessity where things are what they are, in
themselves. Against this world of nature, it is the status and the forms of human culture
that appear problematic (Descola 1996a: 88, see also Viveiros de Castro 1998: 478). Yet
for Descola, animism and naturalism (along with totemism, consideration of which I
reserve for the next chapter) may be regarded as alternative ‘schemata of praxis’, in other
words as ‘mental models which organise the social objectivation of non-humans’ (1996a:
87). This appeal to the language of mental models, to the idea of accommodating beings
that are really non-human into schemes of representation that construct them as social
and therefore human, belongs squarely within a naturalist ontology, and it is from this
that the terms of the comparison are derived. For what these terms do is to preserve a
space for ‘really natural’ nature which is unaffected by the diverse constructions that the
human mind might place upon it. Thus the comparison between naturalism and animism,
since it is done on naturalism’s terms, is hardly a fair or balanced one (see Chapter Three,
pp. 41–2).
My purpose in this chapter has been to redress the balance. Instead of trying to comprehend Ojibwa understandings within a comparative framework which already presupposes
the separation of mind and nature, I have been concerned to place the mode of understanding of Western science within the context of the primary existential condition,
revealed in Ojibwa thought and practice, of being alive to the world. Let me summarily
take stock of these two approaches. The ﬁrst posits a world ‘out there’ full of objects,
animate and inanimate. The life process of animate objects, being the expression of their
essential nature (nowadays understood as their genetic constitution) under given environmental conditions, is understood to be purely consequential, an ‘effect’ (see Chapter One,
p. 19). Hence an additional principle, of mind or consciousness, has to be invoked to
account for the powers of intentionality and awareness that we normally attribute to
persons. In animic systems such as those of the Ojibwa, these powers are said to be
projected onto non-human kinds. So long as we follow Descola in assuming that in reality,
they are reserved for human beings, such projection is bound to be anthropomorphic. If,
in other words, only humans really have intentions, to represent non-humans such as bears
as though they were persons with intentions is necessarily to represent them as human (see
Kennedy 1992: 9). That is why Descola builds a component of anthropomorphism into
his very deﬁnition of animism, as a system that endows natural beings with human capacities. Only beings thus endowed, it seems, can have social relations.
Working from an Ojibwa notion of animacy, not as an empirical property of things
but as an existential condition of being, my argument has followed an alternative path.

Livelihood
This has been to envisage the world from the point of view of a being within it, as a 1
total ﬁeld of relations whose unfolding is tantamount to the process of life itself. Every 2
being emerges, with its particular form, dispositions and capacities, as a locus of growth 3
– or in Ojibwa terms, as a focus of power – within this ﬁeld. Mind, then, is not added 4
on to life but is immanent in the intentional engagement, in perception and action, of 5
living beings with the constituents of their environments. Thus the world is not an external 6
domain of objects that I look at, or do things to, but is rather going on, or undergoing 7
continuous generation, with me and around me. As such primary engagement is a condi- 8
tion of being, it must also be a condition of knowledge, whether or not the knowledge 9
in question is deemed to be ‘scientiﬁc’. All properly scientiﬁc knowledge rests upon obser- 10
vation, but there can be no observation without participation – without the observer’s 1
coupling the movement of his or her attention to surrounding currents of activity. Thus 2
the approach I have followed here is not an alternative to science, as animism is to natu- 3
ralism; it rather seeks to restore the practices of science to the contexts of human life in 4
the world. For it is from such contexts that all knowledge grows.
This approach has two further implications that I would like brieﬂy to explore. The 6
ﬁrst takes us back to the question of anthropomorphism, the second concerns what I shall 7
call the ‘genealogical model’. Natural science, as von Bertalanffy has put it (1955: 258–9), 8
approaches the world through a ‘progressive de-anthropomorphization’, that is, through 9
the attempt to expunge from its notion of reality all that can be put down to human 20
experience. Thus puriﬁed, nature is revealed to a detached human reason as a domain of 1
things in themselves. Now Ojibwa ontology, too, could be said to entail a process of de- 2
anthropomorphisation, but this operates in a quite different direction. Instead of severing 3
the link between reality and human experience, Ojibwa ontology recognises the reality of 4
the experience of other-than-human beings.15 All experience depends on taking up a posi- 5
tion in the world, tied to a particular form of life, but for the Ojibwa the human is but 6
one form out of many. This, of course, undermines the core assumption that Descola 7
brings to his characterisation of animic systems as inherently anthropomorphic, namely 8
that experience depends upon powers of awareness and intentionality that mark their 9
possessors as uniquely human.
The genealogical model is a way of thinking about the relations between animate beings 1
which rests on the idea that every such being is speciﬁed, in its essential nature, prior to 2
commencing its life in the world. According to the model, the elements of the speciﬁca- 3
tion are received as a kind of endowment, passed on independently of the being’s 4
interaction with its environment. And it is in the passing on or ‘inheritance’ of this endow- 5
ment, from generation to generation, that relations are constituted. I shall consider this 6
model and its implications at length in Chapter Eight. Sufﬁce it to say at this point that 7
the model is central not only to the way modern biology conceives of species and their 8
phylogenetic connections, but also to the conventional anthropological understanding of 9
kinship. Thus a simple line on a kinship diagram indicates that some component of the 40
essence of a person is received, by transmission, at the point of conception, ahead of that 1
person’s growth in an environment. Now from the genealogical model, it is easy to derive 2
the following propositions: ﬁrst, membership of the human – or any other – species is 3
ﬁxed by birth; secondly, the animals most closely related to humans are those (namely 4
the great apes) with which they have the closest genealogical connections; and thirdly, 5
human kinship relations cannot crosscut the species barrier.
From the Ojibwa perspective, none of these propositions is valid. We have seen that 7
beings can change from one species-form to another, that the animals closest to humans 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 109 •

are those such as bears and eagles which are fellow participants in the same life-world,
and that one speciﬁc category of kin – namely ‘grandfathers’ – admits persons of both
human and other-than-human kinds. Ojibwa ontology, however, is incompatible with the
genealogical model at a more fundamental level. For if the forms of beings are not expressed
but generated within the life process, then these forms cannot be passed on as part of any
context-independent speciﬁcation. One cannot, in other words, lay down the form that
a being will take independently of the circumstances of its life in the world. Kinship, in
particular, is not about handing down components of a person-speciﬁcation, but about
the ways in which other persons in my environment, through their presence, their activities and the nurturance they provide, contribute to the process of my own growth and
wellbeing. And since these others may be non-human as well as human, there is nothing
in the least strange about the extension of kinship relations across the species boundary,
nor do we have to set up a distinction between ‘real’ and ‘ﬁctive’ kinship in order to
accommodate cases of this kind. To receive blessings from my other-than-human grandfathers, it is not necessary to suppose that I am descended from them in the genealogical
sense.

CONCLUSION
Ever since Darwin, Western science has cleaved strongly to the view that humans differ
from other animals in degree rather than kind. Yet it is a view that has raised more problems than it has solved. For if we ask on what scale these differences of degree are to be
measured, it turns out to be one that places human beings unequivocally at the top. It
is the scale of the rise of reason, and its gradual triumph over the shackles of instinct.
Where Darwin differed from many (though by no means all) of his predecessors was in
both attributing powers of reasoning to sub-human animals and recognising the powerful
sway of instinct even on the behaviour of humans beings. As he argued in The Descent
of Man (1871, Chs 3 and 4), the beginnings of reason can be found far down in the scale
of nature, but only with the emergence of humanity did it begin to gain the upper hand.
In short, for Darwin and his many followers, the evolution of species in nature was also
an evolution that progressively liberated the mind from the promptings of innate disposition. Moreover in bringing the rise of science and civilisation within the compass of the
same evolutionary process that had made humans out of apes, and apes out of creatures
lower in the scale, Darwin was forced to attribute the ascendancy of reason in the West
to innate endowment, a conclusion that is utterly unacceptable today. Modern science has
responded, by and large, by dissociating the historical process of civilisation from the
evolution of the species, thereby compromising the thesis of continuity. Humans are made
to appear different in degree, not kind, from their evolutionary antecedents by attributing
the movement of history to a process that differs in kind, not degree, from the process
of evolution!
I have been searching, in this chapter, for a way of understanding the continuity of the
relations between human beings and all the other inhabitants of the earth which does not
fall foul of the difﬁculties of the argument by degree – an argument that is unashamedly
anthropocentric in taking human powers of intellect as the measure of all things, that can
only comprehend the evolution of species in nature by supposing an evolution of reason
that takes them out of it, and that, if applied consistently, is incompatible with any ethical
commitment to shared human potential. I have tried to show that the ontology of a nonWestern people, the Ojibwa, points the way towards a solution. I do not mean to suggest

Livelihood
for one moment that the Ojibwa orientation to life in the world is without paradoxes of 1
its own. Nor would I wish to argue that it offers a viable substitute for science. Earlier, 2
I suggested that what the Ojibwa have arrived at is not an alternative science of nature 3
but a poetics of dwelling. In the past, there has been a tendency to write off such poetics 4
as the outpourings of a primitive mentality that has been superseded by the rise of the 5
modern scientiﬁc worldview. My conclusion, to the contrary, is that scientiﬁc activity is 6
always, and necessarily, grounded in a poetics of dwelling. Rather than sweeping it under 7
the carpet, as an embarrassment, I believe this is something worth celebrating, and that 8
doing so will also help us do better science.

Culture, nature, environment • 111 •

Chapter Seven

Totemism, animism and the
depiction of animals

INTRODUCTION
Art, it is often supposed, is one of the hallmarks of humanity. It reveals a capacity, common
to all human beings, to disengage consciousness from the current of lived experience, so
as to treat that experience as an object of reﬂection. Such reﬂection is the work of the
imagination, and its products are symbolic representations. In visual art, these representations are expressed in painting, drawing and sculpture. Throughout history, in cultures
around the world, non-human animals have always ﬁgured as key topics of artistic representation. Indeed from earliest times, human beings seem to have been fascinated by their
diverse forms and movements, and to have desired to express this aesthetic appreciation
in visual media.
What I have just set out is a fairly conventional view, not only in the academic disciplines of archaeology, anthropology and art history but also, I think, more widely among
those of us who have been raised within the conventions of the Western ‘art world’. I
believe, however, that it is almost entirely false, and in this chapter I want to show why.
My argument, in a nutshell, is that it results from the retrojection, onto the entire ﬁeld
of pre-modern or non-Western societies, of notions of humanity and animality, of culture
and nature, and of art as representation, that have their source in Western modernity.
The ﬁeld of non-Western ‘art’ is vast, and obviously I cannot deal with it all. Instead, I
shall conﬁne my attention to the paintings, drawings and carvings of certain peoples
conventionally known in anthropological literature as ‘hunters and gatherers’. This is not
the place to debate the validity of the category; the important point for our present
purposes is that people who hunt and gather for a subsistence generally have an extremely
close and intimate knowledge of the landscape and its plant and animal inhabitants, on
whose continuity or regeneration their life depends. They stand, if you will, at the opposite extreme from the afﬂuent Westerner who may ﬁnd the wild animal a beautiful thing
to look at, whether directly or more often through the lens of a camera, so long as it
remains at a safe distance which precludes any closer involvement.
In order to avoid the unwanted connotations of the concept of ‘art’, I shall refer to
the animal-like ﬁgures that hunter-gatherers draw, paint or carve as ‘depictions’. Though
far from ideal for the purpose, it is the most neutral term I can ﬁnd. Obviously, to say
of a ﬁgure that it depicts an animal is to suggest that it bears some iconic resemblance
to the creature in question. It does not necessarily follow, however, that the one represents
the other (Gibson 1979: 279–80). But if depictions are not representations, what are they?
How else are we to interpret the correspondence between the ﬁgure and the animal it
evokes? The answers to these questions, I argue, depend upon ways of understanding the

Livelihood
relationships between human beings, animals and the land. To show how this is so, I 1
intend to contrast two such understandings, which I denote by the terms ‘totemism’ and 2
‘animism’. These should be taken as labels of convenience only, and I should move at 3
once to correct the misleading impression to which adding the ‘-ism’ is apt to give rise, 4
namely that the terms refer to coherent and explicitly articulated doctrinal systems. They 5
are, of course, nothing of the sort, but rather orientations that are deeply embedded in 6
everyday practice. Or to put it another way, they are not so much systems to which people 7
relate as immanent in their ways of relating.
Furthermore, I have no wish to become embroiled in arguments about the extent to 9
which the diverse beliefs and practices that have been brought under the respective rubrics 10
of totemism and animism share features in common. Sufﬁce it to say that my view of 1
totemism rests largely on my reading of ethnographic material from Australian Aboriginal 2
societies, and my view of animism has its basis in the ethnography of the circumpolar 3
North. Ironically, the word ‘totem’ actually comes from the language of the Ojibwa, a 4
native people of northern North America whose basic ontology, as we saw in the last 5
chapter, is unquestionably animic. It entered the anthropological literature by way of an 6
account written by the Englishman J. K. Long, who was trading with the Ojibwa towards 7
the end of the eighteenth century, as a label for systems of ritual and belief that associate 8
particular social groups, such as clans, with particular natural species, usually of animals. 9
For various reasons, internal to the history of social anthropology, the locus classicus for 20
such systems subsequently shifted from North America to Australia. More recent ethno- 1
graphic studies of Australian Aboriginal societies showed, however, that the association of 2
clans with species is a corollary of a more fundamental set of linkages between people, 3
land and ancestral beings. Both for ethnographers of the region and for Aboriginal people 4
themselves, it is to these linkages that the concept of totemism has come to refer, and 5
this is the sense in which I will use the term here.1
In what follows I begin by spelling out the contrast between totemism and animism, 7
and go on from there to show how ﬁrst the totemic ontology, and then the animic one, 8
are reﬂected in the depiction of animals. This, in turn, provides a basis for their system- 9
atic comparison. Finally, I return to the orthodox view spelled out in the introductory 30
paragraph in order to show why it is so wrong, and to replace it with a more satisfactory 1
alternative. The activities of hunters and gatherers that lead to the production of what we 2
in the West call ‘art’ should, I argue, be understood as ways not of representing the world 3
of immediate experience on a higher, more ‘symbolic’ plane, but of probing more deeply 4
into it and of discovering the signiﬁcance that lies therein.
TOTEMISM AND ANIMISM
At the most fundamental level, the contrast is about the relative priority of form and 9
process. With a totemic ontology, the forms life takes are already given, congealed in 40
perpetuity in the features, textures and contours of the land. And it is the land that 1
harbours the vital forces which animate the plants, animals and people it engenders. With 2
an animic ontology, to the contrary, life is itself generative of form. Vital force, far from 3
being petriﬁed in a solid medium, is free-ﬂowing like the wind, and it is on its uninter- 4
rupted circulation that the continuity of the living world depends. In the following 5
paragraphs I elaborate on this contrast in more detail.
Throughout Aboriginal Australia, people’s sense of being is grounded in the under- 7
standing that the fundamentals of existence were laid down in an era known conventionally 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 113 •

as the Dreaming. During this era, which both underwrites the living present and encompasses it as but a moment of eternity, the initially shapeless earth was inhabited by beings
of immense scale and power who roamed across its surface, shaping it with the impress
of their movements and depositing something of their creative essence at place after place
as they passed along. These beings are said to be ancestral to all currently living creatures,
whether human or non-human. But the relationship between the ancestors and their living
progeny is not a genealogical one. That is to say, there is no line of descent, passing
through a series of intermediate steps, that would connect the one to the other, nor is
any living generation further removed from the ancestors than its predecessors. For every
living being, according to the Aboriginal conception, draws its essential form and substance
directly from the land, and the land, in turn, embodies the creative powers of the ancestors. Human beings and other creatures come and go: they emerge from the land, live
out their time, and are reincorporated into it when they die. But the land is always there,
and will continue to bring forth new life so long as those who dwell upon it – by fulﬁlling
their custodial responsibilities towards it, or ‘looking after’ it in the proper way – do not
allow its powers to be dissipated. It is this understanding of the relationship between the
ancestors, the land which is the enduring form of their presence, and the living beings it
engenders, that I call ‘totemic’.
Among the native peoples of the circumpolar North the land does not have quite the
same signiﬁcance that it has in Aboriginal Australia. For the powers that bring forth life,
instead of being concentrated in the land itself, are rather distributed among the manifold beings that inhabit it. There is no power source, analogous to the totemic ancestors
of Aboriginal cosmology, that subtends the life process itself. Consequently, animate beings
are engendered not by the land but reciprocally, by one another. Far from revealing the
shape of a world that already exists, as it were, out of time, life is the temporal process
of its ongoing creation. The world of this ‘animic’ understanding is home to innumerable beings whose presence is manifested in this form or that, each engaged in the project
of forging a life in the way peculiar to its kind. But in order to live, every such being
must constantly draw upon the vitality of others. A complex network of reciprocal interdependence, based on the give and take of substance, care and vital force – the latter
often envisaged as one or several kinds of spirit or soul – extends throughout the cosmos,
linking human, animal and all other forms of life. Within this network, the generation
of animate form in any one region necessarily entails its dissolution in another. Vitality
must be surrendered here so that it may be reconstituted there. For this reason, no form
is ever permanent; indeed the transience or ephemerality of form is necessary if the current
of life is to keep on ﬂowing. All of existence is suspended in this ﬂow. Borne along in
the current, beings meet, merge and split apart again, each taking with them something
of the other. Thus life, in the animic ontology, is not an emanation but a generation of
being, in a world that is not pre-ordained but incipient, forever on the verge of the actual.
Having set out the basic contrast between totemism and animism, I now want to
consider how it bears upon the relation between human beings and non-human animals.
How, for example, is it reﬂected in the attitudes of hunters towards their prey? In a
totemic system, to hunt (or to refrain from hunting) animals of a particular species is part
of the proper way of living one’s life on the land according to a pre-established order of
things. Thus the relation between human and animal is subsumed by the relation of both
to the ancestral powers of which they are the living incarnations. People of course have
to hunt (as well as gather) to secure a livelihood, but the actual pursuit of animals lacks
cosmological signiﬁcance. It is, as Philippe Descola writes, ‘a quite mundane activity of

Livelihood

food procurement’ (1996: 95). While it helps to keep people fed it does not, in itself, 1
establish their presence in the world. It is in dwelling upon the land – in the senses both 2
of inhabiting it and of sustained focal attention towards its ancestral essence in acts of 3
ceremony – that people forge their sense of being. In an animic system, on the other 4
hand, hunting effects the circulation of vital force between humans and animals and thus 5
contributes directly to the regeneration of the lifeworld of which both are part. The animals 6
offer something of their potentiality and substance to human beings so that the latter may 7
live, while humans, in return, through the proper treatment of the animals in death, ensure 8
the release of their life force and hence their subsequent reincarnation. Human life, which 9
in the totemic ontology is predicated upon the immortality of the land, is here predicated 10
upon the mortality of animals. In the animic ontology, the killing and eating of game is 1
far more than mere provisioning; it is world-renewing.
Let me put the contrast in another way. The totemic world is essential, the animic 3
world dialogical. When an Australian Aboriginal man proclaims himself to be a kangaroo, 4
he means that he – along with other persons who share this afﬁliation – actually partakes 5
of the same substance as the kangaroo. The connection, in other words, lies in the essen- 6
tial consubstantiality of members of the human group, and of the animal species, all of 7
whom derive the lineaments of their being from the same place in the landscape in which 8
is deposited the creativity of the kangaroo ancestor. But what of the shaman, in a northern 9
circumpolar society, who walks abroad as a bear? Recall that the animic cosmos is popu- 20
lated by beings of both human and non-human kinds engaged in ongoing mutual 1
interaction. Animals, like humans, are supposed to form their own communities, and 2
members of each can visit the communities of the other. From a perspective located within 3
the human community, non-human beings will appear in their animal guise. However 4
upon ‘crossing over’ to the animal side, a man will see his hosts as creatures like himself, 5
while to the people back home he will now appear in animal form. In short, in the 6
dialogue between human and 7
animal, each in turn takes up 8
the point of view of the other, 9
becoming temporarily other to his 30
or her own people. The shaman, in 1
animic society, is a person of excep- 2
tional power, who can move with 3
relative ease across the human– 4
animal interface. But particular 5
animals may also be credited with 6
similar powers: indeed right across 7
the circumpolar North, the bear is 8
regarded as such a one. If the bear 9
can appear human, so too, the 40
human shaman can show up as a 1
bear (see Figure 7.1). Whether you 2
see one or the other depends on 3
Figure 7.1 An Inuit man and a polar bear cordially greet one another. where you are looking from; in 4
Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collection of Professor other words it has to do not with 5
Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
the substance of being but with the 6
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Nanook, super-male, Signifying animals: relative positioning of self and 7
human meaning in the natural world, ed. R. Willis, 1990, p. 179.
other in contexts of dialogue.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 115 •

Now one of the principal reasons why the shamans of animic society make their often
arduous journeys to the communities of non-human animals is to recover vitality that
may have been lost, due to some untoward circumstance, to the ‘other side’. Such loss is
generally experienced in the form of serious illness, and by bringing vitality back to the
sufferer the shaman aims to effect a cure. Another reason may be to negotiate with the
spirit masters, who control the disposition of animals, for their release to human hunters.
To make the crossing to the animal domain, the shaman has to avail himself of the assistance of bodies other than his own. Animals of various kinds, known as his ‘helpers’, carry
his inner being aloft on its journey, yet all the while his corporeal body remains where it
stands. The shaman’s liberation from the constraints of his bodily bearing in the human
world is generally achieved through going into trance. In this state, the normal boundaries between human and animal are dissolved. However, such ‘out-of-body’ experience
has no place within a totemic system, for the simple reason that the unity of human and
animal, in a totemic ontology, lies in
their very consubstantiality. A man does
not have to leave his body to take on
that of his totem, for his own
body and that of his totem share the
same essence whose ultimate source, as
we have seen, lies in the land. Whereas
the animist must go beyond the body to
transcend the human-animal distinction,
the totemist ﬁnds the distinction dissolved at the very core of his being –
within the body, not beyond it. Human
and animal, separated in life, are reunited on death and burial, that is
through the ultimate return of the body
to the land from which it grew (see
Figure 7.2).

THE DEPICTION OF ANIMALS
Now that we have established the basic
contrast between totemic and animic ontologies, our next, and principal problem
is to consider how each, in turn, bears
upon the depiction of animals. As a lead
into the problem, consider the two
depictions reproduced in Figures 7.3 and
7.4. The ﬁrst was executed on bark
by the Australian Aboriginal painter
Namerredje Guymala, one of a group of
Kunwinjku-speaking painters residing in
the town of Oenpelli in Western Arnhem
Land. It dates from about 1975. The
second was drawn on paper around the
same time by Davidialuk Alasuaq, an

Figure 7.2 This bark painting by Djawada Nadjongorle, a
Kunwinjku Aboriginal artist from Western Arnhem Land,
Australia, juxtaposes the ﬁgures of a dead human spirit and the
sand monitor, Varanus gouldii. The juxtaposition vividly brings
out the uniﬁcation, in death, of human and animal, joined by
their shared ancestral essence.

Livelihood

Inuit from Povungnituk in northern 1
Quebec. On the face of it, both appear 2
to depict hunting scenes. The animal in 3
Figure 7.3 is an antilopine kangaroo, and 4
in the top right corner is a ﬁgure of 5
undoubtedly human form, spear-thrower 6
in hand, on the point of launching a spear 7
towards the head of his victim. The 8
animal in Figure 7.4 is a caribou, which 9
stares directly at the Inuit hunter 10
crouching half-concealed in the under- 1
growth. The hunter is about to loose an 2
arrow from his bow to dispatch the 3
caribou. Now in both pictures, there is 4
actually more going on than immediately 5
meets the eye. The ﬁrst, as I shall show, 6
is not really a hunting scene at all. The 7
second, though it does indeed describe an 8
encounter between hunter and prey, also 9
catches a moment of reﬂection in a 20
dialogue between two sentient beings, 1
each of whom is offering something to 2
the other while wondering about the 3
other’s intentions. I begin with the 4
former.
Painting the ancestors:
Aboriginal Australia
Figure 7.3 Painting of an antilopine kangaroo with mimih spirit, It is obvious, looking at Figure 7.3, that 30
by Namerredje Guymala, c.1975.
the depictions of the anthropomorphic 1
hunter and of the kangaroo that he 2
appears to be spearing follow quite 3
different conventions.2 The hunter is portrayed as a diminutive, stick-like ﬁgure, caught 4
in an unstable posture that conveys a powerful sense of movement. He is clearly doing 5
something, using tools, engaging in an activity. The kangaroo, by contrast, does not appear 6
to be doing anything at all. It is depicted in limp, static proﬁle, resembling nothing so 7
much as a perfectly preserved fossil in a slab of stone. Not only is it shown on a much 8
larger scale than is the hunter, but the artist has also chosen to concentrate on the animal’s 9
bodily architecture – on its design, morphology and the internal layout of its organs – 40
rather than on the dynamics of movement, posture and behaviour. A particularly remark- 1
able characteristic of the depiction is its use of so-called ‘X-ray’ style to display the principal 2
features of anatomy, including the heart and lungs, liver, and intestinal tract, as well as 3
the backbone (Taylor 1996: 135–7). Indeed the static, anatomical portrayal of the animal 4
contrasts so strikingly with the dynamic, postural portrayal of the hunter that it seems 5
almost calculated to draw attention to the former’s existential status as an inanimate being, 6
as opposed to the animacy of the latter. The kangaroo, whatever else it may be supposed 7
to be, is not a living creature.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 117 •

Figure 7.4 Inuit hunter and caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collection of
Professor Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Inuit and caribou, published by Université Laval, Canada, 1979, p. 61.

The ﬁgure of the hunter in this painting, though human-like in appearance, in fact
depicts a spirit being, one of a class of such beings known as mimih. Wispish and delicate but nevertheless agile, mimih are believed to inhabit crannies in the rocky escarpment
that dominates the landscape of Western Arnhem Land. From their abodes within the
rock face they carry on a form of life precisely parallel to that of ordinary living humans,
engaging in such activities as hunting, ﬁghting and ceremonials. It was through observing
the practices of these spirits that people in the past learned, among other things, how to
hunt, to cook, to divide up game in the proper way, and to dance. But above all, mimih
taught them how to paint. Small red monochrome paintings of mimih ﬁgures abound on
the walls of caves in the escarpment. Many of these, as a matter of fact, are extremely
old and are thought by archaeologists to have been produced between nine and eighteen
thousand years ago, though the exact dating remains a subject of some controversy.
Kunwinjku people, however, assert that the ﬁgures were painted by mimih themselves,
and that they accurately portray both their bodily appearance and their customary activities (Taylor 1996: 89, 183–4).
So much for the ﬁgure of the hunter, but what about the ﬁgure of the kangaroo? This
could be read on two levels. On the one hand the kangaroo is a perfectly ordinary animal,
which is hunted and killed for food. Long ago, mimih used to hunt kangaroo to eat, as
humans do today, and many stories are told of their exceptional skill and prowess in this
regard (Carroll 1977: 123–5, Taylor 1996: 134). Yet paradoxically, these stories have virtually nothing to say about the activity of hunting itself, and focus almost exclusively on
the procedure for cutting up and cooking the animal once it has been killed. Likewise in
depictions of mimih hunters apparently spearing kangaroos, such as that in Figure 7.3,
neither the behaviour of the animal on encountering the hunter, nor its attitude in death,

Livelihood
is portrayed. It is rather shown as if already dead, and collapsed upon the ground. The 1
area enclosed by the body proﬁle is schematically divided into sections by double parallel 2
lines, which also indicate the way in which the carcass should be cut up for presentation 3
to various categories of kin. The picture can thus be interpreted as a kind of instruction 4
manual, carrying the imprimatur of the mimih spirits, for butchery and distribution. 5
In some pictures, the animal is shown already dismembered into several pieces (Carroll 6
1977: 123). As the distribution of cuts follows the paths of kinship, so the image of the 7
divided animal body provides a kind of scheme or template for the enactment of signif- 8
icant human relationships (Taylor 1996: 199, 225–7). But neither in the pictures nor in 9
the accompanying stories is there a sense of the animal as anything other than mere meat, 10
or of the hunt as an encounter entailing any kind of relationship between one animate 1
being and another.
Read on another level, however, the ﬁgure of the kangaroo is a portrayal of no ordi- 3
nary animal. It depicts, rather, an ancestral being, one of many whose world-shaping 4
activities are recounted in the stories of the Dreaming. The ancestral standing of such 5
beings is usually indicated by means of a ‘geometric’ internal division of the body area 6
into triangular or rhombic panels which are ﬁlled in with ﬁne cross-hatching (Taylor 1996: 7
139–43). This cross-hatching produces a shimmering effect that is understood as an emana- 8
tion of the ancestral power immanent in the depiction: the closest equivalent in Western 9
experience, perhaps, is the brilliance of a stained glass window lit up by sunlight.3 In the 20
painting shown in Figure 7.3 these features are not pronounced, and so it is probably not 1
intended to be interpreted on this level. But many other paintings on the same theme, 2
complete with a mimih hunter in the corner, do depict the kangaroo in a vividly ‘ances- 3
tral’ light (Taylor 1996: 23, 180). Once again the animal is portrayed, by contrast to the 4
hunter, as fundamentally inanimate. This does not mean, however, that it is dead rather 5
than alive, as in the ﬁrst-level reading. Ancestral beings are inanimate in the same way as 6
is the land they energise: their presence underlies the cycle of life and death in which the 7
existence of all mortal creatures, both human and animal, is suspended.
Now painting, whether on cave walls or bark shelters, is one of the ways through which 9
the order of the Dreaming is presented to humans. Another way is through their obser- 30
vation of the landscape itself, created as it was through ancestral activity. One can, rather 1
literally, ‘follow’ the story of creation either by walking about over the landscape and 2
attending to its features, or by similarly roaming with one’s eyes across the surface of the 3
picture. It might be suggested, on these grounds, that the painting should be understood 4
as a kind of map of the landscape. Thus the body of the ancestral being, depicted in the 5
form of an animal (the kangaroo), would stand for the landscape in its totality, and its 6
internal divisions to places and the relations between them, and between their respective 7
inhabitants. Yet while there is certainly a correspondence between the form of the painting 8
and the morphology of the landscape, it would not be right to suppose that the one repre- 9
sents the other. Rather, both landscape and painting exist on the same ontological level, 40
as alternative ways in which an underlying, ancestral order is revealed to human experi- 1
ence (Taylor 1996: 229–32, see Morphy 1991: 221–2, 237). The immobility of the animal 2
in the painting, then, is strictly equivalent to the permanence of the landscape: the move- 3
ment is entirely on the side of the painter through whose work the form of the ancestral 4
being is gradually unveiled, just as it is on the side of the hunter who makes his way 5
through the terrain.
But likewise in the painting, the movement appears to be wholly on the side of the 7
mimih spirit as it clambers over the motionless body of the ancestral creator being. Like 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 119 •

ordinary humans, mimih have no creative power of their own but are bound to an already
established order of things. And in these spirits living humans see the reﬂections of themselves. Thus the relation between the mimih-ﬁgure and the ancestral kangaroo in the
painting is precisely analogous both to that between the painter and the world as it is
revealed through his work, and to that between the hunter and the landscape over which
he roams in pursuit of game. The human painter, depicting the mimih, paints his own
reﬂection as it looks back at him from the rock face. It is almost a self-portrait, but not
quite, for the human’s activity of painting is reﬂected back as the spirit’s activity of hunting.
In this the equivalence between hunting and painting, as alternative ways of opening up
an ancestral order to visual perception, is perfectly epitomised – though I should stress
again that hunting, in Aboriginal understanding, is primarily a kind of movement on the
land rather than something you do to, or with, animals. This interpretation, incidentally,
immediately makes sense of Kunwinjku assertions to the effect that the original mimih
paintings were produced by the spirits themselves. But ancestral beings do not paint themselves; they simply are, and are revealed in the enduring forms of their creation.
Three further stylistic features of totemic depiction follow from what I have said so far.
First, animal-like ﬁgures are not generally arranged together to form a narrative scene.
For to show such a ﬁgure engaged in any kind of activity, on its own or with others,
would be fundamentally incompatible with both readings of what it depicts, whether the
dead body of a creature that has been hunted and killed or the body of an ancestral being
metamorphosed into the landscape. It is true that in some compositions, animal ﬁgures
appear in symmetrically disposed pairs (Taylor 1996: 164), but this appears to be in the
interests of formal balance rather than due to any narrative requirements. Once again, this
is in striking contrast to paintings of anthropomorphic mimih ﬁgures, both ancient and
recent, which often show many ﬁgures together engaged in a variety of activities (Carroll
1977: 122–5, Taylor 1996: 188). Secondly, the animal is speciﬁed, in pictorial form, by
a ﬁxed proﬁle or silhouette which itself frames the painting. For what is depicted is
not a particular being situated within a world, but rather the world as it is enfolded within
a particular being. The bodily limits of the being are therefore the limits of the world.
There is nothing beyond. Admittedly, in Figure 7.3 the portrait of the mimih spirit lies
outside the proﬁle of the animal. But as we have seen this portrait, rather like a signature in the corner of a modern Western work of art, is a projection of the identity of the
painter rather than a disclosure of the underlying order of the world, and in this sense is
not really part of the picture at all. Thirdly, since there is nothing beyond the body proﬁle,
we must look to what is inside it – to the relations between its divisions and between
these and the whole – to understand the signiﬁcance of the painting. Where, for example,
an ancestral being is credited with the creation of sacred objects to be used in ceremonies,
these objects are indicated in paintings as organs internal to the ancestral body in its
animal form, rather than as implements in its hands (Taylor 1989: 379–80). Here, too,
there is an obvious contrast with depictions of mimih, which are often shown brandishing
tools and weapons that serve to indicate the activities in which they are engaged (Taylor
1996: 187–9).
In order to reinforce my general argument about the static nature of totemic depictions and their association with the morphology of the landscape, I should like to refer
brieﬂy to two other painting traditions from Aboriginal Australia, both very different from
that of Western Arnhem Land which has been the focus of my discussion up to now.
Among peoples of the desert regions of Central Australia, such as the Walbiri, Pintupi
and Luritja, animal forms do not appear at all. What are depicted, in the past by being

Livelihood
drawn or sculpted in the sand, and nowadays painted in acrylic on board, are not ances- 1
tral beings themselves but the permanent traces of their activity.4 A horseshoe-shaped 2
motif, for example, indicates the impression that was left in the ground where the kangaroo 3
ancestor sat down to rest; a pair of parallel wavy lines is the path left in the sand by the 4
ancestral python, and a cluster of small circles are the eggs laid by the ancestral lizard. 5
To each of these motifs there correspond speciﬁc features of the landscape: the kangaroo’s 6
resting place is a water-hole, the snake’s track a creek-bed, the python’s eggs a patch of 7
rounded boulders (Layton 1985: 437–8). In sand-drawings and paintings, graphic elements 8
of this kind are linked by connecting lines into a kind of network, and the various routes 9
that can be traced through the network correspond to the paths taken by ancestral beings 10
as they travelled from place to place, creating the landscape as they went.
Now in these depictions from the Australian Central Desert, just as in those from 2
Western Arnhem Land, nothing is going on, or being done. They portray a world that 3
is already made, not one in the making. Yet the two traditions of painting seem to be 4
the exact inverse of one another. In the ﬁrst we see an unbounded ground, but no animal 5
ﬁgures – only ‘black holes’ corresponding to their enduring imprints in the surface of the 6
earth. In the second we see bounded animal ﬁgures, but no ground – there is nothing 7
beyond them. Further reﬂection, however, shows these to be mutually exclusive alterna- 8
tives. For to combine ﬁgure and ground – that is, to show the animal ﬁgures and their 9
imprints in the landscape together in the same composition – would at once be to convert 20
it into a narrative scene of the world-in-creation. Suppose, for example, that we were to 1
take a ﬁgure depicting the ancestral kangaroo and place it upon a line of horseshoe-motifs 2
to show its track. The effect would be to turn the ﬁgure inside out: no longer enfolding 3
the world in its being, the kangaroo ancestor would be portrayed instead as a being in 4
the world, engaged in the activity of journeying from place to place with its character- 5
istic alternation of movement and rest. If, on the other hand, we were to take a depiction 6
of the line of ancestral travel and the impressions left along the way, and add to it an 7
image of the kangaroo-being itself, then the latter would – by its very presence – indi- 8
cate that the depiction is of a world-shaping journey that is still ongoing rather than over 9
and done with. To portray a world whose formation is complete, the agents of creation 30
have either to be removed from the scene, thus demonstrating that their work is ﬁnished, 1
or shown metamorphosed into the forms of their own creation, in which case the world 2
itself becomes one with the immobilised bodies of its creators, each of which incorporates 3
the whole in a particular aspect. The ﬁrst solution has been adopted by the painters of 4
the Central Desert, the second by those of western Arnhem Land.
Among the peoples of the Western Kimberleys of northwestern Australia, we ﬁnd yet 6
another solution.5 In this case the ﬁgures in paintings, which are found on the walls of 7
certain caves, are immobile like the landscape because they are actually fused with it. That 8
is to say, they are as tied to the sites in which they occur as are the rock faces that bear 9
them. The principal ﬁgures depicted in these paintings are anthropomorphic creator beings 40
known as Wandjina. These beings are of bulbous, rotund build, somewhat resembling the 1
human neonate, which gives the impression that they would be incapable of supporting 2
themselves, let alone of autonomous movement. The head is usually surrounded by a 3
broad, halo-like band often divided by lines that radiate outwards. Having neither mouths 4
with which to breathe or sing, nor ears to hear, they are clearly inanimate, while their 5
large round eyes stare vacantly out from the rock face. The Wandjina ﬁgures are often 6
accompanied by similarly lifeless ﬁgures of animal form, depicting the species that they 7
are supposed to have originally brought into being. According to Aboriginal legend, having 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 121 •

shaped the landscape through their activities in the Dreaming, the Wandjina eventually
came to rest at particular sites where they can still be seen. At these sites, they literally
painted themselves into the cave walls. Living humans paint too, of course: thus every
clan is responsible for the regular retouching of the Wandjina in its own country, in order
to keep them in good condition. For if a painting were to fade and disappear, so would
the being it depicts, and with it would go the life-giving energy which it imparts to the
land. Painting as retouching, in short, is not just a matter of disclosing an already created
world, but of conserving or looking after it.
Both in appearance and in status, the Wandjina of the Kimberleys are at the opposite
end of the scale from the mimih of Arnhem Land. Mimih, as we have seen, are mobile,
and in ancient times they used the walls of caves as convenient surfaces on which to depict
their everyday activities in a straightforwardly narrative style, subsequently copied by
human beings. But the Wandjina did not paint pictures of themselves on the rock, they
painted themselves into it. In the painting, they metamorphosed into their own depictions. Wandjina ﬁgures, in short, are not depictions of anything. Rather, they are what
they depict, the creator beings themselves, forever immobilised in the rock face. Comparing
the mimih ﬁgures with the animal forms of ancestral beings in the paintings of Western
Arnhem Land, we have seen that in the ﬁrst case depiction is a mode of narration, and
in the second a mode of revelation. In the Wandjina of the Kimberleys, by contrast, depiction is a mode of being.

Carving the spirits: the circumpolar North
Now let me return to Figure 7.4, and from the totemic ontology of Aboriginal Australia
to the very different, animic system of northern circumpolar societies – exempliﬁed in
this instance by the Inuit. There is no doubt that the drawing depicts a narrative scene.
Critically, it is one in which the animal is just as much a participant as the human hunter.
Both are clearly situated in an environment, with a ground surface and scrub vegetation.
There is, indeed, a world of difference between the observation of a living animal in its
normal environment and the examination of its anatomical form, as though it were
laid out before you like a corpse. On a surface reading, this is what distinguishes the
ﬁgure of the caribou in Davidialuk Alasuaq’s picture from Namerredje Guymala’s rendering
of the kangaroo. The picture is a ﬁnely observed portrayal of the characteristic posture and behaviour of the caribou when it encounters the hunter face to face. It is a fact
well known both to hunters and to biologists who have set out to study caribou behaviour by scientiﬁc methods, that at the point when the animal becomes aware of the close
presence of a potential predator, whether human or non-human, it stands still, turning
to stare directly at its pursuer (see Chapter One, p. 13). The attitude of the animal at
this point, and the tension and suspense of the moment, are beautifully caught in the
picture.
From my discussion in Chapter One, it will be recalled that native people have a particular explanation for why the caribou stands its ground. This is the moment, they say, at
which the animal intentionally offers itself up to the hunter. This leads us to a deeper
reading of the drawing of the caribou in Figure 7.4, which once again contrasts with the
‘inside’ reading of the ﬁgure of the kangaroo in Kunwinjku painting. Recall that the latter
reveals a motionless essence, embodied in the land, upon which is founded the life-cycles
of ordinary, mortal creatures. The depiction of the caribou, to the contrary, reveals powers
of agency, intentionality, and sentience embodied in a living, moving being. On this

Livelihood
reading, the human hunter relates to the animal as one such being to another, and the 1
encounter is a moment in the ongoing dialogue between them. Among hunters who take 2
this view of animals, there is a general feeling that one should not kill an animal that 3
does not consent to be taken. To kill without the animal’s active connivance would 4
be an act of violence, carrying the threat of equally violent retribution in the future. How, 5
then, can a hunter know for sure whether an animal means to give itself up or not? 6
This dilemma, a very real one in the experience of Inuit and other northern hunting 7
peoples, is fundamentally what the drawing is about. Let us take a closer look at what is 8
going on.
Like humans, animals reveal their identities and intentions through their behaviour. 10
But the animal in the picture is behaving suspiciously. Speciﬁcally, it has a sprig of willow 1
clenched between its jaws. With this, it seems to be trying to say something. But what? 2
Could it be a warning of some kind? The hunter does not know for sure. Uncertain about 3
the caribou’s intentions towards him he turns his eyes away from its gaze, and does not 4
shoot. Another picture by Davidialuk Alasuaq, reproduced in Figure 7.5, shows what could 5
have happened had he done so. Here the arrow has already penetrated the body of the 6
caribou, whose forelegs are giving way in a posture that vividly portrays its imminent 7
death. But look at the faces of the hunter and his prey! The man stares at us with an 8
expression of wide-eyed terror. As for the animal, the skin and fur covering of its head 9
has been pulled back to reveal a wolf-like visage, with round eyes, a long, thin snout and 20
bared fangs. The gentle caribou has turned into a frightening predator, and we are left 1
wondering who, in fact, is hunting whom.6
Now animals that appear thus, with the head covering removed or retracted, are known 3
as ‘hoodless’ (nasaittuq).7 Generally, they are individuals that have been maltreated in one 4
way or another by humans in the past, and therefore harbour some malice towards them. 5
I have already shown how, in an animic system, the regeneration of the lifeworld depends 6
Figure 7.5 On killing a hoodless caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collec- 6
tion of Professor Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Inuit and caribou, published by Université Laval, Canada, 1979, p. 63.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 123 •

upon the maintenance of balance in the reciprocal give-and-take of vital force. Animals
give life to humans, but humans should receive only what is offered rather than seek to
extract vitality by forcible or violent means. For otherwise the animals, seeking equally
violent recompense, would be turned from life-givers to life-takers. This is precisely what
has happened in the case of the hoodless caribou depicted in Figure 7.5. Signiﬁcantly
nasaittuq, if killed, are deemed to be inedible: as potential eaters of human beings they
cannot be eaten by humans – not, at least, without courting considerable danger.
However the image of the retractable hood tells us something more, about the way in
which living beings are generally thought to be constituted in animic systems. Despite
considerable variation in the detail, a fundamental division is always recognised into two
parts: an interior, vital part that is the source of all awareness, memory, intention and
feeling, and an exterior, bodily covering that provides the equipment and confers the
powers that are necessary to conduct a particular form of life.8 The ﬁrst is continuous
through time, the second is inherently unstable. Creatures of the sea, for example, can
exchange ﬁns and ﬂippers for the armature of a terrestrial quadruped, or vice versa: whales,
say the Yup’ik of Alaska, can turn into wolves (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 74–5), but behind
the altered bodily form and lifestyle lies a continuity of being. Now for animals in their
own communities, as for humans in theirs, the body is transparent. Beings perceive and
interact with one another directly, wearing their feelings and intentions, so to speak, ‘on
the surface’, and above all – as we shall see – on the face. However it is not ordinarily
possible for a human being to perceive a living animal in this way: its true face remains
concealed behind the bodily covering. To witness it ‘face-to-face’, with its hood removed,
one must already have crossed over from the human to the animal domain. Indeed a
common theme of stories all around the circumpolar North is of how a traveller, having
lost his or her bearings in the human world, strays or is lured into the abode of a certain
animal, whereupon the latter stands revealed in its inner being. For the traveller, this is
a dangerous, indeed potentially fatal predicament. One may never make it back to the
company of humankind. Small wonder, then, that the hunter depicted in Figure 7.5 looks
scared. For not only does the hoodless caribou, its predatory intentions revealed, pose a
direct threat to life and limb, but also the very sight of it casts a pall of uncertainty over
his existential status as a human being.
In short, the faces of animals are visible only to humans who have taken up the subject
positions of the animals themselves, and who have therefore – in the eyes of other humans
– actually turned into animals. Only shamans have the power to do this intentionally
and with relative impunity. Human beings can, however, invoke the presence of animals
in their midst by means of masks. Here, in effect, it is the animal, whose inner being
or spirit is revealed on the surface of the mask, which takes up the subject position of
a human, namely that occupied by the mask-bearer. The carving of wooden masks
depicting the faces of animals and other non-humans, for display in dances and ceremonies,
is widespread among the indigenous peoples of the circumpolar North. In some regions,
such as among Inuit and Yup’ik people of Alaska, and on the American northwest
coast, the construction of masks reached quite extraordinary degrees of elaboration. This
is not the place for a detailed analysis of their symbolic content.9 I want merely to make
three general observations about the depiction of animals in masks. First, the central
component of every mask, around which all else revolves, is a face. Secondly, the mask
is not a disguise intended to hide the identity of the bearer. Thirdly, in appearance, the
masks often show little obvious resemblance to the animals whose spirits they are supposed
to depict.

Livelihood
As a surface, the face has some very peculiar properties. I can feel my own face, and 1
others can see it. But it remains invisible to me. Where others see my face, I see the 2
world. Thus the face is the visible appearance, in others’ eyes, of my own subjective pres- 3
ence as an agent of perception. It is, if you will, the look of human being. By the same 4
token, the face-depicting mask is the look of non-human being. Both face and mask are 5
the phenomenal forms of ‘the Other as Subject’, that is, as the ‘second person’ whom one 6
would address as ‘you’ and who would respond in kind (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 483). 7
Now when the hunter in Figure 7.5 witnessed the caribou with its hood drawn back, 8
what he saw was the animal’s real face. However, far from its having been unmasked, as 9
a conventional understanding of masking as disguise or cover-up would lead us to expect, 10
the mask was what was revealed. In other words, the mask is not the skin and fur of the 1
hood but the face itself. As visible manifestations of inner being, face and mask are onto- 2
logically equivalent. Thus a being can no more look through a mask than it can look 3
through its own face. There is no face peering out from behind the mask. In effect the 4
identity of the human mask-bearer is not so much disguised as displaced by the mask he 5
carries. For this reason, in masked dances the eyes of the bearers should be downcast – 6
rendered passive in order to make way for the active perceptual powers of the mask 7
(Fienup-Riordan 1987).10
Moreover, precisely because the mask’s purpose is to reveal the true, or spirit face of 9
the animal rather than to conceal that of its human bearer behind an animal disguise, its 20
appearance is nothing like the animal’s facial covering. The standard features of the mask- 1
face include eyes, mouth and nostrils. On perceiving these features we are inclined to 2
regard the face as human, or at least human-like, in appearance, and there is some evidence 3
that native people did the same, thus supposing that animal spirits are human in form 4
(Oosten 1992: 115–16). Yet the faces on many masks are so grotesquely distorted that 5
they bear no more resemblance to the human visage than to that of any other creature, 6
and mask-makers were certainly not constrained by any conventions of realism. Their aim, 7
it seems, was not to depict any attributes of morphology or behaviour that might be drawn 8
from empirical observation of the animal in question, but rather to capture the under- 9
lying character and personal idiosyncrasies attributed to the spirit that has assumed its 30
form. This was done by inﬂecting the curve of the mouth, the splay of the nostrils or 1
the slant of the eyes in recognisable ways. Some masks have hinged ﬂaps of outwardly 2
naturalistic appearance, but these are designed to open up so as to disclose the face, 3
effecting a transformation precisely equivalent to the caribou’s removal of its hood. Other 4
masks achieve the same effect through visual punning or ﬁgure–ground reversal: thus a 5
whale’s-tail mask looks realistic enough when viewed from one angle, but from another 6
the contours of the tail turn out to reveal a mouth, nose and browridges (Ray 1967: 212 7
and Plate 52, Oosten 1992: 128–9, see also Carpenter 1966: 224).
It is in the matter of clothing, not masks, that considerations of animals’ diverse bodily 9
forms, and of the behavioural capacities that go along with them, come to the fore. 40
Circumpolar hunters attach great importance to clothing, dressing up in the skins and 1
furs of the animals they have killed. Of course they have to keep warm, but there is more 2
to it than that. We have seen that animals’ bodily covering is understood as so much 3
equipment which enables them to lead the kinds of lives they do. Human beings differ 4
from other animals in that they are born naked, without any covering. To survive, they 5
must clothe themselves with animal bodies, and in so doing, they can also draw on the 6
effectivities these bodies confer (see Chapter Six, p. 94). Very often, parts of the animal 7
skin would be tailored to cover corresponding parts of the human body: thus the skin of 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 125 •

the head would be made into a hood, that of the legs into trousers and boots, and so on
(Chaussonnet 1988: 213). In short, whereas animals take body-skin off to reveal themselves in their inner being, humans put it on in order to function in the world.11 This is
the difference between the bear and the man in Figure 7.1. The man wears a coat, leaving
his face and hands uncovered. The bear, however, has uncovered his face and hands by
peeling back the skin. The one, in a sense, dresses up, the other dresses down. Dressing
in skin clothing, however, is very different from wearing a mask. For the mask is distinguished from clothing precisely as the inner being of the animal is distinguished from its
exterior body. Dressed in its skin, the human acquires the effectivities of the animal;
donning the mask, the human makes way for the spirit of the animal.
Before leaving the subject of masks, I should like to comment on a curious feature of
masks from the Kuskokwim-Yukon area of Alaska. One such is illustrated in Figure 7.6A.
This is an example of the type of mask referred to above, with hinged doors that open
to reveal a face. Painted on the inside surface of each door are quite realistic, silhouette
depictions of seals (on the left) and caribou (on the right). Now the mask-face belongs
to a tunghak, one of the spirit ‘masters’ or keepers of game animals. Evidently, the tunghak
has its charges in mind, since even with the shutters closed the seal and caribou ﬁgures
dance before its eyes. Now it is often said in these parts that a hunter, if he is to succeed,
should likewise keep the animals he will pursue at the forefront of his thoughts. Thinking
of animals is one of the ways of keeping up a proper relationship with them; conversely
the animals, if well regarded, will think positively of humans. Yup’ik hunters, according

Figure 7.6 Two masks from the Kuskokwim-Yukon area of Alaska, from Nelson (1983 [1896–7]: Plates
50 and 51). The ﬁrst (A) depicts a spirit master of the animals (tunghak). According to Nelson (1983:
406) the animal ﬁgures on the inside left shutter are seals; Ray, however, claims they are whales (1967:
65). A colour photograph of the same mask appears in Fitzhugh (1988: 306 ﬁg. 435), but in this the
ﬁgures on the left appear too worn to be identiﬁed with certainty. The second mask (B) depicts a salmon,
with its back cut away to reveal the face of the salmon’s inua, or spirit.
From E. W. Nelson, The Eskimo about Bering Strait, published by Smithsonian Institution Press, 1983,
p. 408.

Livelihood
to Fienup-Riordan, ‘admonished young men to “keep the thought of seals” foremost in 1
their minds as they shoveled snow, carried out trash, and hauled water’ (1994: 53). So 2
whatever he is doing, whether actually out hunting or engaged in routine domestic chores, 3
the animals should always be there before a man’s mind’s eye. Hunters, as we might say, 4
typically have animals ‘on the brain’. In the extraordinary, bird-like hunting helmets tradi- 5
tionally worn by the Aleut, adorned with exquisitely lifelike animal ﬁgurines carved from 6
ivory, and sometimes painted with narrative depictions of hunting scenes as well, this 7
became almost literally true (Rousselot, Fitzhugh and Crowell 1988: 152, 164–5). But 8
the carving of realistic animal ﬁgurines is a practice of truly circumpolar distribution, and 9
– besides the signiﬁcance attached to masks and clothing – is probably one of the most 10
distinctive features of animic depiction. I would like to conclude this section with a few 1
words about it.
In my analysis of the animal depictions of Western Arnhem Land, I showed how the 3
activity of painting can be compared, in a certain sense, to that of hunting. In the circum- 4
polar North there is a similar parallel between carving and hunting. Yet the similarity 5
hides a contrast, for in the experience of the carver, hunting is not so much a movement 6
through the terrain as a mode of relating to animals. The important thing in hunting is 7
never to impose one’s will upon animals, to force them against their inclinations. When 8
it is ready, but not before, the animal reveals itself to the hunter, who can then grace- 9
fully receive its gift of bodily substance. In just the same way, carving is not the wilful 20
imposition of preconceived form on brute matter, but a process in which the carver is 1
continually responsive to the intrinsic qualities of the material, to how it wants to be. 2
The following passage, in which Edmund Carpenter describes an Inuit carver at work, 3
could almost have been written of the hunter on the ice:
As the carver holds the unworked ivory lightly in his hand, turning it this way and 6
that, he whispers, ‘Who are you? Who hides there?’ And then: ‘Ah, Seal!’ . . . Then he 7
brings it out: seal, hidden, emerges. It was always there: He did not create it. He released 8
it: he helped it step forth.
(1966: 206) 30
If painting, for the people of Western Arnhem Land, is a way of focusing attention on 2
the land and its immanent ancestral powers, then carving for the Inuit and other peoples 3
of the North is a way of keeping animals in mind. Moreover it is the process – of dwelling 4
on the animals in one’s thought – that is important, rather more than the products – the 5
carvings themselves – which are readily lost or discarded (Carpenter 1966: 212).
This interpretation helps us to make sense of two outstanding features of carved animal 7
ﬁgurines: their minute size and their realism (Figure 7.7). Among carvings from the so- 8
called Dorset Culture, dating to as early as 800 BC, Carpenter notes that one – of a 9
ptarmigan – ‘is scarcely larger than the head of a match’, another – of a running bear, 40
complete with claws – ‘is less than three-eighths of an inch high’, and a third – of a glau- 1
cous gull – ‘weighs less than one-sixtieth of an ounce’. Yet each was so accurate that there 2
could be no doubt about the species depicted (1966: 218). These tiny objects are the 3
material embodiments of thoughts, or more strictly they are thoughts. For the carver would 4
not separate thinking in the head from thinking with the hands, nor, consequently, would 5
he distinguish the products of these respective activities. But as embodied thoughts, carv- 6
ings are of such a microcosmic scale that they can be turned around in the hand as can 7
images in the mind. They are not designed to be set upon a pedestal and looked at, 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 127 •

indeed most will not stand up unless artiﬁcially mounted. Rather, like memories, they are
held close to the person – generally fastened to the clothing – and are carried around
with that person wherever he or she goes. Indeed the relation between the hunter and
the miniature ﬁgurines he carries is precisely analogous to that between the tunghak
depicted in the mask shown in Figure 7.6A and the tiny animal ﬁgures painted on its
inside doors. Both the mask-spirit who has seals and caribou to bestow, and the hunter
who has hopes of receiving them, have animals in mind.
These little animals are like tokens in the ongoing relationship of give and take between
human hunters and the spirit beings on
whose continued generosity the supply of
game depends. They are, in that sense,
equivalent to the animals actually killed in
the hunt, and this accounts for the realism
of their depiction. Equally lifelike ﬁgures are
frequently carved on hunting and other
equipment: knife-handles, harpoon heads,
toggles, lamps, bowls and containers, and
sundry other items could all be ornamented
in this way. As Fitzhugh explains, throughout northern North America (and for that
matter, in the Eurasian North as well),
‘hunting art, the ornamentation of weapons,
and the use of ritual hunting clothing were
the hunter’s way of asking for the gift of an
animal rather than overpowering it physically or spiritually’ (1988: 310–11). It should
come as no surprise, then, that among
Australian Aboriginal hunter-gatherers, who
have no such reciprocal ties with animaldonors, the ornamentation of equipment is
conspicuously absent. Indeed in the relation
between the ancestral beings of Western
Arnhem Land and the tiny mimih spirits we
ﬁnd the precise inverse of the relation,
among northern circumpolar hunters, between human or spirit beings and the little
animal tokens that they carry. Where the
human-like mimih adheres to the much
larger body of the zoomorphic ancestral Figure 7.7 Miniature waterfowl carved in walrus ivory by
being, the carved animal ﬁgurine adheres to Inuit of the Ungava District, northern Quebec; from Turner
the clothing of the hunter, and the painted (1979 [1889–90]: 96 ﬁg. 63). The species depicted include
animal silhouette to the mask of the spirit. loons, eider ducks, geese, sea pigeons, and guillemots. Turner

SOME MORE COMPARISONS
I have shown that perhaps the most fundamental contrast between the totemic and
animic depiction of animals is between a

writes: ‘It is readily discerned, in most instances, what position and action of the bird was intended to be represented.
The last shows in the plainest possible manner that the loon
is just starting to swim from an object which has given it
alarm’.
From L. M. Turner, Ethnology of the Ungava District,
published by Presses Coméditex, Quebec, 1979.

Livelihood
focus on morphology and anatomy in the former, and on posture, movement and behav- 1
iour in the latter. It would be a mistake to infer from this, however, that in totemic 2
society, people know and experience the land, and the ancestral beings that shaped it, 3
only by their ﬁnal immobile forms. And it would be equally mistaken to infer that in 4
animic society, animals and other non-human beings are known and experienced only by 5
way of their mobility. After all, the animal spirit whose face is carved on a mask is no 6
more shown to be ‘doing something’ than is the ancestral being whose proﬁle is painted 7
on rock or bark. Neither the painting nor the mask depicts movement. The difference 8
between them, however, is that in totemic depiction the signiﬁcant movement lies in the 9
process of painting itself, whereas in animic depiction it is imparted to the ﬁnished object, 10
the mask.
In their ceremonies Australian Aboriginal people re-enact, through song, dance and 2
storytelling, the events of ancestral world-creation. Dance steps, in particular, mime the 3
original movements of the ancestral beings, and are closely modelled on the characteristic 4
postures and gestures of the animals whose forms they take. In storytelling, the narrator 5
may move a ﬁnger across the sand in imitation of the movement of the ancestral hero of 6
the story, leaving a trace that has its counterpart in the landscape which the hero shaped 7
in its journey. Now like dancing and storytelling, painting, too, is a performance. The 8
movement of painting is congealed in the depiction just as that of the storyteller is 9
congealed in the traces of his gestures in the sand, or that of the dancers in the imprint 20
of their feet upon the earth. But the analogy is between painting, dancing and storytelling, 1
not between paintings, dances and stories. The painter does not, in his picture, seek to 2
portray the actions of ancestral beings, as do dancers in their steps and storytellers in their 3
words. But like them, he seeks to re-enact ancestral activity – to ‘go over’ it again and 4
again, quite literally in the case of retouching – in the very movement of his work. Thus 5
while painting is an activity, paintings do not depict activity.
Carving, of course, is an activity too. But among Inuit and Yup’ik of Alaska, where 7
the making of masks was most highly elaborated, the carving itself was rather quickly 8
and furtively done so, it was said, as not to offend the spirits depicted (Ray 1967: 52). 9
A shaman who had experienced a vision of the spirit in question would often commis- 30
sion an expert carver to do the work for him, according to his instructions. Once 1
completed, the mask would be hidden away, only to be revealed in the ceremony for 2
which it was intended. Here, borne aloft by a dancer and animated by his movements, 3
the mask would come to life, to be witnessed by the audience as a being in their midst. 4
Thus while the Yup’ik or Inuit mask of an animal spirit, in itself, no more depicts activity 5
than does the Australian Aboriginal painting of a totemic ancestor, the former is perceived 6
as a dynamic, mobile presence whereas the latter is perceived as a static locus of congealed 7
power. This difference maps directly onto the basic distinction between totemic and animic 8
ontologies with which I began. It therefore furnishes an explanation for the remarkable 9
ethnographic fact that masks, which are such a striking feature of the animic societies of 40
the circumpolar North, are conspicuously absent from the totemic societies of Aboriginal 1
Australia.
In preparation for dances and ceremonies, however, Australian Aboriginal people do 3
apply painted designs to their own bodies, and it is perhaps to these, rather than to paint- 4
ings on external surfaces, that the masks of northern circumpolar societies should be 5
compared. Among the Kunwinjku of Western Arnhem Land, the painted body bears 6
the same pattern, consisting of a division into panels ﬁlled in with cross-hatching, that 7
is also applied to painted depictions of ancestral beings in their animal forms, thereby 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 129 •

establishing the essential consubstantiality of the two (Taylor 1996: 118–19). Thus decorated, a ritual participant becomes the living embodiment of the being whose distinctive
pattern he or she bears. So too, the Inuit masked dancer takes on the persona of the spiritbeing whose face is depicted on the mask he carries. But the similarity hides a crucial
contrast. In the masked dance one being, the spirit, takes the place of another, the dancer.
In Aboriginal ceremony, to the contrary, the identities of participants merge with those
of the beings whose deeds they enact. The mask, in short, effects a displacement, whereas
the body painting effects a reincorporation. The one asserts a metaphorical relation of
formal substitution, the other a metonymical link of substantial identity.
Almost exactly the same contrast was suggested by Andrew and Marilyn Strathern, in
a comparison of modes of self-decoration in the Mount Hagen area with those of the
Sepik River and elsewhere in Papua New Guinea. Sepik peoples carve elaborate ﬁgures
and masks, the people of Hagen do not:
The process of decoration in Hagen is not representational but metonymical: that is,
when Hageners wish to associate themselves with magically powerful things, such as
birds, they do not construct masks, carvings or paintings of these. Instead they actually take the parts of the birds, their feathers, and attach these to themselves as
decorations.
(Strathern and Strathern 1971: 176–7)
Likewise, Australian Aboriginal body decoration enhances the power and vitality of humans
through direct contact with ancestral substance, whereas the carved masks of northern
circumpolar peoples invoke the presence of non-human sources of power, namely animal
spirits, with which humans must perforce transact in order to keep vitality in circulation.
In this connection it is signiﬁcant that disposable parts of animals such as feathers, down
and hair, which are used for decoration in both traditions, are attached directly to the
body in Aboriginal Australia, but are invariably attached to masks in the circumpolar
North.
While body painting can be contrasted along one dimension with masks, along another
it can be contrasted with clothing. For northern circumpolar hunters, as we have seen,
the body is conceived as a covering that provides the wherewithal to conduct a certain
form of life. By ‘dressing up’ in the bodies of animals, humans can draw on the practical
effectivities they confer. Painting the body, however, is quite different from clothing it,
for rather than surrounding it with an envelope of capacities, painting serves to bring out,
or render visible, its inner constitution. This contrast, in turn, enables us to explain the
difference between two quite distinct styles of so-called ‘X-ray’ depiction. Kunwinjku
painters, as we have seen, concentrate on the insides of the animal body: its internal parts
and organs and their positioning in relation to one another (see Figure 7.3). In the northern
style, on the other hand, the X-ray view always reveals what is inside the body – its spiritual
inhabitant – invariably manifested as a face. An example is shown in Figure 7.6B, another
mask from the Kuskokwim-Yukon region of Alaska. The mask portrays the body of the
salmon in a somewhat ﬂattened form, but the back has been cut away to reveal the facial
features of the salmon’s spirit. Quite unlike the totemic style of X-ray depiction, exempliﬁed by Kunwinjku painting, in which the emphasis is on the body’s enduring essence,
its bones; in the animic style of the Yup’ik the body ﬁgures as a skin that enclothes its
spiritual inhabitant. The former style is no more interested in the face than is the latter
with the details of internal skeletal architecture.

Livelihood
Finally, there is a contrast to be drawn between painting and carving as techniques of 1
depiction. Australian Aboriginal people were traditionally skilled carvers, yet with the 2
exception of some crude specimens intended for the tourist market (Layton 1992a: 151–2), 3
they did not carve animal ﬁgures. Northern circumpolar people, conversely, knew very 4
well how to paint, and they applied paint to – among other things – their carved masks. 5
But painted depictions of animals or other beings are remarkably rare. I would like to 6
suggest that the difference between painting and carving might be related to that between 7
the totemic focus on the land and the animic focus on its living inhabitants. This sugges- 8
tion is admittedly speculative, and doubtless calls for a good deal of qualiﬁcation and 9
reﬁnement. Nevertheless, the parallel between painting, as a movement that ‘goes over’ 10
and transforms a surface, and the movement of ancestral beings going over and trans- 1
forming the surface of the earth, seems more than coincidental. Likewise, there is a 2
remarkable afﬁnity between carving, as a way of bringing out the form immanent in a 3
lump of material, be it ivory, wood or stone, and the animic understanding of being as 4
immanent within the manifold appearances of the lifeworld. I have shown, moreover, that 5
while painting is akin to hunting in the totemic context, where to hunt is to make one’s 6
way over the land, carving is akin to hunting in the animic context, where to hunt is to 7
engage in a dialogue with its non-human inhabitants.
CONCLUSION
Up to now I have been concerned with the differences between totemic and animic depic- 2
tion. To conclude, it is time to turn to what they have in common. This is most easily 3
expressed in terms of what they are not. In a word, they are not representational. Neither 4
in their painting nor in their carving do people seek to reconstruct the material world 5
they know, through their mundane subsistence pursuits of hunting and gathering, on a 6
higher plane of cultural or symbolic meaning. Whether their primary concern be with the 7
land or its non-human inhabitants, their purpose is not to represent but to reveal, to 8
penetrate beneath the surface of things so as to reach deeper levels of knowledge and 9
understanding. It is at these levels that meaning is to be found. There is no division, here, 30
between ‘ecology’ and ‘art’, as though hunting were merely a matter of organic provi- 1
sioning and carving or painting gave vent to the free play of the symbolic imagination. 2
This division, along with the dualism of nature and culture on which it rests, is of modern 3
provenance, and it lies behind the conventional notion of the work of art as proof of a 4
uniquely human capacity for creative thought and expression.
It is commonly believed that art, like language, is a species universal whose evolutionary 6
emergence marked the advent of humanity itself. This belief, however, belongs to a Western 7
myth of origin which, like all such myths, does more to legitimate the present than shed 8
light on the past. Projecting onto our hunter-gatherer forbears the capacities for every- 9
thing we most value in contemporary civilisation, the entire course of history – including 40
the history of art – is revealed as the glorious but pre-ordained movement of their 1
progressive fulﬁlment.12 The famous paintings of Lascaux or Chauvet surprise us 2
because they seem better than they ought to be at such an early epoch, but we never 3
doubt that they are art. Of course we know nothing about how the people who painted 4
these pictures, some 30,000 years ago, felt about animals, ancestors and the land. It is, 5
however, extremely unlikely that they subscribed to the hierarchical ranking of human- 6
ity over nature that leads contemporary Western observers to celebrate their achievement 7
as the high point of artistic development in prehistory. Such ranking would certainly 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 131 •

have been utterly inconceivable within the totemic and animic ontologies that I have
discussed here.
To be sure, hunters and gatherers have been painting and carving ﬁgures of one kind
or another for thousands of years. But only in recent times, now that their paintings and
carvings have entered the Western ‘art world’ – where they attract curiosity, admiration
and sometimes high prices – have these people begun to engage in the production of art
in the conventional art-world sense of objects for sale or for display in museums and
galleries. Hunters and gatherers of the past were painting and carving, but they were not
‘producing art’. To understand the original signiﬁcance of what they were doing, I contend,
we must cease thinking of painting and carving as modalities of the production of art,
and view art instead as one rather peculiar, and historically very speciﬁc objectiﬁcation of
the activities of painting and carving. We are right to admire the skills of Australian
Aboriginal painters, and of Inuit and Yup’ik carvers. Like all skills, they are acquired
through practice and training within an environment. They are not, however, culturally
speciﬁc dialects of a naturally evolved, and developmentally preconstituted ‘capacity for
art’. The existence of such a capacity is a ﬁgment of the Western imagination.

Livelihood
INTRODUCTION
‘Indigenous or aboriginal peoples’, according to a recent United Nations document, ‘are 5
so-called because they were living on their lands before settlers came from elsewhere’ 6
(United Nations 1997: 3). At the time of colonisation, they were the original inhabitants. 7
This is no guarantee, of course, that their forbears had not, during some earlier wave of 8
population movement, displaced a yet earlier people, nor is it to deny that people of settler 9
origin might develop deep and lasting attachments to the land. But these possibilities 20
raise some awkward questions. Does not the conﬂation of the two terms, indigenous and 1
aboriginal, merely perpetuate a thoroughly Eurocentric image of the precolonial world as 2
a mosaic of cultures and territories that was already ﬁxed in perpetuity before history 3
began? And is it reasonable to withhold indigenous status from persons who were born 4
and raised in a country, among people who likewise have a lifelong familiarity with it, 5
on no other grounds than that many generations previously, their ancestors had arrived 6
from somewhere else?1 Behind both questions is a more fundamental issue about what it 7
actually means to be an ‘original inhabitant’. Suppose – as is widely the case – that the 8
people who were already living on the land when the settlers arrived are no longer alive 9
today. On what grounds can contemporary generations partake of the ‘originality’ of their 30
predecessors?
In the ofﬁcial organs of the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation 2
(ILO), this question is answered in terms of descent. Thus the document cited above goes 3
on to explain, in the same passage, that indigenous peoples ‘are the descendants – according 4
to one deﬁnition – of those who inhabited a country or a geographical region at the time 5
when people of different cultures or ethnic origins arrived’.2 This answer, however, intro- 6
duces paradoxes of its own. For the descendants of these prior inhabitants of the country 7
need no longer live there. Indeed in many cases a substantial majority do not. The very 8
idea that originality can be passed on by descent, along chains of genealogical connec- 9
tion, seems to imply that it is a property of persons that can be transmitted, rather like 40
a legacy or endowment, independently of their habitation of the land. On the other hand, 1
this very habitation is claimed as the root source of aboriginal identity. How, then, can 2
an identity that lies in people’s belonging to the land reappear as a property that belongs 3
to them? There is a profound contradiction here, which it is my purpose in this article 4
to explore. It turns, as I shall argue, on the interpretation of ﬁve terms that have been 5
central to the debate on indigenous peoples, as conducted by academics, policy-makers 6
and representative organisations of the peoples themselves. They are: ancestry, generation, 7
substance, memory and land.

Chapter Eight

Ancestry, generation, substance,
memory, land

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 133 •

I aim to show that the meanings of these terms are linked, within this debate, by way
of their common grounding in what I shall call the ‘genealogical model’. I begin by spelling
out this model, and the assumptions it entails: that original ancestry lies at the point
where history rises from an ahistorical substrate of ‘nature’; that the generation of persons
involves the transmission of biogenetic substance prior to their life in the world; that
ancestral experience can be passed on as the stuff of cultural memory, enshrined in language
and tradition; and that the land is merely a surface to be occupied, serving to support its
inhabitants rather than to bring them into being. I go on to argue that the genealogical
model fundamentally misrepresents the ways in which the peoples whom we class as indigenous – that is, who are regarded as such from a sympathetic, anthropologically informed
perspective – actually constitute their identity, knowledgeability, and the environments in
which they live. I suggest an alternative, relational approach to interpreting the ﬁve key
terms which is more consonant with these people’s lived experience of inhabiting the land.
In this approach, both cultural knowledge and bodily substance are seen to undergo continuous generation in the context of an ongoing engagement with the land and with the
beings – human and non-human – that dwell therein. I conclude that it is in confronting
the need to articulate their experience in an idiom compatible with the dominant discourses
of the state that people are led to lay claim to indigenous status, in terms that nevertheless systematically invert their own understandings.
Before proceeding further I should enter two qualiﬁcations. First, it may reasonably be
objected that formal attempts to deﬁne the indigenous can only be understood in the
political context of peoples’ struggles, against the odds, to restore their security, dignity,
well-being and self-esteem after years of marginalisation and oppression. The intent and
meaning of any deﬁnition, in other words, must lie in the effort to reconﬁgure the relations
between a historically disadvantaged and numerically under-represented minority and the
encompassing nation state (Saugestad 1998: 31). To focus exclusively on criteria of eligibility – let alone on one particular criterion, that of descent – in isolation from the contexts
of their application, surely misses the point. My response to this objection is simply to
stress that what follows is not intended as a contribution to the analysis of the relations
between indigenous minorities and nation states. Rather, I take one particular deﬁnition
of indigenous status, formulated by the ILO, as an example of a way of thinking about
what it means to be indigenous which, I believe, is symptomatic of more fundamental
patterns of thought. It is these underlying patterns that I aim to explore. To observe that
people face a genuine dilemma in articulating their aspirations within the hegemonic
discourse of their erstwhile oppressors is not to question the worth or the integrity of
their political project. They may indeed have no alternative.
The second qualiﬁcation concerns the connection between the genealogical model and
the troublesome notion of modern or Western thought. The examples on which I draw
come predominantly from studies of hunting and gathering societies. In such societies,
people are rarely concerned with tracing paths of genealogical ancestry and descent. Yet
we know from ethnography that in a great many agricultural and pastoral societies, the
narration of such paths is a major preoccupation. Do agriculturalists and pastoralists, then,
operate with a genealogical model? Is this, to revert to an older anthropological terminology, what distinguishes ‘tribal’ from ‘band-level’ societies? By and large, I think not.
As a ﬁrst hypothesis, I would suggest that genealogical thinking in agricultural and pastoral
societies is carried on within the context of a relational approach to the generation of
knowledge and substance. That is to say, it is embedded in life-historical narratives of the
deeds of predecessors, of their movements and emplacements, and of their interventions

Livelihood

– oftentimes from beyond the grave – in the lives of successors. The genealogical model 1
turns this logic on its head. Here, genealogical connection becomes the context both for 2
thinking about relationships and for their enactment, rather than vice versa. Such a model 3
is indeed characteristic of Western modernity. But I would hesitate to attribute it exclu- 4
sively to the modernist episteme. Modern thought cannot have sprung, fully fashioned, 5
from nowhere, but must owe something to more deep-seated and enduring forms of 6
consciousness. As a second hypothesis, I would suggest that the genealogical model is an 7
aspect of just such a form and that it belongs, in this respect, with the generative condi- 8
tions for modernity rather than with modernity per se. To test either of the aforementioned 9
hypotheses, however, would call for a major investigation that lies well beyond the scope 10
of the present chapter.
THE GENEALOGICAL MODEL
Ancestry
One of the most potent images in the intellectual history of the Western world has been 7
that of the tree (Deleuze and Guattari 1988: 18). We use tree diagrams to represent hier- 8
archies of control, schemes of taxonomic division, and above all, chains of genealogical 9
connection. It is the tree as genealogy that speciﬁcally concerns me here. Early drawings 20
of such trees in the Western tradition draw copiously on Biblical imagery, depicting the 1
family of man as so many branches radiating from a trunk whose roots are planted ﬁrmly 2
in the land. Here, at the base of the trunk, lies the autochthonous Adam, the ﬁrst man 3
– who, as St Paul declared in his Epistle to the Corinthians, is unequivocally ‘earthy’. 4
Despite the revolution wrought by evolutionary theory in our conceptions of time and of 5
humankind’s place in nature, this basic picture has remained little changed (Bouquet 1995: 6
42–3). Thus Alfred Kroeber, in his Anthropology of 1948, used the Biblical ﬁgure of the 7
‘tree of the knowledge of good and evil’, rooted in the Garden of Eden, to illustrate his 8
view of the history of human culture as a tree whose branches – unlike those of its neigh- 9
bour, the ‘tree of life’ – could grow 30
together as well as split apart (see 1
Figure 8.1). Contemporary palaeo- 2
anthropologists continue to delve in 3
the earth for human origins, and while 4
the earliest ancestors of man are no 5
longer thought to have been specially 6
created but rather to have arisen by 7
way of an evolutionary phylogeny that 8
is itself depicted as a vast genealogical 9
tree, they remain uniquely placed at 40
the roots of history: in possession of 1
the full suite of human capacities, yet 2
still committed – like all other crea- 3
tures – to a life wholly conﬁned 4
Figure 8.1 ‘The tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good within the natural world.
and evil – that is, of human culture’.
Almost invariably, these ancestors are 6
Reproduced from Anthropology by A. L. Kroeber, Harcourt Brace portrayed as hunter-gatherers. Like 7
Jovanovich, 1948, p. 260.
the earthy Adam, they are supposed 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 135 •

to remain of the land, as opposed to cultivators who, having broken through the
bounds of nature and ‘branched out’ over the territories of the globe, proceed to settle
upon it. This opposition, between people of and on the land, continues to inform public
awareness, in the West, of the difference between indigenous people and colonists.
The former are seen to embody, in their present way of life, the ancestral condition of
those who were ‘there ﬁrst’, at the point where history began. Concern for the heritage
of indigenous peoples is thus tempered by a perception that they, in turn, represent
an essential part of the heritage of global humanity. Their place is understood to lie at
the foot of the tree of human culture. As culture rises from the land, branching out into
its many lines, so history rises up from the ground of nature. That history, however,
is conceived as one of colonisation. In the popular conception, colonists – by the
very fact of their occupation of the land – inevitably establish their domination over
indigenes, just as culture is bound to dominate nature. Land is there to be occupied, but
does not itself contribute to the constitution of its occupants. It therefore lies outside
of history.
How, then, is the connection established between ancestral humans and contemporary
indigenes? The answer, as we have already seen, is generally couched in the idiom of
descent. Present-day indigenous people, it is supposed, are in some sense ‘the same’ as the
people who were there at the very beginning, because the former are descended from
the latter. There is, however, a striking contrast between the image of the tree, ‘rising up’,
and that of descent as ‘going down’, and it is probably no accident that images of the
ﬁrst kind tend to dominate in progressivist accounts of the advance of human civilisation,
whereas images of the latter kind appear in more relativistic accounts of the continuity
and diversiﬁcation of local tradition. Certainly, ever since W. H. R. Rivers introduced
what he called the ‘genealogical method’ into anthropological inquiry, it has been conventional to upend the tree, placing its roots at the top (Bouquet 1995: 42–3; 1996). The
effect of this inversion, however, is to erase the image of the tree as a living, growing
entity, branching out along its many boughs and shoots, and to replace it with an abstract,
dendritic geometry of points and lines, in which every point represents a person, and every
line a genealogical connection. Thus a vertical line connecting two points, A and B, stands
for the proposition, ‘person B is descended from person A’.3 My question, which goes to
the heart of anthropological studies of kinship, is: what, exactly, is implied by this line?
Or to rephrase the question in negative terms, what does it leave out?

Generation
To begin with the positive part of the answer: the implication is that the essential or
substantive components of personhood are ‘handed on’, fully-formed, as an endowment
from predecessors. Their origins, in other words, lie in the completed past, rather than
in the present lives of recipients. From this it follows that the practical activities of people
in the course of their lives – in relating to others, making artefacts and inhabiting the
land – are not themselves generative of personhood but are rather ways of bringing already
established personal identities into play. And this, in turn, answers our question in its
negative formulation. For if the essential elements of personhood are given by virtue of
genealogical connection, independently of the situational contexts of human activity, then
a person’s location on a genealogical chart – in which every line is a link in a chain of
descent – says nothing about his or her actual placement in the world.4 As every person
in the chain is but an intermediary, passing on to successors the rudiments of being

Livelihood

descent-line

received from predecessors, what each does in his or her life – though it may inﬂuence 1
the possibility of transmission – has no bearing on its content. The circumstances of your 2
existence could affect whether you have many, few or no descendants, but not what you 3
pass on to them. A genealogy therefore presents a history of persons in the very peculiar 4
form of a history of relatedness, which unfolds without regard to people’s relationships – 5
that is to their experience of involvement, in perception and action, with their human 6
and non-human environments. I shall return to the distinction between relatedness and 7
relationship, since it is critical for my argument.
What we have just discovered, cleverly concealed behind the apparently innocent graph 9
of the line of descent, is an assumption that persons are brought into being – that is, 10
generated – independently and in advance of their entry into the lifeworld, through the 1
bestowal of a set of ready-made attributes from their antecedents. This assumption lies at 2
the very core of the genealogical model, and all its remaining features can be derived from 3
it. In particular, it implies that the generation of persons is not a life process. On the 4
contrary, life and growth are conceived as the enactment of identities, or the realisation 5
of potentials, that are already in place. It is descent, the passing down of the components 6
of being underwriting one life-cycle to the site of inauguration of another, that generates 7
persons. Thus the genealogical model, in separating out the generation of persons from 8
their life in the world, also splits the descent-line from the life-line. In so doing it estab- 9
lishes the conventional notion of the generation, deﬁned by the Oxford English Dictionary 20
as ‘offspring of the same parent regarded as a step in a line of descent from an ancestor’. 1
Whereas life goes on within each generation, descent crosses from one generation to the 2
next in a cumulative, step-by-step sequence (Figure 8.2).
With each new generation, those preceding it regress ever further into the past. Life, 4
however, is lived in the present. Thus the present is set over against the past along the 5
lines of generational succession and replacement. The conﬁnement of life to the present 6
leaves the past lifeless or extinct. Philippe Descola catches the essence of this view, so 7
characteristic of modernity, in his observation that ‘the present exists for us only thanks 8
to the inexorable abolition of the past from which it proceeds’ (1996b: 226). The idea 9
of the past as an age that is spent, and 30
that has no further part to play in what 1
is to come, is one of the hallmarks of 2
genealogical thinking. But in separating 3
PAST
the descent-line from the life-line, the 4
genealogical model also divorces time 5
from being. The events that follow one 6
another along a line of descent, like 7
life-line
beads on a string, do not take place in 8
PRESENT
generation
the lives of persons, they are persons. 9
The existence of each is collapsed into 40
the moment of the event it represents. 1
And these events, in turn, are suspended 2
in a time that is abstract and chrono- 3
FUTURE
logical (Ingold 1986b: 128–9). The 4
same logic that maps being upon the 5
plane of the present also stretches time 6
to eternity, yielding the classic dicho- 7
Figure 8.2 The relation between descent-line, life-line and
generation, according to the genealogical model.
tomy between synchrony and diachrony. 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 137 •

Arrayed diachronically in linear sequence, reaching back to ‘time immemorial’, persons
of the past are removed from their present descendants by a distance measured out in
generations.

Substance
Now it is commonly supposed that the total endowment a person-to-be receives, by way
of descent, can be divided into two components, respectively material and ideational. The
ﬁrst comprises the ingredients of bodily substance; the second the contents of cultural
memory. It was once customary to speak of the former in terms of kinds – or colours –
of ‘blood’, a usage preserved in the technical concept of consanguineal kinship (connection based on ‘shared blood’) as well as in a multitude of expressions of everyday currency
in the Western world (Schneider 1968: 23–5, Bouquet 1993: 17–21). Nowadays, one is
as likely to hear it said of some feature of a person that it is ‘in the genes’ as to be told
that it is ‘in the blood’. But the sense of such pronouncements has hardly been altered
by the substitution of genetic for sanguinary metaphors. If anything, the science of genetics
has not so much challenged as taken on board – and in turn lent authority to – the
founding principles of the genealogical model, namely that persons embody certain attributes of appearance, temperament and mentality by virtue of their ancestry, and that these
are passed on in a form that is unaffected by the circumstances or achievements of their
life in the world. These principles underly the belief, for example, in a species-wide human
nature which has come down to us more or less unchanged from its evolutionary origins
in the Pleistocene era, while remaining immune to the upheavals of history (see Chapter
Twenty-one).
Where, however, the very same principles are adduced to justify a narrower claim to
ethnic distinctiveness, based on the assertion of common descent from an ‘original’ ancestral population, the claim is bound to take on implicitly – if not explicitly – racial overtones.
This should come as no surprise, since the concepts of race and of generation, in the
speciﬁc sense of procreation implied by the genealogical model, are etymologically linked,
both derived from the Latin generare, ‘to beget’ (Wolf 1994: 1). All attempts to ascribe
indigenous identity on the criterion of descent have been plagued by the problem of miscegenation, and by concern over the degrees of racial impurity to which this is perceived
to give rise. What proportion of colonists can one number among one’s ancestors while
yet qualifying as an indigenous person? If indigenous people are marked out by their
common possession of an ancestral essence, how can some persons claim to be more
indigenous than others? In practice, efforts to accommodate the real complexities of
genealogical connection within essentialist categorisations based on the sharing of substance
through descent have invariably led to the endless ramiﬁcation of ever ﬁner lines of discrimination and exclusion whose imposition – which may have real consequences for those
affected in terms of access to resources and arenas of decision-making – appears increasingly arbitrary.

Memory
Turning from the transmitted component of bodily substance to the ideational component of cultural memory, we ﬁnd the assumptions of the genealogical model replicated,
once again, in an approach to culture as a corpus of traditional wisdom, handed
down as a legacy from the past, and which is applied or expressed, rather than actually

Livelihood
generated, in the contexts of present activity. This approach has venerable anthropo- 1
logical antecedents, and continues to inform much contemporary discussion. Culture, it 2
is commonly said, consists of ‘what one needs to know in order to behave as a func- 3
tioning member of one’s society’.5 Notice how, in this view, the acquisition of cultural 4
knowledge is clearly distinguished from the practicalities of its use that come under the 5
rubric of ‘functioning’. What divides acquisition from functioning is none other than the 6
division, inherent in the genealogical model, between the generation of persons and their 7
life in the world. As the descent-line is split off from the life-line, so the intergenerational 8
transmission of knowledge is distinguished from environmentally situated experience. And 9
in psychology as in biology, mainstream science has incorporated the principles of the 10
model into its own conceptual frame. Thus a distinction is posited between ‘social learning’, 1
by which information is copied into the head of the novice, and ‘individual learning’, 2
born of the experience of putting it into practice (I return to this distinction in Chapter 3
Twenty-one, pp. 386–7). The former takes place across generations; the latter is conﬁned 4
within each generation. A glance at Figure 8.2 reveals the congruence between these 5
concepts and the terms of the genealogical model.
What does all this imply about memory? If culture is taken to consist of a body of 7
acquired information that is available for transmission independently of the contexts 8
of its application in the world, then memory must be something like an inner cabinet of 9
the mind, in which this information is stored and preserved from the vagaries of everyday 20
life. Whatever people do, or wherever they go, they carry the contents of memory with 1
them. It is an encyclopaedic resource on which they can continually draw for guidance 2
on how to proceed in a manner appropriate to the circumstances in which they ﬁnd them- 3
selves. Remembering, then is a matter of retrieving from storage – or ‘calling up’ – items 4
of information relevant to the situation at hand. Critically, this implies that objects of 5
memory pre-exist, and are imported into, the contexts of remembering. They are already 6
present, in some representational form, within the native mind. Thus, far from bringing 7
memories into being, remembering serves to bring out, or to disclose, knowledge that has 8
been there from the start. In short, from the perspective of the genealogical model, remem- 9
bering is no more generative of the contents of memory than is life activity generative of 30
the person. And this, in turn, means that if people share memories, it is not because of 1
their mutual involvement in joint activity within a certain environment, but because their 2
knowledge has come down to them from the same ancestral source, along the lines of 3
common descent. They are bound by an identity not only of bodily substance but also 4
of cultural tradition – by both inheritance and heritage.
Land
If the sharing of substance and memory by dint of common descent is what makes people 9
the same, then what makes them different? Here I want to argue that one of the key 40
entailments of the genealogical model is that difference is rendered as diversity. That is to 1
say, the model leads us to compare individuals in terms of such qualities as they may 2
possess, by virtue of their essential natures, irrespective of their positioning vis-à-vis one 3
another in the world. Diversity is the measure of difference as construed within a compar- 4
ative project of this kind, one that presumes a world already divided into discrete, unit 5
entities – ‘things-in-themselves’ – which may then be grouped into classes of progressively 6
higher order on the basis of perceived likeness. This classiﬁcatory exercise gives rise to the 7
familiar tree-diagrams of taxonomy, with their roots in the highest, most inclusive levels 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 139 •

and branches reaching out into lower levels of ever ﬁner discrimination. Where it is further
supposed that every individual derives the speciﬁcations of its essential nature by descent,
then the taxonomic tree readily translates into a genealogical one.
To be sure, the translation is not perfect – a fact that has ignited ﬁerce and still unresolved controversies among scholars engaged in the reconstruction of both evolutionary
phylogenies and cultural (especially philological) histories. These controversies need not
detain us here:6 they have to do with the method of reconstruction but do not touch the
more fundamental assumption that difference arises from the accumulation of minor variations along lines of descent in the content of transmitted information, whether biogenetic
or cultural, due to errors in the process of intergenerational transcription. In genetics these
errors are known as mutations; analogous forms of miscopying have often been suggested
for the histories of language and culture. Assuming, then, that difference increases with
genealogical distance, we might reasonably conclude that one indigenous person is more
like another from the same ethnic group than a colonist whose ancestors came from elsewhere, but more like the latter – who is, after all, a fellow human being – than, say, a
chimpanzee. But these similarities and differences have absolutely nothing to do with the
life-histories of the individuals whom we are comparing: where they have lived, what they
have done, or whether they share any experiences in common. Their source, in other
words, lies not in current ﬁelds of relationship but in past histories of relatedness.
Now as we have already seen, a person’s position within such a history – that is, their
genealogical position – is ﬁxed quite independently of their position and involvement in
the lifeworld. It follows that the difference between the indigenous person and the colonist,
insofar as it is attributable to descent, does not reﬂect their respective modalities of habitation of the land. Indeed the land, conceived in its broadest sense as a ﬁeld of dwelling
for beings of all kinds, human and non-human, simply has no place at all within a
genealogically inspired conception of biocultural diversity. If each and every individual is
constituted by the sum total of bodily substance and cultural knowledge received down
the line from ancestors, then the land itself can be no more than a kind of stage upon
which is enacted a historical pageant consisting of the succession of generations. At no
point does it enter directly into the constitution of persons – with one exception, namely
at the mythical point of autochthonous origin. And this takes us back to the question of
ancestry.
The genealogical model, it seems, presents us with a stark choice. Either we grant indigenous peoples their historicity, in which case their existence is disconnected from the land,
or we allow that their lives are embedded in the land, in which case their historicity is
collapsed into an imaginary point of origin. In the ﬁrst option, an original connection to
the land is converted into an object of memory that is handed down as a heritable attribute
of individuals without further regard to its source. In the second, it is as though indigenous people lived in suspended animation in a prehistoric world of unadulterated nature
which the rest of humanity has long since left behind. Land and history, in short, ﬁgure
as mutually exclusive alternatives. For indigenous people themselves, by contrast, it is in
their relationships with the land, in the very business of dwelling, that their history unfolds.
Both the land and the living beings who inhabit it are caught up in the same, ongoing
historical process. To comprehend this process, we need a different, relational model, and
it is to this that I now turn.

Livelihood
Ancestry
‘We’re tired of trees’, sigh Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in a moment of exaspera- 5
tion. ‘They’ve made us suffer too much’ (1988: 15). In place of the arborescent, dendritic 6
imagery of the genealogical model they offer an alternative ﬁgure, that of the rhizome. 7
This is to be envisaged as a dense and tangled cluster of interlaced threads or ﬁlaments, 8
any point in which can be connected to any other. Whether the image is botanically accu- 9
rate need not concern us here.7 It has the virtue of giving us a way of beginning to think 10
about persons, relationships and land that gets away from the static, decontextualising 1
linearity of the genealogical model, and allows us to conceive of a world in movement, 2
wherein every part or region enfolds, in its growth, its relations with all the others. ‘The 3
rhizome’, as Deleuze and Guattari repeatedly insist, ‘is an antigenealogy’ (1988: 11, 21). 4
To put it more positively, it is a progeneration, a continually ravelling and unravelling 5
relational manifold. I believe that a relational model, with the rhizome rather than the 6
tree as its core image, better conveys the sense that so-called indigenous people have of 7
themselves and of their place in the world. In what follows, I review the ﬁve terms of my 8
earlier discussion – ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land – in the light of this 9
alternative model. To begin with the ﬁrst, our question is: what is the meaning of ancestry 20
in a rhizomatic world where the rudiments of being are not transmitted along arboreal 1
lines of genealogical connection?
Part of the difﬁculty we have in addressing this question lies in the sheer multiplicity 3
of possible answers. Here I suggest just four. Ancestors can be ordinary humans who lived 4
in the past, or spirit inhabitants of the landscape, or mythic other-than-human charac- 5
ters, or original creator beings. As an illustration of the ﬁrst possibility, consider the 6
following passage in which Signe Howell describes the myriad signs that the Chewong of 7
Malaysia discern as they move around in their jungle environment. ‘These may be paths 8
made by animals, a fruit tree planted by an ancestor, stones which are inhabited by poten- 9
tially harmful beings, fallen tree-trunks, the place where an event in a particular myth 30
took place, etc.’ (1996: 132). The ancestor mentioned in this passage was an ordinary 1
human predecessor whose activity, in this case of planting a tree, left an enduring token 2
in the landscape. But his contribution to successors was not to hand anything down by 3
way of substance or memory (thereby converting ‘successors’ into ‘descendants’); it was 4
rather to play a small part, along with the innumerable other beings – human, animal, 5
spiritual – that have inhabited the forest at one time or another, in creating the environ- 6
ment in which people now live, and from which they draw their sense of being. Passing 7
by the fruit tree, contemporary Chewong may be reminded of the ancestor’s erstwhile 8
presence and deeds, but it is in such acts of remembrance, not in any transmitted endow- 9
ment carried in their bodies and minds, that he lives on.
The second possibility may be illustrated by means of an example from Nurit Bird- 1
David’s account of the Nayaka of Tamil Nadu, South India. ‘Nayaka refer’, she reports, 2
‘to the spirits that inhabit hills, rivers, and rocks in the forest and to the spirits of their 3
immediate forefathers alike as dod appa (“big father”) and dod awa (“big mother”)’ (1990: 4
190, see also Chapter Three, pp. 43–4). For anthropological analysts primed with the 5
genealogical model of kinship, such usages have caused no end of trouble. Surely, it is 6
argued, people cannot really be descended from beings embodied in features of the land- 7
scape, as they are from their own forefathers. Classically, anomalies of this kind have been 118

THE RELATIONAL MODEL

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 141 •

dealt with by constructing a special category of ‘ﬁctive kinship’ which is modelled on, but
nevertheless fundamentally distinct from, the ‘real’ kinship founded in genealogical connection. But the people themselves, for whom there is no anomaly, are telling us something
quite different. It is that the role of parents is not, as the genealogical model implies, to
pass on to their offspring the essential speciﬁcations of personhood in advance of their
entry into the lifeworld, but rather – by their presence, their activities and the nurturance
they provide – to establish the necessary conditions in the environment for their children’s growth and development. This is what kinship is all about. And since the spirit
inhabitants of the land contribute to human well-being equally, and on the same footing,
as do human forbears, providing both food, guidance and security, they too can be ‘big’
fathers and mothers. As such, they are ancestors of a sort, albeit ones that are alive and
active in the present.8
For an illustration of the third possibility, we can return to A. Irving Hallowell’s ethnography of the Ojibwa of Berens River, Manitoba, which I have already considered at
length in Chapter Six. The characters of Ojibwa myths are known collectively by a term,
ätíso’kanak, that translates as ‘our grandfathers’. They include the Sun, the Four Winds,
and the ‘masters’ of various animal species. Despite their mythic status, these ‘other-thanhuman’ characters are entirely real in Ojibwa experience. They are regarded, according to
Hallowell, ‘as living entities who have existed from time immemorial. While there is genesis
through birth and temporary or permanent form-shifting through transformation, there
is no outright creation’ (1960: 27). In other words, the other-than-human grandfathers
have been there all along, living a parallel existence to ordinary humans with whom they
may enter into close and, for the latter, lifelong relationships. Just like human grandfathers, they are a source of protection, and especially of wisdom. But this wisdom, gained
above all through dream experience, takes the form not of knowledge that is ‘passed down’
but of a heightened perceptual awareness that reveals the world of one’s waking life in a
new or enriched light. Crucially, Ojibwa make no more claim to be descended from their
grandfathers than do Nayaka to be descended from the spirits of the landscape.
Grandfathers are ancestors because they were there before you, and because they guide
you through the world. In that sense you follow them. But you are not descended from
them.
The fourth and ﬁnal possibility is most fully elaborated in the ethnography of Aboriginal
Australia. The ancestors celebrated in Aboriginal myth and ceremony were creator beings
who, in their world-forming activities, roamed across the face of the earth, emerging onto
the surface here, going ‘back in’ there, and travelling from place to place – though in no
particular direction – in between. The landscape itself is a reticulate maze of criss-crossing
lines of ancestral travel, with the most signiﬁcant localities at its nodal points. Localities
identiﬁed by particular landscape features – hills, rocks, gullies, waterholes and so on –
embody the ancestors’ powers of creativity and movement in a congealed form. It is these
powers, in turn, that engender living persons. Through conception, birth or long-term
residence a person incorporates the essence of a locality into his or her own being, even
to the extent of substantial identity. A nice illustration of the point comes from Nancy
Munn’s (1970) study of the Pitjantjatjara of the Australian Western Desert. On the subject
of birthmarks – which are called djuguridja, ‘of or pertaining to the ancestors’ – Munn
recalls one woman explaining that a mark on her body was also to be found on a particular ancestral rock at her birthplace. ‘The rock was the transformed body of the ancestor
lying down and the marking was originally his hair’ (Munn 1970: 146). In this case there
is indeed a bond of substance between the ancestor and the living person, but it is not

Livelihood
one of descent. Following Munn, it might better be described as a kind of reverse meta- 1
morphosis, in which the subject-turned-object (the ancestor transformed into the rock in 2
the Dreaming) becomes an object-turned-subject (the rock imprinting upon the body of 3
the living person at birth).
Now if there is one thing that our four examples have in common, it is that in no 5
case can the connections between ancestors and living people be described in terms of a 6
dendritic geometry of points and lines. Indeed there are no points as such. Every being 7
is instantiated in the world as the line of its own movement and activity: not a move- 8
ment from point to point, as though the life-course were already laid out as the route 9
between them, but a continual ‘moving around’, or coming and going. Signiﬁcant moments 10
– births, deaths, encounters with animals or spirits, coming out of the ground or going 1
back in – are constituted within this movement, where the life-lines of different beings 2
cross, interpenetrate, appear or disappear (only, perhaps, to reappear at some other 3
moment). Try to depict the relations between beings, ancestral and living, in the form of 4
a tree, and its boughs would intertwine, grow together as well as split apart, in a profu- 5
sion of cross-cutting connections. Indeed our tree, comprehensively entangled in such 6
transverse ties, would cease to look like a tree at all, and take on all the appearance of a 7
rhizome! As Deleuze and Guattari observe, ‘transversal communications between different 8
lines scramble the genealogical trees’ (1988: 11).9 Our next task is to examine the impli- 9
cations of this rhizomatic view for the concept of generation.
Generation
We have seen that the genealogical model collapses the life of each person into a single 4
point, which is connected to other such points by lines of descent. A relational model 5
presents us with precisely the opposite picture. There are no lines of descent linking succes- 6
sive ‘generations’ of persons. Rather, persons are continually coming into being – that is, 7
undergoing generation – in the course of life itself. To put it in a nutshell: whereas in 8
the genealogical model life is encompassed within generations, in the relational model 9
generation is encompassed within the process of life. But this also entails a radically 30
different conception of the person. According to the genealogical model, every person is 1
a substantive entity, whose particular make-up is a function of biogenetic and cultural 2
speciﬁcations received from predecessors, prior to its involvement with other entities of 3
like or unlike kinds. By contrast, the relational model situates the person in the lifeworld 4
from the very start, as a locus of self-organising activity: not a generated entity but a site 5
where generation is going on.10 Perhaps no-one has expressed the point better than a Cree 6
man from the James Bay region, who, as will be recalled from Chapter Three (p. 51), 7
explained to the ethnographer, Colin Scott, that to be a person is to live, and that life 8
(pimaatisiiwin) is a process of ‘continuous birth’ (Scott 1996: 73).
This, too, is what I had in mind in positively redescribing the antigenealogical, 40
rhizomatic character of the lifeworld as progenerative. Entailed here is a distinction between 1
pro-generation and procreation. The latter term captures the sense of begetting implied 2
when we say that one being is descended from another. It suggests a one-off event: the 3
making of something absolutely new out of elements derived from immediate antecedents. 4
By progeneration, in contrast, I refer to the continual unfolding of an entire ﬁeld of rela- 5
tionships within which different beings emerge with their particular forms, capacities and 6
dispositions. Consider, for example, the relations between human hunters and their animal 7
prey. Thinking genealogically, one would suppose that as humans beget humans, so moose 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 143 •

(say) beget moose – so long as hunters leave sufﬁcient animals alive to ensure their procreative replacement. Not so, however, for the Rock Cree of northern Manitoba, whose
understanding of human–animal relations has been richly documented by Robert
Brightman (1993). Cree say that moose present themselves willingly to be killed by hunters,
and in that way contribute actively to the production of human existence. But conversely,
hunters, in their treatment of kills in consumption and disposal of the remains, bring it
about that the vitality of animals is restored, and so contribute to the production of animal
existence. As Brightman explains, ‘hunter and prey successively renew each other’s lives,
and, indeed, each seems to realize its innate nature in the transaction, the hunter as supplicant and the animal as benefactor’ (1993: 188).
Here, hunting – including acts of killing, consumption and disposal – is the very epitome
of progeneration. In the unfolding of the relation between hunters and prey both humans
and animals undergo a kind of perpetual rebirth, each enfolding into its inner constitution the principle of its relationship to the other. Actual events of birth and death, therefore,
are merely moments in the progenerative process, points of transition in the circulation
of life. Once again, this conclusion stands in stark contrast to the images of life and death
evoked by the genealogical model. For according to this model, as we have seen, life does
not cross generations, but is expended in the present, in the procreative project of
forwarding the elements needed to get it restarted in the future.11 In each successive generation, the life-cycle begins at the point of conception and ends at death. When a person
dies his or her life is over, ﬁnished. With a relational model, by contrast, life does not
start or stop. To borrow a phrase from Deleuze and Guattari, it is a matter of ‘coming
and going rather than starting and ﬁnishing’ (1988: 25). Particular persons may come and
go, but the life process continues. All of existence is suspended in this process. Animals
come when, following the successful hunt, they enter the human community, they go
again with the eventual disposal of the remains. But the animal that has gone has not
ceased to be: it still exists, albeit in another form. And for this reason, there is always the
possibility of its return. As one Cree hunter told Brightman, ‘they say it just comes up
again and again’ (1988: 240).
What goes for animals also goes for human beings. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the relational model tends to be associated with ideas of reincarnation and
cyclical rebirth. When an old person dies, it does not mark the end of a generation, which
will henceforth recede ever further into the past as it is buried under layer after layer of
new people. The fact that deceased persons are no longer present does not mean that they
belong to a past that has been irrevocably left behind, but rather that they have departed
from the living, along a path that takes them to what is often conceived as another land.
Co-presence may be temporally bounded, but existence is not. Or to put it in another
way, the past may be absent from the present but is not extinguished by it. Death punctuates, but does not terminate, life. Writing of the Yup’ik Eskimos of Alaska, Ann
Fienup-Riordan notes that ‘death as a ﬁnal exit had no place in [their] system of cosmological reproduction . . . Birth into the land of the dead was ultimately the source of
continuing life’ (1994: 250). Thus, far from calling for the replacement of one generation by another, death afﬁrms the continuity of the progenerative process. Life is not
compacted, as the genealogical model implies, into a linear sequence of procreative
moments suspended in time, but is itself intrinsically temporal. As the philosopher Henri
Bergson wrote, ‘wherever anything lives, there is, open somewhere, a register in which
time is being inscribed’ (1911: 17). And the life of every being, as it unfolds, contributes
at once to the progeneration of the future and to the regeneration of the past.

Livelihood
I have suggested that from a relational perspective, persons should be understood not as 3
procreated entities, connected to one another along lines of genealogical connection or 4
relatedness, but rather as centres of progenerative activity variously positioned within an 5
all-encompassing ﬁeld of relationships. Every such centre, as Rom Harré puts it, is ‘a site 6
from which a person perceives the world and a place from which to act’ (1998: 3). It is 7
from their emplacement in the world that people draw not just their perceptual orienta- 8
tions but the very substance of their being. Conversely, through their actions, they 9
contribute to the substantive make-up of others. Such contributions are given and received 10
throughout life, in the context of a person’s ongoing relationships with human and non- 1
human components of the environment. Thus, far from having their constitution speciﬁed 2
in advance, as the genealogical model implies, persons undergo histories of continuous 3
change and development. In a word, they grow. Indeed more than that, they are grown. 4
By this I mean that growth is to be understood not merely as the autonomous realisa- 5
tion of pre-speciﬁed developmental potentials, but as the generation of being within what 6
could be called a sphere of nurture.12 It is the role of ancestors, as our earlier examples 7
demonstrated, to establish this sphere by way of their presence and their activity, rather 8
than to pass on the rudiments of being per se. That is to say, ancestors grow their succes- 9
sors, although the latter are not literally descended from them. But this nurturing role is 20
not limited to ancestors: ordinary living persons, too, contribute reciprocally to the condi- 1
tions of each other’s growth as embodied beings. It is in these contributions, as we have 2
seen, that their kinship consists.
Now while each person is at the centre of their own ﬁeld of perception and action, the 4
position of this centre is not ﬁxed but moves relative to others. As it does so, it lays a 5
trail. Every trail, however erratic and circuitous, is a kind of life-line, a trajectory of growth. 6
This image of life as a trail or path is ubiquitous among peoples whose existential orien- 7
tations are founded in the practices of hunting and gathering, and in the modes of 8
environmental perception these entail. Persons are identiﬁed and characterised not by the 9
substantive attributes they carry into the life process, but by the kinds of paths they leave. 30
Beings of extraordinary power, such as the world-shaping ancestors of Australian Aboriginal 1
cosmology or the other-than-human persons of the Ojibwa, can be recognised from their 2
unusual paths which can, for example, leave indelible impressions on the landscape or 3
even disappear underground. In the world of the Yup’ik Eskimos, one class of extraordi- 4
nary persons, the tenguirayulit, are so ﬂeet of foot that they can literally take off, leaving 5
a trail of wind-blown snow in the trees (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 80). While the paths of 6
ordinary human beings and other terrestrial animals remain on ground level, even plants 7
deposit trails in the form of roots and runners in the wake of their advancing tips. Batek 8
women from Pahang, Malaysia, say that the roots of wild tubers ‘walk’, as humans and 9
other animals do (Lye 1997: 159). This may seem an odd idea to us, but only because 40
we think of walking as the spatiotemporal displacement of already completed beings from 1
one point to another, rather than as the movement of their substantive formation within 2
an environment. Both plants and people, we could say, ‘issue forth’ along lines of growth, 3
and both exist as the sum of their trails (see Wagner 1986: 21).
Putting together all the trails of all the different beings that have inhabited a country 5
– human, animal and plant, ordinary and extraordinary – the result would be a dense 6
mass of intersecting pathways, resembling nothing so much as a rhizome. This is not to 7
rule out the possibility that particular growth conﬁgurations may be dendritic in form. 118

Substance

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 145 •

After all, among hunters and gatherers who inhabit a forest environment, some of the
most important persons can be trees! This is beautifully demonstrated in Tuck Po Lye’s
recent study of the Batek, to which I referred a moment ago. For the Batek, trees are
people. They possess agency and sociality. They can be both nurturing and protective,
and dangerous (Lye 1997: 156–63). But of course there is a world of difference between
the real, living tree in the forest and the abstract tree of the genealogical model. For the
former is caught up in a dense network of entanglements with the vegetation that clings
to it, the animals that forage and nest in it, and the humans that live under it. In short,
the tree is but one part of that vast rhizome that is the forest as a whole. Only when it
is abstracted from these rhizomatic entanglements does it appear in its ‘pure’, dendritic
form.
I have already shown that a person’s genealogical position is ﬁxed independently of
their location in the lifeworld. By contrast, every position in the total network of trails
or life-lines is itself an emplacement. Lye draws explicitly on the ‘rhizomatic epistemology’
of Deleuze and Guattari to explain how, for the Batek, places are constituted as nodes in
the endless comings and goings of people, each characterised by its particular assemblage
of relations, and connected to all the others both socially and physically. ‘Important placenames, trails and familiar campsites, like the roots of a rhizome, integrate diverse elements
of the forest and serve as passageways for the ongoing experiences of people’ (1997: 166).
Among hunters and gatherers generally, the most signiﬁcant places are where the paths
of different beings intersect, or perhaps merge for a while before diverging again. It is
here that exchanges of substance occur, for example in episodes of hunting, where the
trails of human and animal cross and from which each leaves bearing something of the
substance of the other, or of gathering, where people pick and consume the fruit of a tree
once planted by an ancestor. Among themselves human persons exchange substance
through feeding and being fed, in the nurturance and sharing that characterises the everyday
life of a camp – which may be envisaged, in turn, as a place upon which the trails of
many people temporarily converge.
Once again, this relational understanding inverts the genealogical model. Instead of
thinking of substance as passing along a line of transmission connecting lives that –
conﬁned within their respective generations – proceed in parallel but never join, persons
are conceived as passing along lines of movement and exchanging substance at the places
where their respective paths cross or commingle. ‘Throughout their lives’, as Bird-David
puts it, persons ‘perpetually coalesce with, and depart from, each other’ (1994: 597).13 I
have attempted to depict the contrast schematically in Figure 8.3; however in limiting the
picture to a mutually constitutive encounter between two persons, A and B, it has been
drastically oversimpliﬁed. In reality, as Fienup-Riordan says for the Yup’ik, ‘the variety of
persons and creatures that one might encounter in one’s path is immense’ (1994: 87). All
of these beings may further one’s growth and development, not only through contributions of substance, but also by way of the experiences they afford.
Thus the contrast shown in Figure 8.3 applies just as well to the growth of knowledge
as to that of bodily substance. Knowledge, from a relational point of view, is not merely
applied but generated in the course of lived experience, through a series of encounters in
which the contribution of other persons is to orient one’s attention – whether by means
of revelation, demonstration or ostention – along the same lines as their own, so that one
can begin to apprehend the world for oneself in the ways, and from the positions, that
they do. In every such encounter, each party enters into the experience of the other and
makes that experience his or her own as well. One shares in the process of knowing, rather

Livelihood

than taking on board a pre-established body of know- 1
ledge. Indeed in this education of attention, nothing, 2
strictly speaking, is ‘handed down’ at all. The growth 3
transmission
and development of the person, in short, is to be 4
of substance
understood relationally as a movement along a way of 5
life, conceived not as the enactment of a corpus of 6
B
rules and principles (or a ‘culture’) received from 7
predecessors, but as the negotiation of a path through 8
the world (see Chapter Thirteen).
A
Memory
With this, we are led to pose a question about 3
memory not unlike the one posed earlier, about 4
ancestry. There we asked: what is the meaning of 5
exchange of
ancestry in a lifeworld where the elements of a 6
substance
person’s substantive make-up are not passed on along 7
lines of descent? The question that concerns us now 8
is: what is the meaning of memory in a world of 9
B
experience where the rudiments of knowledge are not 20
handed down along analogous lines of cultural trans- 1
Figure 8.3 Schematic contrast between the trans- mission? A large part of the answer hinges on our 2
mission of substance according to the genealogical understanding of language. For according to the 3
model, and the exchange of substance according to genealogical model, it is above all thanks to language 4
the relational model. For simplicity, the diagram that the concepts and values of a culture are trans- 5
depicts only two persons, A and B.
mitted from one generation to the next. Not only 6
does this presuppose that cultural knowledge exists 7
in the form of a corpus of transmissible, context-free representations; it also implies that 8
the words of language take their meanings from their attachments to these representa- 9
tions, quite apart from the situations of their utterance in speech. The purpose of speaking, 30
then, is to render explicit, or publicly accessible, meanings that would otherwise remain 1
conﬁned within the interiority of the mind – nevertheless only to those who share the 2
language and are therefore in a position to decode the messages conveyed therein.14 It 3
follows that the loss of a language inevitably leads to the loss of the knowledge expressed 4
in it, which will die out with the last generation of speakers. Much concern over the 5
disappearance of indigenous languages is fuelled by a fear that with them will go tradi- 6
tions that have been handed down from time immemorial, severing once and for all the 7
increasingly tenuous threads that connect present humanity to its ancestral past.
If, however, as the relational model implies, the source of cultural knowledge lies not 9
in the heads of predecessors but in the world that they point out to you – if, that is, one 40
learns by discovery while following in the path of an ancestor – then words, too, must 1
gather their meanings from the contexts in which they are uttered. Moving together along 2
a trail or encamped at a particular place, companions draw each other’s attention, through 3
speech and gesture, to salient features of their shared environment. Every word, spoken 4
in context, condenses a history of past usage into a focus that illuminates some aspect of 5
the world. Words, in this sense, are instruments of perception much as tools are instru- 6
ments of action. Both conduct a skilled and sensuous engagement with the environment 7
that is sharpened and enriched through previous experience. The clumsiness of the novice 118
A

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 147 •

in handling unfamiliar tools is matched, as every anthropological ﬁeldworker knows, only
by his incomprehension of spoken words. What the novice lacks, however, and the knowledgeable hand possesses, is not a scheme of conceptual representations for organising the
data of experience but rather the perceptual sensitivity that enables him to discern, and
continually to respond to, those subtle variations in the environment whose detection is
essential to the accomplishment of ongoing activity. From this point of view, and contrary
to the tenets of the genealogical model, speech is not so much the articulation of representations as the embodiment of feeling. It is a way, as Maurice Merleau-Ponty once put
it, ‘for the human body to sing the world’s praises and in the last resort to live it’ (1962:
187). I return to this point in Chapter Twenty-three (pp. 408–10).
But to live the world is also to inhabit it. Thus a way of speaking is, in itself, a way
of living in the land. Far from serving as a common currency for the exchange of otherwise private mental representations, language celebrates an embodied knowledge of the
world that is already shared thanks to people’s mutual involvement in the tasks of habitation. It is not, then, language per se that ensures the continuity of tradition. Rather, it
is the tradition of living in the land that ensures the continuity of language. Conversely,
to remove a community of speakers from the land is to cut the language adrift from its
generative source of meaning, leaving it as the vestige of a form of life that has long since
been overtaken by its representation as an object of memory. In this regard, the assumptions of the genealogical model have had fateful consequences for the peoples it construes
as indigenous. For so long as it is supposed that the language, and the traditions encoded
therein, can be passed along like a relay baton from generation to generation, it appears
to make no difference where the people are. On these grounds, administrations have often
seen no principled objection to moving their ‘indigenous’ peoples off the land, or greatly
restricting their access, whether in the interests of industrial development or wildlife conservation. It did not occur to them that such displacement might rupture the continuity of
tradition or cut the people off from their pasts.
I have already shown that traditional knowledge, in the genealogical conception,
comprises an inventory of transmitted items that are stored in memory, from which they
may be accessed as required, and expressed in speech or practice. From a relational perspective, by contrast, knowledge subsists in practical activities themselves, including activities
of speaking. And just as to follow a path is to remember the way, so to engage in any
practice is, at the same time, to remember how it is done. Thus hunters and gatherers,
following in the paths of their ancestors as they make their way through the terrain,
remember as they go along. The important thing, so far as they are concerned, is that
the process should keep on going, not that it should yield precise replicas of past performance. Indeed ‘keeping it going’ may involve a good measure of creative improvisation.
A skill well remembered is one that is ﬂexibly responsive to ever-variable environmental
conditions. Thus there is no opposition, in the terms of the relational model, between
continuity and change. Change is simply what we observe if we sample a continuous
process at a number of ﬁxed points, separated in time. The growth of an organism, for
example, is continuous, but if we compare its appearance at different times it will appear
to have changed. So too, the growth of knowledge, conceived relationally, is an aspect of
the growth of persons, in the contexts of their involvement with one another and with
the environment. Just because people are doing things differently now, compared
with the way they did them at some time in the past, does not mean that there has been
a rupture of tradition or a failure of memory. What would really break the continuity,
however, would be if people were forcibly constrained to replicate a pattern ﬁxed by

Livelihood
genealogical descent, or to ‘traditionalize the traditional’, as Bjørn Bjerkli has nicely put 1
it (1996: 18). The effect would be similar to that of a needle becoming stuck in the 2
groove of a record. One could not keep the music going.
We are now in a better position to answer the question I posed at the start of this 4
section. For if knowledge is not received from predecessors in advance of its application 5
in the world, then objects of memory cannot pre-exist acts of remembering. Nor can such 6
acts be understood as purely cognitive operations, of calling up representations already 7
installed within the mind. On the contrary, it is through the activity of remembering that 8
memories are forged. This activity, moreover, is tantamount to the movement of the person 9
through the world. Memories, then, are generated along the paths of movement that each 10
person lays down in the course of his or her life. Earlier, I pointed out that in the terms 1
of the relational model, the progeneration of the future is also a regeneration of the past. 2
Another way of putting this would be to say that the growth of knowledge is, at one and 3
the same time, the production of memory. Journeying forward along a path or trail, one 4
is also taken back to places imbued with the presence of ancestors. ‘Trails’, as Lye observes 5
in her study of the Batek, ‘are routes to remembrance just as they are routes to know- 6
ledge’. She recalls one Batek man pointing out a particular trail to her. ‘That’, he is 7
reported to have said, ‘is a trail of the old people. So when people feel ha?ip [longing] 8
for the old people, they come back here and use the trail so that they can remember the 9
old people’ (Lye 1997: 149).
One more example, from the other side of the world, may be drawn from Richard 1
Nelson’s study of the Koyukon of Alaska (Nelson 1983: 243). He describes how he was 2
taken by an old woman to see a place in the forest where, long ago, the late Chief Henry 3
and his wife Bessie had their ﬁshing camp. Looking closely, one could make out dark 4
bands on the birch trees, where the bark had been removed from which Bessie used to 5
make baskets, and axe marks on the rotting stumps of trees that Chief Henry had felled. 6
Examining these signs, which an untrained eye would have passed over completely, 7
Nelson’s companion began to talk a little sadly about the deceased couple and their activ- 8
ities. She spoke of the skill and sensitivity that enabled Chief Henry to select wood with 9
the best grain for making sleds or snowshoes, or Bessie to weave excellent baskets from 30
birchbark. Yet this same sensitivity, grounded in an intimate familiarity with the country 1
and its inhabitants, also enabled the old woman, in her turn, to recognise the signs of 2
the couple’s erstwhile presence in an otherwise featureless and overgrown patch of forest. 3
Memories may be forged with words, and artefacts with tools; both, however, are the 4
fruits of a certain way of living in the land. For the old woman this way of life was not 5
just an object of memory, represented and passed down in oral tradition, but also a prac- 6
tice of remembering, embedded in the perception of the environment.
Land
What, then, given this relational view of growth and remembrance, makes people more 1
or less the same or different? Not their genealogical proximity as determined by a past 2
history of relatedness, but the extent to which their own life-histories are intertwined 3
through the shared experience of inhabiting particular places and following particular paths 4
in an environment. Common involvement in spheres of nurture, rather than any prin- 5
ciple of shared descent, creates likeness. Persons, as we have seen, are to be understood 6
from this perspective not as preconstituted – or procreated – entities, but rather as loci 7
of growth, of the progenerative unfolding of the entire ﬁeld of relationships within which 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 149 •

each comes into being. The source of their differentiation is to be found in this unfolding.
There is no room, within such a view, for the kind of classiﬁcatory project that groups
individuals on the basis of whatever intrinsic characteristics they might happen to possess,
by virtue of their biogenetic inheritance or cultural heritage, irrespective of their life
in the world. Thus ethnic and racial classiﬁcations are as foreign to relational thinking as
are the genealogically conceived taxonomies devised by biologists for the classiﬁcation of
living things. It is not by their inner attributes that persons or organisms are identiﬁed,
but by their positions vis-à-vis one another in the relational ﬁeld (Ingold 1993a: 229).
The relational model, in short, renders difference not as diversity but as positionality.15
The idea of a ﬁeld of relationships may seem highly abstract, far removed from the
reality of entities and events ‘on the ground’. Yet it is the very dominance of the genealogical model in our thinking, I would argue, that leads us to suppose that things exist, in
the real world, independently of their relations. The relational model overturns this understanding. To exist, it asserts, is already to be positioned in a certain environment and
committed to the relationships this entails. Reality, then, is relational through and through.
The relational ﬁeld is no abstraction but the very ground from which things grow, and
take on the forms they do. Another word for this ground is land. Up to now I have
spoken of beings of various kinds as ‘inhabiting’ the land. This should not be taken to
imply mere occupancy, as though inhabitants, already endowed by descent with the attributes of substance and memory that make them what they are, were slotted into place like
pegs on a peg-board. Positions in the land are no more laid out in advance for persons
to occupy, than are persons speciﬁed prior to taking them up. Rather, to inhabit the land
is to draw it to a particular focus, and in so doing to constitute a place. As a locus of
personal growth and development, however, every such place forms the centre of a sphere
of nurture. Thus the generation of persons within spheres of nurture, and of places in
the land, are not separate processes but one and the same. In the relational model, as
Leach has put it, ‘kinship is geography’ (Leach 1997: 36).
All this has implications for our ideas about permanence and replacement. Recall that
according to the genealogical model, life is encompassed within generations. Every
organism comes with its allotted lifespan, and has eventually to make way for copies of
itself if its kind is to continue. Life, in short, is conceived as but a means to the end of
procreative replacement. The land, by contrast, since it is supposed to contain or support
living things, cannot itself be alive. For if every form of life exists upon the land, then
the land must be inanimate. It does not, therefore, have to be replaced; it is simply, and
permanently there, an enduring surface over which generation after generation of individuals pass like cohorts on the march. The relational model, on the other hand, does
not counterpose the land to its inhabitants along the axis of a dichotomy between the
animate and the inanimate. A founding premise of the model is that life, rather than
being an internal property of persons and things, is immanent in the relations between
them. It follows that the land, comprised by these relations, is itself imbued with the
vitality that animates its inhabitants. The important thing is to ensure that this vitality
never ‘dries up’. As hunters and gatherers have explained to their ethnographers, with
remarkable consistency, it is essential to ‘look after’ or care for the land, to maintain in
good order the relationships it embodies; only then can the land, reciprocally, continue
to grow and nurture those who dwell therein.
This perspective gives us a view of the land quite unlike the inert and timeless, twodimensional substrate of the genealogical model. It ﬁgures rather as an immense tangle of
interlaced trails – an all-encompassing rhizome – which is continually ravelling here, and

Livelihood
unravelling there, as the beings of which it is composed grow, or ‘issue forth’, along the 1
lines of their relationships. I have referred to this ravelling and unravelling as a process 2
of progeneration. Every being, in the course of its life history, works in the ﬁrst place to 3
keep the progenerative process going rather than to secure its own procreative replace- 4
ment. Thus there is no opposition, here, between history and land. Both carry the same 5
intrinsic temporality. Woven like a tapestry from the lives of its inhabitants, the land is 6
not so much a stage for the enactment of history, or a surface on which it is inscribed, 7
as history congealed. And just as kinship is geography, so the lives of persons and the histo- 8
ries of their relationships can be traced in the textures of the land.
CONCLUSION
Indigenous peoples regard all products of the human mind and heart as interrelated, 3
and as ﬂowing from the same source: the relationships between the people and their 4
land, their kinship with the other living creatures that share the land, and with the 5
spirit world. Since the ultimate source of knowledge and creativity is the land itself, all 6
of the art and science of a speciﬁc people are manifestations of the same underlying 7
relationships, and can be considered as manifestations of the people as a whole.
So writes Erica-Irene Daes on behalf of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, 20
which was established in 1982, under the auspices of the United Nations, to hear 1
the views of the representatives of such populations on the issue of the protection of 2
their collective ‘heritage’ (Daes 1997: 3). In this passage she offers a cogent and succinct 3
restatement of the relational perspective. Yet it also contradicts, point by point, the ‘ofﬁ- 4
cial’ deﬁnition of what it means to be indigenous, with which I began. To recapitulate: 5
this deﬁnition classiﬁes as indigenous the descendants of people who were already 6
inhabiting some country or region at the time when colonists arrived from elsewhere. The 7
axiom, formulated so clearly by Daes, that indigenous peoples draw their being from 8
their relationships with the land, is here brushed aside in favour of a claim based purely 9
and simply on proof of prior presence, judged in terms of a linear concept of time and 30
history.
The fact that a certain region was home to a population of human beings prior to its 2
colonial settlement tells us nothing about how these ‘original inhabitants’ understood their 3
relationships to the land. They may of course have felt themselves to have been connected 4
to other components of the lifeworld in the way the relational model suggests. But for 5
contemporary people to claim indigenous status on the criterion of descent from this ances- 6
tral population is tantamount to an admission that for them, ‘living in the land’ is no 7
more than a distant memory. For the principle of descent implies, as we have seen, that 8
people do not draw their substance and knowledge from the land, or from their relation- 9
ships with it, but rather from their immediate genealogical antecedents. At the same time 40
it rules out the possibility of any real kinship with other creatures that share the land, 1
and reduces the activity of dwelling to mere occupancy. In short, the appeal to descent 2
as a basis on which to ascribe indigenous identity contravenes those very understandings 3
that for the indigenous groups themselves, are most fundamental to their way of life. 4
Indeed it seems that a sense of being founded on people’s relationships to the land is 5
bound to be compromised by its articulation in terms of a model that treats these relation- 6
ships as no more than epiphenomena of genealogically transmitted, biogenetic and cultural 7
attributes.

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 151 •

To describe indigenous people as those who were ‘there ﬁrst’ is to situate them within
a history conceived as a narrative of colonial conquest and state formation. It is a designation, as André Béteille comments, that ‘acquires substance when there are other populations
in the same region that can reasonably be described as settlers or aliens’ (1998: 188). In
the eyes of the settlers who went on to take possession of their lands, these earlier inhabitants may well have seemed like archetypal ‘natives’. In a sense, then, the ofﬁcial deﬁnition
of indigenous status faithfully reﬂects the self-perception of the non-indigenous populations of nation states, as descendants of settlers who founded the nations they represent
on alien soil. In these terms, contemporary indigenes are descendants of the colonially
dispossessed. Indeed the categorical opposition of indigenous and non-indigenous
populations, conceived respectively as the descendants of natives and settlers, is itself a
construction of colonialism. For the genealogical model is fundamentally a colonial model,
with its notion of the land as a surface to be occupied, of the lifeworld as a country to
which people can move in order to take up residence, bringing their endowments of heritable substance and knowledge with them, and of generation as serial replacement, such
that the present takes over from, and extinguishes, the past.
To conclude: we are left with the question of why people should feel the need to articulate claims to indigenous status in terms that, by their own accounts, are incompatible
with their experience and understanding of the world. The answer, I believe, is that these
people are compelled to operate in a modern-day political context in which they are also
citizens of nation states. The genealogical model is deeply implicated in the discourse of
the state: indeed it is the principal source of legitimation for the state’s sovereign entitlement to defend and administer its territory in the name of the nation. For the state, the
land belongs to the national heritage, and is held in trust by each generation of citizens
on behalf of their descendants. If it is by appeal to common heritage that the citizens of
the state are made to appear the same – that is, to share a national identity – then only
by stressing their separate heritage can encapsulated groups express their difference. The
construction of indigenous status upon the principle of descent is thus, as I have argued
elsewhere, ‘a product of the representation of difference in the discourse of homogeneity’
(Ingold 1993a: 218). In this construction, the very relationships within which persons are
positioned and from which they derive their identity and belonging are recast as the
outward expressions of inner, inherited properties or attributes that belong to them. It is
in the attempt to recover a lost or threatened sense of relational identity in attributional
terms that people come to deﬁne themselves, and to be deﬁned by others, as ‘indigenous’.

Livelihood

Part II

Dwelling

INTRODUCTION
The chapters in this part explore various aspects of what I have called the dwelling perspective. By this I mean a perspective that treats the immersion of the organism-person in an
environment or lifeworld as an inescapable condition of existence. From this perspective,
the world continually comes into being around the inhabitant, and its manifold
constituents take on signiﬁcance through their incorporation into a regular pattern of life
activity. It has been rather more usual, in social and cultural anthropology, to suppose
that people inhabit a world – of culture or society – to which form and meaning have
already been attached. It is assumed, in other words, that they must perforce ‘construct’
the world, in consciousness, before they can act in it. I refer to this view as the building
perspective. Each chapter explores some aspect of the contrast between the building and
dwelling perspectives, in relation to such topics as the signiﬁcance of architecture, the
perception of the landscape, the idea of environmental change, the practice of wayﬁnding,
and the properties of vision and hearing. In order to lay a foundation for these explorations, however, I begin in Chapter Nine with a general introduction to anthropological
theories of perception and cognition. The fundamental question that all such theories seek
to address is the following: why should people from different cultural backgrounds perceive
the world in different ways?
In the ﬁrst part of the chapter I outline the history of anthropological attempts to
answer this question, starting with the classical work of Emile Durkheim, through inﬂuential statements by Edmund Leach, Clifford Geertz and Mary Douglas, to the more
recent development of the ﬁeld known as cognitive anthropology. Throughout this history,
the assumption has persisted that people construct the world, or what for them is ‘reality’,
by organising the data of sensory perception in terms of received and culturally speciﬁc
conceptual schemata. But in recent anthropology, this assumption has been challenged by
advocates of ‘practice theory’, who argue that cultural knowledge, rather than being
imported into the settings of practical activity, is constituted within these settings through
the development of speciﬁc dispositions and sensibilities that lead people to orient themselves in relation to their environment and to attend to its features in the particular ways
that they do. In the second part of Chapter Nine, I assess the relevance for anthropological understanding of alternative approaches drawn from cognitive science, ecological
psychology and phenomenology. Though my conclusion is that anthropology has more
to gain from an alliance with ecological psychology than with cognitive science, and that
such an alliance accords well with a phenomenology of dwelling, there are still problems
to be faced in overcoming the dichotomy between culture and biology, in reconciling a

Dwelling
phenomenology of the body with an ecology of mind, and in translating the overall theo- 1
retical perspective into a practicable programme of research.
Chapter Ten explores how a dwelling perspective might affect our understanding of the 3
similarities and differences between the ways in which human beings and other animals 4
create environments for themselves. I am concerned, in particular, with the meaning of 5
architecture, or that part of the environment conventionally described as ‘built’. I start by 6
documenting the transition in my own thinking from a ‘building perspective’, according 7
to which worlds are made before they are lived in, to a ‘dwelling perspective’, according 8
to which the forms people build, whether in the imagination or on the ground, only arise 9
within the current of their life activities. Drawing on Jakob von Uexküll’s notion of 10
Umwelt, I show how we might distinguish between human and non-human constructions 1
in the terms of the building perspective, on the basis of the presence or absence of an 2
intentional project of design. This argument, however, implies the existence of some kind 3
of threshold in human evolution, beyond which our ancestors were able to author their 4
own projects. This idea has motivated the search for a point of origin for humanity in 5
general, and for human architecture in particular. Through the adoption of a dwelling 6
perspective, inﬂuenced by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger, I show that the point of 7
origin is illusory. There can, then, be no absolute distinction between ‘natural’ and ‘arti- 8
ﬁcial’ structures. Buildings, like other environmental structures, are never complete but 9
continually under construction, and have life-histories of involvement with both their 20
human and non-human inhabitants. Whether, at a certain point in its life history, a struc- 1
ture looks to us like a building or not will depend on the extent and nature of human 2
involvement in its formation.
In Chapter Eleven I turn to what I consider to be the unifying themes of archaeology 4
and sociocultural anthropology: namely, landscape and temporality. This chapter is an 5
attempt to show how the temporality of the landscape might be understood by way of a 6
dwelling perspective. I ﬁrst set out to clarify the meaning of ‘landscape’ by contrast to 7
the concepts of land, nature, space and environment. I then introduce the notion of 8
‘taskscape’ to denote a pattern of dwelling activities. The intrinsic temporality of the 9
taskscape, I argue, lies in its rhythmic interrelations or patterns of resonance. At ﬁrst glance 30
the opposition between landscape and taskscape seems to mirror that, in the ﬁeld of art, 1
between painting and music. However by considering how taskscape relates to landscape, 2
the distinction between them is ultimately dissolved, and the landscape itself is shown to 3
be fundamentally temporal. I illustrate the thesis of the temporality of the landscape 4
through an analysis of the scene depicted by Pieter Bruegel the Elder in his painting The 5
harvesters. In conclusion, I criticise the view that a properly cultural ecology would be one 6
that would go beyond strictly pragmatic concerns with the conditions of adaptation to 7
focus on the multiple layers of symbolic meaning with which people cover over their envi- 8
ronments. For meaning, I contend, does not cover the world but is immanent in the 9
contexts of people’s pragmatic engagements with its constituents. But the discovery of 40
meaning in the landscape has to begin from a recognition of its temporality, and in this 1
lies the essence of archaeological investigation.
The signiﬁcance of the contrast between building and dwelling perspectives for cosmo- 3
logical conceptions of ‘the earth’ is my theme in Chapter Twelve. I argue that the image 4
of the earth as a globe, implied in such phrases as ‘global environmental change’, is one 5
that actually expels humanity from the lifeworld, such that rather than the environment 6
surrounding us, it is we who have surrounded it. Far from reintegrating human society 7
into the world of nature, the idea of the earth as a solid globe of opaque materiality marks 118

Introduction to Part II • 155 •

their ﬁnal separation. Thus the biodiversity of locally distributed life-forms presents itself
to a universal, globally distributed humanity. The conservation ethic entailed in such a
global vision, which places nature on the inside and humanity on the outside, is at once
ecocentric and anthropocircumferential. Against this, I examine the contrasting image of
the sphere, conjuring up a transparent lifeworld which is perceived by its inhabitants from
within. This image, which is characteristic of the cosmologies of pre-modern societies, is
genuinely anthropocentric, but in a way that counterposes neither humanity and nature,
nor the local and the global. I show how the shift from a spherical to a global perspective marks the triumph of technology over cosmology. But it also leads to the systematic
disempowerment of local communities, taking from them – in the name of preserving
biodiversity – the responsibility to care for their own environments.
From my discussion of the landscape and of the topological image of the globe in
Chapters Eleven and Twelve, it is clear that in the building perspective (as in the genealogical model of Chapter Eight) the earth is presented to humanity as a surface to be occupied
rather than a world to be inhabited. It is further supposed that the disposition of things
and places on this surface is known by representing it, either in the mind or on paper,
in the form of a map. Thus to know where one is entails identifying one’s current position with a corresponding location on the map, and to ﬁnd one’s way from one position
to another is to navigate by means of it. In Chapter Thirteen I take a critical look at the
notion of the map, and its application in anthropological studies of wayﬁnding and navigation. I argue that while dwelling in the world entails movement, this movement is not
between locations in space but between places in a network of coming and going that I
call a region. To know one’s whereabouts is thus to be able to connect one’s latest movements to narratives of journeys previously made, by oneself and others. In wayﬁnding,
people do not traverse the surface of a world whose layout is ﬁxed in advance – as represented on the cartographic map. Rather, they ‘feel their way’ through a world that is itself
in motion, continually coming into being through the combined action of human and
non-human agencies. I develop a notion of mapping as the narrative re-enactment of journeys made, and of maps as the inscriptions to which such re-enactments may possibly
give rise. However, the building perspective enshrined in modern science splits mapping
into the phases of mapmaking and map-using, and likewise splits wayﬁnding into the twin
projects of cartography and navigation.
In Chapter Fourteen I turn to a problem in the anthropology of the senses. Does a
building perspective imply the hegemony of vision? Is hearing the predominant sense of
dwelling? To regain an appreciation of human dwelling in the world is it necessary to
rebalance the sensorium, giving greater weight to the ear, and less to the eye, in the ratio
of the senses? Many philosophers and historians have noted the ‘ocularcentrism’ of the
Western tradition, its privileging of sight over the other senses as a source of human knowledge. Anthropologists, for their part, have stressed the importance of hearing in the
sensorium of many non-Western peoples. Yet the comparison remains couched in terms
of a dichotomy between vision and hearing whose roots lie ﬁrmly in the intellectual history
of the West. In the terms of this dichotomy, vision is distancing, objectifying, analytic,
and atomising; hearing is unifying, subjective, synthetic and holistic. Vision represents an
external world of being, hearing participates in the inwardness of the world’s becoming:
the former is inherently static, the latter suspended in movement. Whereas one hears
sound, one does not see light, but only the things off whose surfaces light is reﬂected.
This is why hearing is supposed to penetrate the inner, subjective domain of thought and
feeling in a way that vision cannot. It is also why Western thought, for all its dependence

Dwelling
on the written word, and in apparent contradiction to its elevation of sight as the ‘noblest’ 1
of the senses, has tended to treat writing (which is seen) as inferior to speech (which is 2
heard).
But ethnography suggests that people in non-Western societies do not regard vision 4
and hearing as radically opposed, but rather as virtually interchangeable. Nor does their 5
apparent emphasis on understanding through sensory participation rather than external 6
observation entail a bias towards hearing over vision. For many, vision remains paramount. 7
But it is a vision that is non-representational, a matter of watching rather than seeing. 8
Like hearing, it is caught in the ﬂow of time and bodily movement. One can, in short, 9
dwell just as fully in the world of visual as in that of aural experience: indeed for the 10
most part these worlds are one and the same. That this point has been missed in the 1
anthropology of the senses is due to its tendency to treat sensory experience as but a 2
vehicle for the expression of extra-sensory, cultural values. The key question, I conclude, 3
is: what is the relationship between the cultural evaluation of the senses and the ways in 4
which they are practically deployed in acts of perception?

Culture, nature, environment • 157 •

Chapter Nine

Culture, perception and cognition

There is one question that, perhaps more than any other, motivates anthropological inquiry.
Take people from different backgrounds and place them in the same situation; they are
likely to differ in what they make of it. Indeed such difference is something that every
anthropologist experiences in the initial phases of ﬁeldwork. But why should this be so?
How do we account for it? In their attempts to answer this question, anthropologists have
come up against some of the most contested issues in the psychology of perception and
cognition. My purpose in this chapter is to show how they have dealt with these issues.
The chapter is divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part I trace something of the history
of the problem over the past century of anthropological thought. In the second, I go on
to assess the relevance for anthropological understanding of alternative approaches drawn
from cognitive science, ecological psychology and phenomenology. This is a considerable
agenda, and in the space of a single chapter I can do no more than touch on the many
questions raised.

SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY
In British social anthropology (as distinct from American cultural anthropology) thinking
about perception and cognition goes back to the classical work of Emile Durkheim, himself
one of the founding fathers of what was then the new science of sociology. In his manifesto for the new discipline, The rules of sociological method (ﬁrst published in 1895),
Durkheim adamantly opposed all attempts to explain social phenomena in terms of the
psychological properties of individuals. As he famously declared, ‘every time a social
phenomenon is directly explained by a psychological phenomenon, we may rest assured
that the explanation is false’ (1982[1895]: 129). If sociology is a kind of psychology,
Durkheim thought, its object of study must be the mind of society, not of the individual.
This mind, the consciousness of the collectivity, was supposed to have emergent properties of its own, in no way reducible to the given properties of individuals as inscribed in
human nature. But it was not until the concluding chapter of his greatest work, The
elementary forms of the religious life, that Durkheim explicitly spelled out the relation
between the consciousness of the individual and that of the collectivity – ‘the highest form
of the psychic life’ (1976[1915]: 444). He did so in terms of a thoroughgoing distinction between sensation and representation.
The distinction was made on two grounds. The ﬁrst lies in the contrast between the
ephemerality of sensations and the durability of representations. Every sensation, Durkheim

Dwelling
argued, is tied to a particular moment that will never recur, for even if – at a subsequent 1
point in time – the thing perceived has not changed, the perceiver will no longer be the 2
same. We are nevertheless able to represent our experience, and so to know what we have 3
perceived, by catching perceptual images that would otherwise ﬂoat by on the stream of 4
consciousness within the mesh of a system of concepts that remains somehow aloof from 5
this sensory agitation (in a ‘different portion of the mind’, Durkheim suggested, that is 6
more calm and serene). Like language, which is the medium in which concepts are 7
expressed (‘for every word translates a concept’), the conceptual system has a kind of 8
stability: it endures, whilst the stream of consciousness ﬂows on (Durkheim 1976[1915]: 9
433).
Secondly, whereas sensations are private and individual, representations are public and 1
social. Since sensations consist in the reactions of the organism to particular external 2
stimuli, there is no way in which a sensation can be made to pass directly from one indi- 3
vidual consciousness to another. If people are to share their experiences they must talk 4
about them, and to do that these experiences must be represented by means of concepts, 5
which in turn may be expressed in words whose meanings are established within a commu- 6
nity of speakers by verbal convention. Thus collective representations serve as a kind of 7
bridge between individual consciousnesses that are otherwise closed to each other, 8
furnishing them with a means of mutual understanding. ‘The concept is an essentially 9
impersonal representation; it is through it that human intelligences communicate’ 20
(Durkheim 1976[1915]: 433–4).
Following Durkheim’s lead, British social anthropologists carried on with the compar- 2
ative study of collective representations – otherwise known as ‘social structures’ – without 3
paying much attention to the psychological premises on which such study rested. Fifty 4
years later, two of the most inﬂuential social anthropologists of the day, Edmund Leach 5
and Mary Douglas, could still pose the problem of perception and cognition in very much 6
the same terms. Given that the world of our immediate, sensory experience is a formless 7
and continuous ﬂux in which nothing is the same from one moment to the next, how 8
can we know what we perceive? To recognise speciﬁc objects and events in the external 9
world, Leach claimed, the ﬂux has to be cut up into bounded chunks: thus thought frag- 30
ments the continuum of life as it is lived, and the diversity of culture lies precisely in the 1
manifold ways in which the continuum can be cut. Leach’s ﬁrst explicit statement of this 2
theory of perception and cognition was presented in an article on ‘Anthropological aspects 3
of language’, published in 1964. Here he argued that the categories of language provide 4
the ‘discriminating grid’ which, laid over the continuous substrate of raw experience, 5
enables the speaker to tell one thing from another, and so to see the world ‘as being 6
composed of a large number of separate things, each labelled with a name’ (1964: 34). 7
As the child learns its mother-tongue, thereby taking on board a conventional system of 8
named categories, so its environment literally takes shape before its very eyes.
Two years later, Mary Douglas published her seminal study, Purity and danger. Here, 40
too, we ﬁnd the same basic idea: that in perception the world is constructed to a certain 1
order, through the imposition of culturally transmitted form upon the ﬂux of experience. 2
As perceivers we select from all the stimuli falling on our senses only those that interest 4
us, and our interests are governed by a pattern-making tendency . . . In a chaos of 5
shifting impressions, each of us constructs a world in which objects have recognisable 6
shapes, are located in depth, and have permanence.
(1966: 36) 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 159 •

As with Leach, the roots of Douglas’s thinking lie in Durkheim’s theory of knowledge.
This theory, as we have seen, effectively divides the human subject into two mutually
exclusive parts. One part, fully immersed in the sensate, physical world, is continually
bombarded by stimuli which are registered in consciousness as a ‘chaos of shifting impressions’. The other part, however, stands aside from this engagement, and is untouched by
it. Here are located the conceptual categories that sort the sensory input, discarding or
suppressing some elements of it while ﬁtting the remainder into a pre-existing, socially
approved schema. Crucially, then, perception is a two-stage phenomenon: the ﬁrst involves
the receipt, by the individual human organism, of ephemeral and meaningless sense data;
the second consists in the organisation of these data into collectively held and enduring
representations.

CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
The rigid distinction between social and psychological phenomena that British social
anthropology took from Durkheim was not matched by the parallel, North American
tradition of cultural anthropology. The founder of this latter tradition, Franz Boas, consistently adopted the position that the patterned integration of culture, as a system of habits,
beliefs and dispositions, is achieved on the level of the individual rather than having its
source in some overarching collectivity, and is therefore essentially psychological in nature.
Accordingly, American cultural anthropologists of the mid-twentieth century paid a great
deal of attention to the way in which the individual personality is fashioned out of the
cultural materials available to it. In two respects, however, subsequent developments led
to the establishment of a view of perception and cognition more closely in line with that
espoused by British writers. The ﬁrst lay in the separation of culture, as a body of transmissible knowledge, from patterns of observable behaviour. Already in the writings of
Clyde Kluckhohn, and in the review of concepts of culture that Kluckhohn compiled in
collaboration with Alfred Kroeber, we ﬁnd a stress on culture as an internalised system
of rules and meanings as distinct from manifest behaviour patterns and their artefactual
products (Kluckhohn 1949: 32, Kroeber and Kluckhohn 1952: 114). And in 1957, Ward
Goodenough conﬁrmed this separation in his much cited deﬁnition of culture as ‘whatever it is one has to know or believe in order to operate in a manner acceptable to [a
society’s] members’ (cited in D’Andrade 1984: 89).
The distinction between culture and behaviour was once again reiterated, this time by
Clifford Geertz, in an inﬂuential article ﬁrst published in 1966, on ‘The impact of the
concept of culture on the concept of man’. Culture, Geertz argued, ‘is best seen not as
complexes of concrete behavior patterns – customs, usages, traditions, habit clusters –
. . . but as a set of control mechanisms – plans, recipes, rules, instructions (what computer
engineers call “programs”) – for the governing of behavior’ (Geertz 1973: 44). He nevertheless took strong exception to the view, attributed to Goodenough, that the place to
ﬁnd these control mechanisms is inside the heads of individuals.1 Herein, then, lay the
second development: having split culture from behaviour, the former was removed from
the minds of individuals and reinscribed on the level of the collectivity. In a move redolent of Durkheim’s earlier formulation, Geertz insisted that the domain of cultural symbols
is social rather than psychological, public rather than private. Their natural place of abode
is in the intersubjective space of social interaction – ‘the house yard, the marketplace, and
the town square’ – whence they are ‘used to impose meaning upon experience’ (1973:
44–5). For any one individual, the range of symbolic meanings which can be drawn upon

Dwelling
is more or less given by what is current in the community into which he or she is born. 1
But without the guidance provided by signiﬁcant symbols, human beings would be hope- 2
lessly lost, unable to establish their bearings in the world. For unlike other creatures whose 3
activities are more closely controlled by innate response mechanisms, humans depend on 4
a substantial input of additional information, learned rather than innate, in order to func- 5
tion adequately in their normal environments. ‘Undirected by culture patterns – organized 6
systems of signiﬁcant symbols – man’s behavior would be virtually ungovernable, a mere 7
chaos of pointless acts and exploding emotions, his experience virtually shapeless’ (Geertz 8
1973: 46).
Despite his different intellectual roots, in American cultural anthropology rather than 10
British social anthropology, Geertz came to conclusions remarkably similar to those that 1
were being drawn at the same time by Douglas, and that I have already touched upon. 2
Both Geertz and Douglas took culture to comprise a framework of symbolic meanings, 3
common to a community and relatively impervious to the passage of time and genera- 4
tions, which gives shape to the raw material of experience and direction to human feeling 5
and action. Thus to return to our original question: if two individuals from different back- 6
grounds, placed in the same environment, construe it in different ways, the reason would 7
be that each has brought a different symbolic system to bear in organising the same 8
material of sensory experience. Granted, then, that every community has its own partic- 9
ular system for the organisation of experience, anthropological attention naturally came 20
to focus on cultural variation in the organisational principles involved. Geertz, as we have 1
seen, claimed that such principles were to be found in the publicly accessible space of 2
social discourse, and not in the interiority of the mind. But others, taking their cue more 3
directly from Goodenough, insisted that cultural cognition can only take place by way of 4
shared conceptual schemata lodged in the minds of individuals. Their aim was to uncover 5
these schemata, and it gave rise, in the late 1960s, to a ﬁeld of inquiry known rather 6
generally as ‘cognitive anthropology’, though in a narrower and more restricted form as 7
‘ethnoscience’ (Tyler 1969).
COGNITIVE ANTHROPOLOGY
The problem for the cognitive anthropologist, Tyler explains, ‘is to discover how other 2
people create order out of what appears to him to be utter chaos’ (1969: 6). They do so, 3
it is supposed, by grouping the inﬁnitely variable phenomena of the experienced world 4
into a ﬁnite set of named, hierarchically ordered classes. This is done by attending only 5
to those perceptual cues that differentiate things as belonging to one class rather than 6
another, while ignoring those that would indicate the uniqueness of every member of a 7
class. But the ordering principles that govern this process of selective attention are given 8
in the mind, not in the world. ‘There is nothing’, Tyler asserts, ‘in the external world 9
which demands that certain things go together and others do not’ (1969: 7). In other 40
words, the principles of classiﬁcation are arbitrary and subjective with regard to the world 1
whose phenomena are to be classiﬁed. They are to be discovered through the formal 2
analysis of responses provided by native informants to a series of questions of the form 3
‘is this thing here a kind of X?’, ‘what other kinds of X are there?’, ‘is X a kind of Y?’, 4
and so on, all of which are designed by the investigator to elicit precisely the distinctions 5
he or she is looking for.
Despite early promise, the project of cognitive anthropology soon ran into difﬁculties. 7
An enormous amount of effort was put into mapping out rather limited semantic domains 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 161 •

– for example of kinship terms, plant and animal taxonomies or colour classiﬁcations –
without bringing any comparable advance in understanding how people actually negotiate
their relationships with one another, and with their non-human environments, in the usual
course of everyday life. It became apparent that the key to such negotiation lay in a certain
ﬂexibility in the use of concepts and a sensitivity to context that was disregarded by formal
semantic analysis. The neatly ordered paradigms and taxonomies yielded by this method
of analysis seemed to be artefacts of anthropologists’ techniques of controlled elicitation
rather than having any counterpart in the cognitive organisation of the people studied.
The specialised tasks of naming and discrimination that the latter were expected to perform
were not, after all, ones that they would have ordinarily encountered. Indeed the ability
to name things correctly is but a small and relatively insigniﬁcant part of what a person
needs to know in order to get by in the world, so that the greater part of cultural knowledge had still to be uncovered. Above all, cognitive anthropology was unable to grasp the
source of human motives: one learned no more from an analysis, say, of kinship terminology about people’s feelings for one another than one might learn from the grammar
of a language about why its speakers say the things they do.
In recent years, and partly in response to these objections, cognitive anthropology has
resurfaced in a new guise, as the investigation of what are now called ‘cultural models’.
Introducing a seminal volume of essays on Cultural models in language and thought, Naomi
Quinn and Dorothy Holland deﬁne such models as ‘presupposed, taken-for-granted models
of the world that are widely shared . . . by the members of a society and that play an
enormous role in their understanding of that world and their behaviour in it’ (1987: 4).
They differ from the classiﬁcatory schemas identiﬁed by earlier cognitive anthropologists
in three major ways. First, rather than dividing up the continuum of experience into
named categories, cultural models offer a description of the world framed in terms of
networks of interconnected images or propositions, in which objects, events and situations
take on regular, prototypical forms. Actual experience in the real world is then organised
by matching it to the prototypical scenarios built into the simpliﬁed worlds of the cultural
models, and these, in turn, furnish conventional guidelines for action. Secondly, although
linguistic data provide important clues to underlying cultural knowledge, it cannot be
assumed that word meanings stand to components of the cultural model in a simple relation of one-to-one correspondence. The relation is rather complex and indirect, and can
only be grasped through an analysis of the richly textured material of ordinary discourse.
Thirdly, cultural models – to the extent that they are fully internalised – do not merely
describe or represent the world, they also shape people’s feelings and desires. That is to
say, they can have ‘motivational force’ (D’Andrade 1992: 28). As Claudia Strauss argues,
in her introduction to a recent volume dedicated to the demonstration of this point, the
realm of cognition is inseparable from the realm of affect; thus cultural models should be
understood as ‘learned, internalised patterns of thought-feeling’ (Strauss 1992: 3).
Despite these fairly radical revisions, the programme of cognitive anthropology remains
basically unchanged. Starting from the premise that culture consists in a corpus of intergenerationally transmissible knowledge, as distinct from the ways in which it is put to use
in practical contexts of perception and action, the objective is to discover how this knowledge is organised. Moreover the assumptions on which the programme rests are much as
they were in Durkheim’s day. They are that cognition consists of a process of matching
sensory experience to stable conceptual schemata, that much if not all of the order that
people claim to perceive in the world – and especially the social world – is imposed by
the mind rather than given in experience, that people are able to understand one another

Dwelling
to the extent that their cultural orderings are founded on consensus (such that the limits 1
of consensus deﬁne the boundaries of society), and that the acquisition of such orderings 2
involves a process of internalisation. These assumptions have not, however, gone unchal- 3
lenged – indeed there is a powerful movement within contemporary anthropology that 4
would reject them altogether. One of the most inﬂuential ﬁgures in this movement has 5
been Pierre Bourdieu, who in a series of works has attempted to show how cultural know- 6
ledge, rather than being imported by the mind into contexts of experience, is itself 7
generated within these contexts in the course of people’s involvement with others in the 8
practical business of life. Through such involvement, people acquire the speciﬁc disposi- 9
tions and sensibilities that lead them to orient themselves in relation to their environment 10
and to attend to its features in the particular ways that they do. These dispositions and 1
sensibilities add up to what Bourdieu calls the habitus (1990: 52–65).2
THE THEORY OF PRACTICE
Like the ‘cultural model’ of cognitive anthropology, the habitus of Bourdieu’s theory of prac- 6
tice could be described as a pattern of thought-feeling. The similarity ends there, however. 7
For thinking and feeling, in Bourdieu’s account, do not go on in an interior subjective 8
(or intersubjective) space of images and representations but in the space of people’s actual 9
engagement in the settings of practical activity. Whereas cultural models are supposed to 20
exist independently of, and prior to, their application in particular situations of use – such 1
as in doing things or making things, or in the interpretation of experience – the habitus 2
exists only as it is instantiated in the activity itself. In other words, the habitus is not 3
expressed in practice, it rather subsists in it.3 What Bourdieu has in mind is the kind of 4
practical mastery that we associate with skill – a mastery that we carry in our bodies and 5
that is refractory to formulation in terms of any system of mental rules and representations. 6
Such skill is acquired not through formal instruction, but by routinely carrying out speciﬁc 7
tasks involving characteristic postures and gestures, or what Bourdieu calls a particular body 8
hexis. ‘A way of walking, a tilt of the head, facial expressions, ways of sitting and of using 9
implements’ – all of these, and more, comprise what it takes to be an accomplished prac- 30
titioner, and together they furnish a person with his or her bearings in the world (Bourdieu 1
1977: 87). And if people from different backgrounds orient themselves in different ways, 2
this is not because they are interpreting the same sensory experience in terms of alternative 3
cultural models or cognitive schemata, but because, due to their previous bodily training, 4
their senses are differentially attuned to the environment.
In the anthropological study of cognition this kind of approach is perhaps best repre- 6
sented in the work of Jean Lave. Her book Cognition in Practice (1988) is a manifesto 7
for an ‘outdoor psychology’ – that is, a psychology that would take as its unit of analysis 8
‘the whole person in action, acting within the settings of that activity’ (1988: 17). 9
Cognition, in Lave’s view, is not a process that goes on ‘inside the head’, whose products 40
are representations that bear some complex relation to the world outside, but rather a 1
social activity that is situated in the nexus of ongoing relations between persons and the 2
world, and that plays its part in their mutual constitution. It is a process wherein both 3
persons, as knowledgeable social agents, and the settings in which they act, continually 4
come into being, each in relation to the other. Thus thinking is inseparable from doing, 5
thought is ‘embodied and enacted’, and cognition is ‘seamlessly distributed across persons, 6
activity and setting’ (1988: 171). To study cognition is to focus on the modus operandi 7
not of the mind, in organising the bodily data of sense, but of the whole body-person in 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 163 •

the business of dwelling in the world. And if knowledge is shared it is because people
work together, through their joint immersion in the settings of activity, in the process of
its formation.
What, then, becomes of the models and schemata of the cognitive anthropologists? Are
they merely artefacts of analytic abstraction, products of attempts by anthropological
observers to represent manifest behaviour as the output of formal programmes? Or do
they, to the contrary, offer clues to basic truths about the way the human mind works?
The answers to these questions hinge on more fundamental differences of approach which
divide psychologists as much as anthropologists. Roughly speaking, the division is between
advocates of cognitive science on the one hand, and their critics on the other, who ﬁnd
inspiration in an ecological or phenomenological perspective on perception and cognition.
These differences of approach, and some of their implications for anthropology, are
reviewed in the next part of this chapter.

COGNITIVE SCIENCE
In the ﬁeld of psychology, cognitive science emerged as an alternative to behaviourism in
the 1950s, alongside the development of the digital computer. Its founding axioms are
that people come to know what is ‘out there’ in the world by representing it in the mind,
in the form of ‘mental models’, and that such representations are the result of a computational process working upon information received by the senses. The functioning of the
mind, then, can be compared to the operation of a computer program, and the relation
between mind and brain to that between the program and the ‘hardware’ in which it is
installed (Johnson-Laird 1988). But the computing analogy also found its way into cognitive anthropology – I have already referred to Geertz’s (1973: 44) likening of cultural
control mechanisms to computer software – where it was similarly supposed that the mind
is equipped with programmes that construct internal representations of the environment
from the data of sensation, and deliver appropriate plans for action (D’Andrade 1984:
88–9). Whereas cognitive scientists, however, have by and large been concerned to discover
universals of human cognition, which are attributed to innate structures established in the
course of evolution under natural selection, cognitive anthropologists have sought to
account for human perception and action in terms of acquired schemata or programmes
that differ from one culture to another.
How, then, should we view the relation between these two projects? Are they contradictory or mutually compatible? D’Andrade (1981: 181–2) tackles this issue by considering
the ﬁt between programmes and processors. By programmes he means the informational
content of transmitted culture – what is ‘passed along’ from generation to generation. By
processors he means the apparatus of acquisition that makes such transmission possible,
an apparatus that is assumed to be common to all human minds. According to this
division, cognitive anthropology is concerned with the diversity of cultural content, and
with the way in which its organisation is constrained by invariant properties of the
processing devices that govern its acquisition, while cognitive psychology is concerned with
the structure and functioning of the devices themselves, and the way in which they work
on all kinds of information (including cultural information). This formulation, however,
begs a critical question. Granted that mental representations are the products of a

Dwelling
processing of information by acquired cultural programmes, what is the source of the 1
processing apparatus of which these programmes are themselves products? This apparatus, 2
it seems, must already be in place prior to the acquisition of culture; hence its design and 3
operation must be innately speciﬁed. In short, the theory that all human cognition is 4
grounded in culturally speciﬁc schemata can hold only on condition that human beings 5
come universally pre-equipped with the structures necessary to enable these schemata to 6
be acquired in the ﬁrst place.
This is precisely the conclusion reached by Dan Sperber (1985), in the context of his 8
critique of cultural relativism – the doctrine, long ascendant in anthropology, that people 9
in different cultures inhabit different cognitive (or rather, cognisable) worlds, each with 10
its own criteria of rationality and judgement. Relativists argue that just as every non- 1
human animal species, depending on its evolved cognitive organisation, can only know 2
the world in its own particular way, so also every human culture is locked into the cogni- 3
tive framework of a unique worldview. But whereas species differences supposedly have a 4
genetic basis, cultural differences are assumed to be entirely independent of genetic 5
constraint. Thus cultural relativists tend to imagine that theirs is a position opposed to 6
an innatist view of the human mind, and that evidence for the diversity of incommen- 7
surate worldviews only goes to prove that the underlying structures of human cognition 8
are genetically underdetermined and malleable to the effects of experience.
Yet in this, Sperber shows, they are mistaken. Relativists, he contends, have failed to 20
attend to the psychological implications of their assumption that human behaviour is 1
rooted in tradition rather than heredity. Had they done so, they would have realised that 2
a creature capable of taking on not just one form of life but any one of a very large number 3
of possible alternative forms would require more rather than less by way of innate program- 4
ming. On the basis of a formal logical argument, Sperber concludes that ‘the greater the 5
diversity of the cultures that humans are capable of acquiring, the greater the complexity 6
of the innate learning abilities involved’ (1985: 43). Thus the relativists’ appeal to human 7
cultural diversity is not at all contrary to the universalist claims of cognitive science; rather 8
it depends upon them.
Though the logic of Sperber’s argument may be impeccable, it rests on a foundation 30
that is far from secure – namely, that cultural knowledge takes the propositional (or semi- 1
propositional) form of beliefs, ‘representations acquired through social communication and 2
accepted on the ground of social afﬁliation’ (1985: 59). Underlying the commonsense 3
understanding of the culturally competent actor is supposed to lie a huge database of such 4
representations, which provide all the information necessary to generate appropriate 5
responses under any given environmental circumstances. Yet as many critics of cognitive 6
science have pointed out, and as the failure of attempts to replicate human skills in the 7
design of expert systems has amply demonstrated (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1987), even the 8
simplest and most routine of everyday tasks are refractory to codiﬁcation in propositional 9
form. By and large, these tasks are not represented (save in the notebooks of observers), 40
nor are such representations communicated in learning situations. Most cultural learning 1
takes place through trial-and-error and practice, albeit in socially structured situations, and 2
although beginners may need to follow rules, these rules structure the situation of learning 3
and do not themselves form any part of the content of what is learned. For the skilled 4
practitioner consults the world, rather than representations (rules, propositions, beliefs) 5
inside his or her head, for guidance on what to do next.4 As Andy Clark puts it, why 6
should we go to the trouble of modelling the world when ‘we can use the world as its 7
own best model’ (Clark 1997: 29–30, see also Chapman 1991: 20)?

Culture, perception and cognition • 165 •

Faced with the evident artiﬁciality of depicting cultural knowledge in algorithmised
form as a set of programmes, acquired by means of a processing device that is somehow
constituted in advance of ontogenetic development, cognitive science has come up with
an alternative model of the way the mind works. Instead of positing one giant processor
with a massive capacity for information storage and retrieval, it is suggested that the mind
consists of a very large number of small, simple processors, massively interconnected, all
operating in parallel, and receiving inputs and delivering outputs to each other along the
countless pathways linking them. Crucially, a system so constituted can learn from experience, not by taking on new informational content, but by adjustments to the differential
strengths of the connections among processing units. In other words, knowledge is acquired
through the establishment of particular patterns of connection: any processor may therefore be involved in the representation of diverse experiences; conversely the representation
of any experience may be distributed across many processors (Johnson-Laird 1988: 174).
This so-called ‘connectionist’ model of the mind has a certain anthropological appeal –
thus cognitive anthropologists such as D’Andrade (1990: 98–9) have noted that the properties of cultural models are precisely what would be expected from the operation of
parallel processing networks, while Bloch (1991) has suggested that the acquisition of practical skills may best be understood in terms of the development of tightly connected
networks dedicated to particular domains of cognition (for a more extended review, see
D’Andrade 1995: 143–9).
Despite its greater realism, connectionism remains open to much the same criticisms
that have been levelled against earlier versions of artiﬁcial intelligence (Dreyfus 1992). For
ultimately, it is still grounded in the Cartesian ontology that is basic to the entire project
of cognitive science – an ontology that divorces the activity of the mind from that of the
body in the world. Thus the body continues to be regarded as nothing more than an
input device whose role is to receive information to be ‘processed’ by the mind, rather
than playing any part in cognition itself. And beyond that, the world is supposed to exist
as a domain of problems to be solved, or as a ﬁeld for the enactment of solutions reached,
rather than as a resource for problem solving (Clark 1997: 83–4). Connectionists, Clark
admits, ‘inherit a distressing tendency to study disembodied problem solving and to opt
for abstract, symbolically deﬁned input-output mappings’ (1997: 80). What they fail to
recognise is that the processing loops that yield intelligent action are not conﬁned to some
interior space of mind, conﬁned within the skull, but freely penetrate both the body and
its environment. This failure is deeply rooted in the history of twentieth-century
psychology. It lies, as Edward Reed (1987: 144–5) has shown, in the founding assumptions of the behaviourist theory that cognitive science claims to have overthrown: namely
that perception is based on discrete bodily sensations touched off by external stimuli, and
that action is based on the corresponding bodily responses.
The objection to behaviourism was that, as a theory, it was incomplete: the simple
linkage of stimulus and response was considered insufﬁcient to account for the knowledgeability of actors or the productivity of their actions. To complete the picture, cognitive
scientists posited a mental processing device that would convert the stimulus input into
knowledge, and generate plans for the delivery of meaningful responses. There is however
another way out of behaviourism, and this is to treat the perceiving organism not as a
passive recipient of stimuli but as an active agent who purposively seeks out information
that would specify the meaningful properties of his or her environment. This was the path
taken by James Gibson in his pioneering studies of visual perception, and in doing so he
laid the foundations for an approach, known as ‘ecological psychology’, which is radically

Dwelling
ECOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY
The point of departure for ecological psychology is the proposition that perceptual activity 5
consists not in the operation of the mind upon the bodily data of sense, but in the inten- 6
tional movement of the whole being (indissolubly body and mind) in its environment. 7
The emphasis on movement is critical. Cognitive science assumes a static perceiver who 8
has nothing to go on but transient patterns of sensory excitation that are, in themselves, 9
quite insufﬁcient to specify the objects and events that gave rise to them. Thus the problem 10
of perception, for the cognitive scientist, is to show how these ephemeral and fragmen- 1
tary sense data are reconstructed, in terms of pre-existing schemata or representations, into 2
a coherent picture of the world. But for Gibson, sensations do not, as such, constitute 3
the data for perception (Gibson 1979: 55). Rather, what the perceiver looks for are constan- 4
cies underlying the continuous modulations of the sensory array as one moves from place 5
to place. In visual perception, for example, we do not see patterns of light but objects in 6
our environment. We do so because, as we move about, the pattern of light reaching the 7
eyes from reﬂecting surfaces in the environment (that is, the ‘optic array’) undergoes a 8
gradual transformation. It is the invariants that underly this transformation, and not the 9
momentary patterns of stimulation themselves, that specify what we see. Indeed it is 20
Gibson’s contention that the invariant relations that structure the modulations of an optic 1
array for a moving observer contain all the information necessary to specify the environ- 2
ment. Perception, then, is a matter of extracting these invariants. The perceiver has no 3
need to reconstruct the world in the mind if it can be accessed directly in this way.
Certain implications follow. First, if perception entails movement, then it must be a 5
mode of action rather than a prerequisite for action. For Gibson, perception is an active 6
and exploratory process of information pickup; far from working on sensations already 7
received, it involves the continual movement, adjustment and reorientation of the receptor 8
organs themselves. What is important, he argues, ‘is the looking, listening, touching and 9
snifﬁng that goes on when the perceptual systems are at work’ (1982[1976]: 397–8). 30
Secondly, if perception is a mode of action, then what we perceive must be a direct func- 1
tion of how we act. Depending on the kind of activity in which we are engaged, we will 2
be attuned to picking up particular kinds of information. The knowledge obtained through 3
direct perception is thus practical, it is knowledge about what an environment offers for 4
the pursuance of the action in which the perceiver is currently engaged. In other words, 5
to perceive an object or event is to perceive what it affords. Perhaps the most fundamental 6
contribution of Gibson’s approach to perception lay in his insight that the information 7
picked up by an agent in the context of practical activity speciﬁes what are called the 8
‘affordances’ of objects and events in the environment (Gibson 1979: 127–43).
Thirdly, the information that is potentially available to an agent is inexhaustible: there 40
is no limit to what can be perceived. Throughout life one can keep on seeing new things 1
in an otherwise permanent world, not by constructing the same sense data according to 2
novel conceptual schemata, but by a sensitisation or ‘ﬁne-tuning’ of the perceptual system 3
to new kinds of information. Novel perceptions arise from creative acts of discovery rather 4
than imagining, and the information on which they are based is available to anyone attuned 5
to pick it up. Finally, and following from the above, one learns to perceive in the manner 6
appropriate to a culture, not by acquiring programmes or conceptual schemata for organ- 7
ising sensory data into higher-order representations, but by ‘hands-on’ training in everyday 118
opposed, in almost every respect, to the project of cognitive science.

Culture, perception and cognition • 167 •

tasks whose successful fulﬁlment requires a practised ability to notice and to respond
ﬂuently to salient aspects of the environment. In short, learning is not a transmission of
information but – in Gibson’s (1979: 254) words – an ‘education of attention’. As such,
it is inseparable from a person’s life in the world, and indeed continues for as long as he
or she lives.
There are clear parallels between the ecological critique, in the ﬁeld of psychology, of
cognitive science and the critique by practice theorists of cognitive anthropology, which
I reviewed in the ﬁrst part of this chapter. Both Gibson’s ecological psychology and
Bourdieu’s theory of practice set out to re-embed perception and cognition within the
practical contexts of people’s ongoing engagement with their environments in the ordinary course of life. And both seek to escape from the sterile Cartesian dualisms of mind
and nature, subject and object, intellection and sensation, and so on. Yet while the impact
of Bourdieu’s work in social and cultural anthropology has been immense, the relevance
of Gibsonian ecological psychology to anthropological theory has been little explored. An
obvious reason for the discrepancy lies in the fact that Gibson himself devoted scant attention to the speciﬁcally social and cultural dimensions of human life, preferring – if anything
– to downplay the signiﬁcance of the distinction between human beings and other animals.
In developing his theory of affordances, Gibson did devote a brief section to ‘other persons
and animals’ in the environment of the perceiver, noting that they have the peculiar
capacity to ‘act back’ or, literally, to interact with the perceiver. Thus ‘behavior affords
behavior, and the whole subject matter of psychology and of the social sciences can be
thought of as an elaboration of this basic fact’ (Gibson 1979: 135). But beyond suggesting
that the perception of mutual affordances in social life involves the same principles of
information pickup as are involved in the perception of inanimate objects, Gibson did
not pursue further the implications of this rather sweeping statement.
A recent attempt to develop this neglected aspect of the Gibsonian programme has been
made by Edward Reed (1988a). The crux of his argument is that social agents can not
only directly perceive their mutual affordances for one another, but also share their direct
perception of other constituents of the environment. Attuned through prior training and
experience to attending to similar invariants, and moving in the same environment in the
pursuit of joint activities, they will pick up the same information (Reed 1988a: 119–20,
see Gibson 1982[1967]: 412). Thus, contrary to the axioms of cognitive anthropology,
the communion of experience that lies at the heart of sociality does not depend upon the
organisation of sensory data, initially private to each perceiver, in terms of an objective
system of collective representations. Rather, sociality is given from the start, prior to the
objectiﬁcation of experience in cultural categories, in the direct, perceptual involvement
of fellow participants in a shared environment (Ingold 1993a: 222–3). This, indeed, is
what makes anthropological ﬁeldwork possible, for it allows the ﬁeldworker and local
people to inhabit a common ground of experience, even though each may bring to bear
a radically different conceptual frame to the task of its interpretation. As Michael Jackson
notes, ‘by using one’s body in the same way as others in the same environment one ﬁnds
oneself informed by an understanding which may then be interpreted according to one’s
own custom or bent, yet which remains grounded in a ﬁeld of practical activity and
thereby remains consonant with the experience of those among whom one has lived’ (1989:
135).
The environment of joint practical activity should not, however, be confused with the
physical world of ‘nature’ (Gibson 1979: 8). For the world can appear in this latter guise
only to a creature that can disengage itself – or imagine itself to be disengaged – from

Dwelling
the processes of its own material life. But the world we inhabit does not confront us, 1
it surrounds us. This does not mean that it is any less real; the environment, however, is 2
reality constituted in relation to the beings whose environment it is. As I have argued else- 3
where (Ingold 1992a), Gibsonian psychology offers a way of thinking about human- 4
environmental relations that dispenses with the conventional dichotomy between naturally 5
given and culturally constructed worlds. According to convention, it is necessary to distin- 6
guish between the ‘real’ environment, as it is presented to detached, scientiﬁc observation, 7
and the ‘perceived’ environment as it is built up through a selective response to stimuli 8
(Brookﬁeld 1969: 53). In anthropology, the distinction is commonly expressed by means 9
of a contrast between the ‘etic’ level of objective description and the ‘emic’ level on which 10
the environment is made meaningful by cultural subjects.5 Yet from a Gibsonian perspec- 1
tive, it is apparent that the world becomes a meaningful place for people through being 2
lived in, rather than through having been constructed along the lines of some formal 3
design. Meanings are not attached by the mind to objects in the world, rather these objects 4
take on their signiﬁcance – or in Gibson’s terms, they afford what they do – by virtue 5
of their incorporation into a characteristic pattern of day-to-day activities. In short, far 6
from being inscribed upon the bedrock of physical reality, meaning is immanent in the 7
relational contexts of people’s practical engagement with their lived-in environments.
PHENOMENOLOGY
It is at this point that ecological psychology makes contact with an older, Continental 2
European tradition of philosophical inquiry, broadly characterised as phenomenological, 3
and represented above all in the works of Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. 4
Just as the point of departure, for Gibson, had been the perceiver-in-his/her-environment, 5
so likewise these philosophers set out from the premise that every person is, before all 6
else, a being-in-the-world. And their intellectual agenda, like that of Gibson, was funda- 7
mentally antagonistic to the kind of rationalism whose contemporary manifestation, in 8
the ﬁeld of psychology, is cognitive science. Yet in some ways they went even further. For 9
all his emphasis on perception as a process that is continually going on, Gibson assumed 30
that the world which the perceiver moves around in and explores is relatively ﬁxed and 1
permanent, somehow pre-prepared with all its affordances ready and waiting to be taken 2
up by whatever creatures arrive to inhabit it.6 From a phenomenological standpoint, by 3
contrast, the world emerges with its properties alongside the emergence of the perceiver 4
in person, against the background of involved activity. Since the person is a being-in- 5
the-world, the coming-into-being of the person is part and parcel of the process of coming- 6
into-being of the world.
Consider, for example, Heidegger’s critique of Cartesianism (reviewed in Dreyfus 1991: 8
109–27). Heidegger begins by distinguishing two ways in which the world may ‘show up’ 9
to a being who is active within it: availableness and occurrentness. The former is evident 40
in our everyday use of the most familiar things around us, which, absorbed into the current 1
of our activity (as indeed, we are ourselves), become in a sense transparent, wholly subor- 2
dinate to the ‘in-order-to’ of the task at hand. The latter refers to the way in which things 3
are revealed in their essential nature to an observer who self-consciously stands back from 4
the action, assuming a stance of contemplative detachment or disinterested reﬂection. Now 5
Cartesian ontology, which takes as its starting point the self-contained subject confronting 6
a domain of isolable objects, assumes that things are initially encountered in their pure 7
occurrentness, or brute facticity. The perceiver has ﬁrst to make sense of these occurrent 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 169 •

entities – to render them intelligible – by categorising them, and assigning to them meanings or functions, before they can be made available for use. Heidegger, however, reverses
this order of priority. For a being whose primary condition of existence is that of dwelling
in the world, things are initially encountered in their availableness, as already integrated
into a set of practices for ‘coping’ or getting by. To reveal their occurrent properties,
things have to be rendered unintelligible by stripping away the signiﬁcance they derive
from contexts of ordinary use. This, of course, is the explicit project of natural science,
which seeks to describe and explain a world which the rest of us are preoccupied with
living in. Yet the scientist, like everyone else, is a being-in-the-world, and scientiﬁc practice, as any other skilled activity, draws unselfconsciously upon the available. Thus even
science, however detached and theoretical it may be, takes place against a background of
involved activity. The total disengagement of the subject from the world, from which
Cartesianism charts a process of building up from the occurrent to the available, is therefore a pure ﬁction which can only be reached by extrapolating to the point of absurdity
a progressive reduction from the available to the occurrent.
If, as Heidegger seems to suggest, self and world merge in the activity of dwelling, so
that one cannot say where one ends and the other begins, it surely follows that the intentional presence of the perceiving agent, as a being-in-the-world, must also be an embodied
presence. This was the principal contention of Merleau-Ponty in his massive treatise, dating
from 1945 [ trans. 1962], on the Phenomenology of perception. ‘The body’, Merleau-Ponty
wrote, ‘is the vehicle of being in the world, and having a body is, for a living creature,
to be involved in a deﬁnite environment, to identify oneself with certain projects and be
continually committed to them’ (1962: 82). Like Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty was concerned
to reverse the ontological priorities of Cartesian rationalism. Just as for Heidegger, the
available is the ground upon which we may seek to reveal the properties of the occurrent,
so for Merleau-Ponty our knowledge of the body as a physical thing – as a mere conduit
or target of the mind’s attention – is grounded in a more fundamental awareness, preobjective and pre-conscious, which is given by the existential condition of our total bodily
immersion, from the start, in an environment. Only because we are thus immersed in the
world can we imagine ourselves as existing separately from it. The problem of perception
lies in understanding the nature of this immediate pre-objective experience, itself a precondition for objective thought. Accordingly, Merleau-Ponty sought to uncover ‘underneath
the objective and detached knowledge of the body that other knowledge which we have
of it by virtue of its always being with us and of the fact that we are our body’ (1962:
206, my emphasis). In this latter sense, the body is neither object nor instrument, it is
rather the subject of perception.
In recent years, albeit somewhat belatedly, many anthropologists have begun to read
Merleau-Ponty with renewed interest. Though there is nothing particularly novel about
anthropological concerns with the body and its symbolism, much work in this ﬁeld is
marked by a tendency to treat body praxis as a mere vehicle for the outward expression of
meanings emanating from a higher source in culture or society. This is true, for example,
of the writings of Mary Douglas. In line with her general thesis, reviewed in the ﬁrst
part of this chapter, of the cultural construction of experience, Douglas holds that the body
is a medium whose forms – whether adopted in movement or repose – ‘express social pressures in manifold ways’ (1970: 93). As Jackson has eloquently shown, this ‘subjugation of
the bodily to the semantic’ diminishes the body and its experience in two ways. First, body
movements – postures and gestures – are reduced to the status of signs which direct the
analyst in search of what they stand for, namely extra-somatic cultural meanings. Secondly,

Dwelling
the body is rendered passive and inert, while the active role of mobilising it, putting it to 1
use and charging it with signiﬁcance is delegated to a knowing subject which is both 2
detached from the body and reiﬁed as ‘society’ (Jackson 1989: 122–3). The ﬁrst reduction 3
fails to recognise that gestures, whatever they might be held to symbolise, delineate their 4
own meanings through their embeddedness in social and material contexts of action. The 5
second reduction ignores a consideration pivotal to Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology: that 6
the body is given in movement, and that bodily movement carries its own immanent 7
intentionality. Indeed it is because of this intentionality that the subject’s action is, at one 8
and the same time, a movement of perception (1962: 110–11).7
Drawing inspiration from Merleau-Ponty, Jackson (1989) calls for studies that would 10
take as their focus the ‘body subject’ in its dealings with the world. In similar vein, and 1
linking Merleau-Ponty’s concerns with perception to Bourdieu’s with practice, Thomas 2
Csordas (1990) puts the case for the establishment of a ‘paradigm of embodiment’ in 3
anthropological inquiry. Far from treating the body as an object of study, this paradigm 4
would be launched from the postulate that ‘the body is to be considered as the subject of 5
culture, or in other words as the existential [as opposed to the cognitive] ground of culture’ 6
(1990: 5). In its promise to collapse the Cartesian dualities between mind and body, 7
subject and object, the paradigm holds a certain appeal for many anthropologists whose 8
familiarity with indigenous, non-Western understandings – which are not generally concor- 9
dant with such dualities – predisposes them to adopt a critical attitude towards the 20
foundational assumptions of Western thought and science. Not everyone has been won 1
over, however, as is evident from the continuing strength of cognitive anthropology, and 2
from the pronouncements of anthropologists such as Bloch (1991), D’Andrade (1995) 3
and Sperber (1996) who see a role for anthropology in an interdisciplinary alliance with 4
cognitive science. Moreover, as I shall show by way of conclusion, there remain three 5
major obstacles to the further development of the phenomenological approach.
CONCLUSION
The ﬁrst obstacle has to do with the problematic status of biology. Even anthropologists 30
who would readily accept the idea of embodiment as a paradigm for the study of culture, 1
and who denounce the mind/body distinction, tend to balk at attempts to soften the 2
conventional dichotomy between culture and biology (for example, Csordas 1990: 36). 3
In effect, the dichotomy remains as strong as it always was; only the body has been repo- 4
sitioned. Formerly placed with the organism on the side of biology, the body has now 5
reappeared as a ‘subject’ on the side of culture. Far from collapsing the Cartesian dualism 6
of subject and object, this move actually serves to reproduce it. Moreover it leaves the 7
organism bodiless, reduced to an inchoate mass of biological potential. The embodiment 8
of culture, in short, leads to nothing less than the disembodiment of the organism! Indeed 9
to posit some kind of biological residuum that exists prior to, and independently of, the 40
culturally constituted body is to resort to the very objectivism that a phenomenological 1
approach claims to repudiate (Morton 1995). It seems to me that to consolidate the theo- 2
retical gains brought by the paradigm of embodiment, one ﬁnal step has yet to be taken: 3
that is, to recognise that the body is the human organism, and that the process of embod- 4
iment is one and the same as the development of that organism in its environment.
This leads to the second obstacle, which is that the cause of dissolving the division 6
between body and mind is ill-served by emphasising one term to the exclusion of the 7
other. One could, in principle, speak just as well of enmindment as of embodiment, to 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 171 •

emphasise the way in which the body and its surroundings are incorporated into those
processing loops that underwrite human powers of agency and intentionality. Body and
mind, after all, are not two separate things but two ways of describing the same thing –
or better, the same process – namely the environmentally situated activity of the human
organism-person (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 352–3). Mind, as Gregory Bateson always
insisted, is not ‘in the head’ rather than ‘out there in the world’, but immanent in the
active, perceptual engagement of organism and environment (Bateson 1973). Indeed the
distance between a Merleau-Pontyan phenomenology of the body and what Bateson christened the ‘ecology of mind’ is not as great as might ﬁrst appear.
Finally, even if it is agreed that a phenomenological approach offers a richer and more
‘experience-near’ (Geertz 1984: 124) account of human life in the world than do the more
formal, ‘experience-distant’ concepts of cognitive science, the problem remains of translating this approach into a programme of research that would give us a more accurate
idea than we presently have of how people routinely succeed, in their everyday, skilful
‘coping’, in performing with ease actions that are far beyond the capabilities of any machine
yet devised. It is easy to pour scorn on the efforts of researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence
to replicate the processes at work in the human brain, but as Dreyfus admits (1992: xliv),
no one knows how the brain does it, nor are philosophers in any way equipped to provide
the answers.
What we can say, however, is that the effect of taking the agent-in-an-environment
rather than the isolated, self-contained individual as our point of departure is to collapse
not only the venerable Durkheimian distinction between the individual and society, but
also the division – which has traditionally rested on this distinction – between the two
disciplines of anthropology and psychology. I can see no further intellectual justiﬁcation
for continuing to separate these disciplines. For we now recognise that such processes as
thinking, perceiving, remembering and learning have to be studied within the ecological
contexts of people’s interrelations with their environments. We recognise, too, that the
mind and its properties are not given in advance of the individual’s entry into the social
world, but are rather fashioned through a lifelong history of involvement in relationships
with others. And we know that it is through the activities of the embodied mind (or
enminded body) that social relationships are formed and reformed. Psychological and social
processes are thus one and the same. And the discipline that will be called into being to
study these processes, whatever we choose to call it, will be the study of how people
perceive, act, think, know, learn and remember within the settings of their mutual, practical involvement in the lived-in world.

Dwelling
This chapter is partly autobiographical, and describes my own attempts over the last few 3
years to ﬁnd a satisfactory way of understanding the relationships between people and 4
their environments. It is incomplete, in the sense that I cannot claim to have yet found, 5
or that I will ever ﬁnd, ﬁnal answers to the questions that are bothering me. Indeed, if 6
one of the main conclusions of what I have to say is that so-called ‘ends’ or ‘goals’ are 7
but landmarks on a journey, then this must apply as much to my own thinking and 8
writing as to everything else that people do in the world. The most fundamental thing 9
about life is that it does not begin here or end there, but is always going on. And for the 20
same reason, as we saw in Chapter One (p. 20), environments are never complete but are 1
continually under construction. My purpose here is to consider the implications of this 2
point with regard to our ideas about the similarities and contrasts between human beings 3
and other animals in the ways in which they go about creating environments for them- 4
selves. I am concerned, in particular, with the meaning of architecture, or of that part of 5
the environment which is conventionally described as ‘built’.
In recent years, my own ideas have undergone something of a sea change, which is 7
where the autobiographical element comes in. I began with a view that was – and indeed 8
still is – fairly conventional in anthropology, one that sets out from the premise that 9
human beings inhabit discursive worlds of culturally constructed signiﬁcance, laid out 30
upon the substrate of a continuous and undifferentiated physical terrain. If I differed from 1
my colleagues, at least in social anthropology, it was in my concern to spell out the impli- 2
cations of this premise for the distinction between human beings and non-human animals. 3
I felt sure that the models developed by ecologists and evolutionary biologists to account 4
for the relations between organisms and their environments must apply as well to the 5
human as to any other species, yet it was also clear to me that these models left no space 6
for what seemed to be the most outstanding characteristic of human activity – that it is 7
intentionally motivated. Human intentions, I argued, are constituted in the intersubjec- 8
tive domain, of relationships among persons, as distinct from the domain in which human 9
beings, as biological organisms, relate to other components of the natural environment. 40
Human life, I therefore proposed, is conducted simultaneously in two domains – a social 1
domain of interpersonal relations and an ecological domain of inter-organismic relations 2
– so that the problem is to understand the interplay between them (Ingold 1986a: 9). 3
Starting out from two quite reasonable propositions – that human beings are organ- 4
isms, and that human action is intentionally motivated – I thus ended up with what 5
appeared to be a thoroughly unreasonable result: that unlike all other animals, humans 6
live a split-level existence, half in nature, half out; half organism, half person; half body, 7
half mind. I had come out as an unreconstructed Cartesian dualist, which is perhaps not 118

Chapter Ten

Building, dwelling, living:

How animals and people make themselves
at home in the world

Building, dwelling, living • 173 •

so surprising when you remember that the intellectual division of labour between the
natural sciences and the humanities – and within anthropology between its biological and
sociocultural divisions – rests on a Cartesian foundation. Something, I felt, must be wrong
somewhere, if the only way to understand our own creative involvement in the world is
by taking ourselves out of it. Eventually, it dawned on me that although the problem was
an anthropological one, it would require more than an anthropological solution: what is
needed is a completely new way of thinking about organisms and about their relations
with their environments; in short, a new ecology. And it is towards this new ecology that
I have been groping.
In this task, I have gained inspiration from three principal sources. The ﬁrst comes
from biology, and consists in the work of the handful of courageous scholars – principally developmental biologists – who have been prepared to challenge the hegemony of
neo-Darwinian thinking in the discipline (e.g. Ho and Saunders 1984, see also Oyama
1985). The second lies in what is known as ‘ecological psychology’, an approach to understanding perception and action that is radically opposed to the cognitivist orientation of
the psychological mainstream (Gibson 1979, Michaels and Carello 1981). And the third
comes from philosophical writing of a broadly phenomenological bent, above all the works
of Martin Heidegger (1971) and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962).1 Although developed
independently, in the different disciplinary contexts of biology, psychology and philosophy, these three approaches have much in common. Though I cannot now explore the
commonalities in detail, I want to highlight just two of them that are rather central to
what I shall have to say. First, all three approaches reverse the normal order of priority
– normal, that is, in the history of Western thought – of form over process. Life, in this
perspective, is not the revelation of pre-existent form but the very process wherein form
is generated and held in place. Secondly, the three approaches adopt as their common
point of departure the agent-in-its-environment, or what phenomenology calls ‘being in
the world’, as opposed to the self-contained individual confronting a world ‘out there’.
In short, they maintain that it is through being inhabited, rather than through its assimilation to a formal design speciﬁcation, that the world becomes a meaningful environment
for people.
In what follows, I refer to this position as the ‘dwelling perspective’, by contrast to the
more conventional position from which I began, and which I shall call the ‘building
perspective’. Thus the movement in my own thinking has been from the building perspective to the dwelling perspective. To document this movement, I shall start by spelling out
the ﬁrst of these perspectives, and its implications for the way we understand the construction of the built environment, in greater depth. I shall then explain what is entailed in
adopting a dwelling perspective in its place. Finally, I shall consider how this shift from
a building perspective to a dwelling perspective bears upon the concept and meaning of
architecture.

CONSTRUCTING ENVIRONMENTS AND MAKING WORLDS
Our initial problem may be framed by juxtaposing two statements, the ﬁrst of which will
be familiar to anthropological readers, the second much less so. ‘Man’, Clifford Geertz
has declared, ‘is an animal suspended in webs of signiﬁcance he himself has spun’ (1973:
5). One is led to suppose that non-human animals are not so suspended. Spiders spin
webs, and do indeed suspend themselves in them, but their webs are tangible objects –
they catch ﬂies, not thoughts. But now consider this passage from the delightful but little

Dwelling

known text of Jakob von Uexküll, A Stroll 1
through the Worlds of Animals and Men: 2
‘As the spider spins its threads, every 3
subject spins his relations to certain char- 4
acters of the things around him, and 5
weaves them into a ﬁrm web which 6
carries his existence’ (1957: 14). Now the 7
subjects of which von Uexküll speaks are 8
not merely human, nor even close to 9
human. Indeed he begins his stroll with 10
a particular species of parasitic tick! If, as 1
it would seem, what Geertz says of 2
humankind applies equally to ticks, then 3
what – if anything – does distinguish 4
human from non-human environments? 5
Though it might be said, with Nelson 6
Goodman (1978), that human beings are 7
makers of worlds, this only begs the ques- 8
tion of how human acts of world-making 9
differ from the processes whereby non- 20
human animals fashion their environ- 1
ments. It was this question that initially 2
led me to focus on the meaning of the 3
built environment: not, that is, on what 4
a built environment means, but on 5
what it means to say that an environment 6
is built. How can we distinguish an 7
Figure 10.1 Human and animal architecture. (A) Ground plan environment that is built from one that 8
of beaver lodge (from Morgan 1868: 142); (B) Floor plan and is not? It is all very well to deﬁne the 9
cross-section of Eskimo house, Mackenzie region (from Mauss built environment, as do Denise Law- 30
and Beuchat 1979: 4).
rence and Setha Low in a recent review, 1
to include ‘any physical alteration of 2
the natural environment, from hearths 3
to cities, through construction by humans’ (1990: 454). But why should the 4
products of human building activity be any different, in principle, from the constructions 5
of other animals? Or to phrase the same question in another way, by what right do we 6
conventionally identify the artiﬁcial with the ‘man-made’? And where, in an environ- 7
ment that bears the imprint of human activity, can we draw the line between what is, 8
and is not, a house, or a building, or an instance of architecture (Pearson and Richards 9
1994: 2)?
My ﬁrst efforts to deal with these questions all hinged on a crucial distinction, which 1
I thought quite unproblematic at the time, between design and execution. The argument 2
ran roughly as follows: imagine a mollusc shell, a beaver’s lodge and a human house. All 3
have been regarded, at one time or another, as instances of architecture. Some authors 4
would restrict architecture to the house, others would include the lodge – as an example 5
of ‘animal architecture’ (von Frisch 1975) – but exclude the shell, others would include 6
all three forms. The usual argument for excluding the shell is that it is attached to the 7
body of the mollusc, whereas for something to count as an artefact it must be detached 118

Building, dwelling, living • 175 •

from the body. The shell, it is said, ‘just grows’ – there is nothing the mollusc can or
need do about it. The beaver, by contrast, works hard to put its lodge together: the lodge
is a product of the beaver’s ‘beavering’, of its activity. Likewise the house is a product of
the activities of its human builders. In their respective forms, and levels of complexity,
they need not be that different (Figure 10.1). Should we, then, conclude that the lodge
is beaver-made just as much as the house is man-made?
To this question I answered in the negative (Ingold 1986b: 345–6; 1988b: 90).
Wherever they are, beavers construct the same kinds of lodges and, so far as we know,
have always done so. Human beings, by contrast, build houses of very diverse kinds, and
although certain house forms have persisted for long periods, there is unequivocal evidence
that these forms have also undergone signiﬁcant historical change. The difference between
the lodge and the house lies, I argued, not in the construction of the thing itself, but in
the origination of the design that governs the construction process. The design of the lodge
is incorporated into the same programme that underwrites the development of the beaver’s
own body: thus the beaver is no more the designer of the lodge than is the mollusc the
designer of its shell. It is merely the executor of a design that has evolved, along with the
morphology and behaviour of the beaver, through a process of variation under natural
selection. In other words, both the beaver – in its outward, phenotypic form – and the
lodge are ‘expressions’ of the same underlying genotype. Richard Dawkins (1982) has
coined the term ‘extended phenotype’ to refer to genetic effects that are situated beyond
the body of the organism, and in this sense, the lodge is part of the extended phenotype
for the beaver.
Human beings, on the other hand, are the authors of their own designs, constructed
through a self-conscious decision process – an intentional selection of ideas. As Joseph
Rykwert has put it: ‘unlike even the most elaborate animal construction, human building
involves decision and choice, always and inevitably; it therefore involves a project’ (1991:
56). It is to this project, I maintained, that we refer when we say that the house is made,
rather than merely constructed. I even went so far as to extend the argument to the
domain of toolmaking, criticising students of animal behaviour for their assumption that
wherever objects are manifestly being modiﬁed or constructed for future use, tools are
being made. They are only being made, I claimed, when they are constructed in the imagination prior to their realisation in the material (Ingold 1986a: 40–78). But if the essence
of making lies in the self-conscious authorship of design, that is in the construction of a
project, it follows that things can be made without undergoing any actual physical alteration at all. Suppose that you need to knock in a nail but lack a hammer. Looking around
the objects in your environment, you deliberately select something best suited to your
purpose: it must be hard, have a ﬂat striking surface, ﬁt in the hand, and so on. So you
pick up an appropriate stone. In this very selection, the stone has ‘become’ a hammer in
that, in your mind’s eye, a ‘hammer-quality’ has been attached to it. Without altering the
stone in any way, you have made a hammer out of it.2 In just the same manner, a cave
may come to serve as a dwelling, a stretch of bare ﬂat land as an airstrip, or a sheltered
bay as a harbour.
To deal with situations of this kind, I chose the term co-option. Thus the stone was
co-opted, rather than constructed, to become a hammer. It follows that there are two
kinds of making: co-optive and constructive. In co-optive making an already existing object
is ﬁtted to a conceptual image of an intended future use, in the mind of a user. In
constructive making this procedure is reversed, in that the object is physically remodelled
to conform more closely to the pre-existing image. Indeed it seemed that the history of

Dwelling
things – of artefacts, architecture and landscapes – could be understood in terms of succes- 1
sive, alternating steps of co-option and construction. We press into service what we ﬁnd 2
around us to suit our current purposes, we proceed to modify those things to our own 3
design so that they better serve these purposes, but at the same time our objectives – or 4
adaptive requirements – also change so that the modiﬁed objects are subsequently 5
co-opted to quite other projects for which they are perceived to come in handy, and so 6
on and on. Exactly the same model has been applied to account for the evolution of 7
organisms – Darwin himself used it in his book on orchids (1862: 348).3 To adopt terms 8
suggested by Stephen J. Gould and Elisabeth Vrba (1982), structures adapted for one 9
purpose may be exapted for another, subsequently undergoing further adaptation, only to 10
be exapted for yet another purpose . . . The difference is just that in the case of organic 1
evolution, the selection involved is natural rather than intentional (Ingold 1986b: 200–2). 2
It was in searching around for ways to express these ideas that I came across the writ- 3
ings of Jakob von Uexküll, Estonian-born aristocrat and a founding ﬁgure in the ﬁelds 4
of both ethology and semiotics, to whose Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men, 5
ﬁrst published in 1934, I have already referred. Reacting against the mechanistic biology 6
of the day, von Uexküll argued that to treat the animal as a mere assemblage of sensory 7
and motor organs is to leave out the subject who uses these organs as tools, respectively, 8
of perception and action:
We who still hold that our sense organs serve our perceptions, and our motor organs 1
our actions, see in animals . . . not only the mechanical structure, but also the oper- 2
ator, who is built into their organs, as we are into our bodies. We can no longer regard 3
animals as mere machines, but as subjects whose essential activity consists in perceiving 4
and acting . . . All that a subject perceives becomes his perceptual world and all that he 5
does, his effector world. Perceptual and effector worlds together form a closed unit, the 6
Umwelt.
(1957: 6) 8
For von Uexküll, the Umwelt – that is, the world as constituted within the speciﬁc life 30
activity of an animal – was to be clearly distinguished from the environment, by which 1
he meant the surroundings of the animal as these appear to the indifferent human observer. 2
We human beings cannot enter directly into the Umwelten of other creatures, but through 3
close study we may be able to imagine what they are like. But the reverse does not hold: 4
the non-human animal, because it cannot detach its consciousness from its own life- 5
activity, because it is always submerged within its own Umwelt, cannot see objects as such, 6
for what they are in themselves. Thus for the animal, the environment – conceived as a 7
domain of ‘neutral objects’ – cannot exist (Ingold 1992a: 43).
Towards the end of his stroll, von Uexküll invites his readers to imagine the manifold 9
inhabitants of an oak tree. There is the fox, who has built its lair between the roots; the 40
owl, who perches in the crotch of its mighty limbs; the squirrel, for whom it provides a 1
veritable maze of ladders and springboards; the ant, who forages in the furrows and crags 2
of its bark; the wood-boring beetle who feeds and lays its eggs in passages beneath the 3
bark, and hundreds of others (Figures 10.2 and 10.3). Each creature, through the sheer 4
fact of its presence, confers on the tree – or on some portion of it – a particular quality 5
or ‘functional tone’: shelter and protection for the fox, support for the owl, a thorough- 6
fare for the squirrel, hunting grounds for the ant, egg-laying facilities for the beetle. The 7
same tree, thus, ﬁgures quite differently within the respective Umwelten of its diverse 118

Building, dwelling, living • 177 •

inhabitants. But for none of them does it
exist as a tree (von Uexküll 1957: 76–9).
Now consider the forester, who is measuring
up the tree to estimate the volume of timber
it will yield. For him, the tree ﬁgures as a
potential source of valuable raw material,
whereas for the little child – again to follow
von Uexküll’s example (pp. 73–5) – it seems
to be alive and to reveal a frightening aspect.
But these different perceptions are not tied,
as they are for non-human animals, to the
modus operandi of the organism. Human
beings do not construct the world in a
certain way by virtue of what they are, but
by virtue of their own conceptions of the
possibilities of being. And these possibilities
are limited only by the power of the imagination.
Herein, it seemed to me, lay the essential distinction I was seeking between the
respective ways in which the subjective
existence of human and non-human animals
is suspended in ‘webs of signiﬁcance’. For
the non-human, every thread in the web is
a relation between it and some object or
feature of the environment, a relation that
is set up through its own practical immersion in the world and the bodily Figure 10.2 Fox, owl and oak tree
orientations that this entails. For the From Jakob von Uexküll ‘A Stroll through the Worlds of
human, by contrast, the web – and the rela- Animals and Men,’ in Instinctive Behavior, 1957, pp. 76–7,
tions of which it consists – are inscribed in illustrations by G. Kriszat.
a separate plane of mental representations,
forming a tapestry of meaning that covers
over the world of environmental objects. Whereas the non-human animal perceives these
objects as immediately available for use, to human beings they appear initially as occurrent phenomena to which potential uses must be afﬁxed, prior to any attempt at
engagement. The fox discovers shelter in the roots of a tree, but the forester sees timber
only in his mind’s eye, and has ﬁrst to ﬁt that image in thought to his perception of the
occurrent object – the tree – before taking action. Or to take another example, suggested
recently by Maurice Bloch, the ‘swidden plot’ exists as an image in the mind of the horticulturalist, who has to match that image to an observed stand of uncut forest prior to
transforming it into a ﬁeld (Bloch 1991: 187). As mental representations, the timber and
the swidden plot belong to the ‘intentional worlds’ (cf. Shweder 1990: 2) of the forester
and the farmer; as occurrent phenomena, the oak tree and the stand of forest belong to
the physical environment of ‘neutral objects’. It has been conventional, in anthropological and other writings of Western academic provenance, to refer to these worlds, of
human values and purposes on the one hand, and of physical objects on the other, by
means of the shorthand terms, culture and nature, respectively. And in a paper written

Dwelling
Figure 10.3 Ant, bark-boring beetle and oak tree
From Jakob von Uexküll ‘A Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men,’ in Instinctive Behavior, 20
1957, pp. 78–9, illustrations by G. Kriszat.
in 1987, I concluded that ‘making is equivalent to the cultural ordering of nature – the 4
inscription of ideal design upon the material world of things’ (Ingold 1989: 506). This 5
statement, I confess, is now a source of considerable embarrassment.
THE BUILDING PERSPECTIVE
In my defence, I can only say that I was singing a tune that has been sung by most 30
anthropologists, in one form or another, for decades, in the context of an encounter with 1
students of animal behaviour whose theories had no place for agency or intentionality at 2
all, except as an epiphenomenal effect of innate predisposition.4 This tune is what I earlier 3
called the ‘building perspective’, and I should now like to elaborate on this perspective 4
with reference to anthropological work other than my own. For a founding statement, we 5
could turn once again to Geertz, and to his assertion that culture – or at least that kind 6
of culture taken to be the hallmark of humanity – consists in ‘the imposition of an arbi- 7
trary framework of symbolic meaning upon reality’ (1964: 39). Reality, that which is 8
imposed upon, is envisioned here as an external world of nature, a source of raw mate- 9
rials and sensations for diverse projects of cultural construction. Following from this, a 40
distinction is commonly made between the real environment that is given independently 1
of the senses, and the perceived environment as it is reconstructed in the mind through 2
the ordering of sense data in terms of acquired, cognitive schemata. Other conventional 3
oppositions that encode the same distinction, and that we have already encountered (see 4
Chapter Three, p. 41, and Chapter Nine, p. 168), are between ‘etic’ and ‘emic’, and 5
between ‘operational’ and ‘cognised’. The starting point in all such accounts is an imagined 6
separation between the perceiver and the world, such that the perceiver has to reconstruct 7
the world, in the mind, prior to any meaningful engagement with it.

Building, dwelling, living • 179 •

Figure 10.4 The Mbuti Pygmy camp of Apa Lelo
From C. M. Turnbull, Wayward servants, published by Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1965, p. 357.

Here, then, is the essence of the building perspective: that worlds are made before they
are lived in; or in other words, that acts of dwelling are preceded by acts of worldmaking.
A good example of this approach comes from the introduction to Maurice Godelier’s
book, The mental and the material (1986). Here, Godelier is concerned with the proper
translation of the Marxian concepts Grundlage and Überbau, usually rendered in English
as ‘infrastructure’ and ‘superstructure’. He likens the Überbau to a building: ‘The Überbau
is a construction, an ediﬁce which rises on foundations, Grundlage; and it [the Überbau]
is the house we live in, not the foundations’ (pp. 6–7). Human beings, then, inhabit the
various houses of culture, pre-erected upon the universal ground of nature – including
the universals of human nature. For another example, I would like to turn to Peter Wilson’s
The domestication of the human species (1988). In this book, Wilson argues that the most
signiﬁcant turning point in human social evolution came at the moment when people
began to live in houses. Roughly speaking, this marks a division between hunters and
gatherers, on the one hand, and agriculturalists and urban dwellers, on the other. ‘Huntergatherers’, Wilson writes, ‘create for themselves only the ﬂimsiest architectural context,
and only the faintest line divides their living space from nature’. All other societies, by
contrast, ‘live in an architecturally modiﬁed environment’, inhabiting houses and villages
of a relatively enduring kind, structures that – even when abandoned – leave an almost
indelible impression in the landscape. In essence, Wilson is distinguishing between societies with architecture and societies without it.
This is a bold generalisation, and like all such, it is an easy target for empirical refutation.
That is not my concern, however. I am rather concerned to expose the assumptions entailed
in making the distinction between an ‘architecturally modiﬁed environment’ and what is

Dwelling

simply called ‘nature’. For it is on this 1
distinction that Wilson’s entire argument 2
rests. One objection to it immediately 3
comes to mind. To be sure, the physical 4
arrangement and formal properties of a 5
hunter-gatherer encampment may be very 6
different from those of a permanent village 7
settlement. By way of example, compare the 8
plan, shown in Figure 10.4, of the Mbuti 9
Pygmy camp of Apa Lelo, in the Ituri forest 10
of Zaire, with the plans shown in Figure 1
10.5 of the ancient Mesopotamian village 2
site of Tell es-Sawwan. In the ﬁrst case the 3
spatial structure of settlement is loose, 4
informal, and sensitive to the changing state 5
of interpersonal relations between cliques, 6
hosts and visitors. In the second it is tightly 7
packed, geometrically regular, and appears 8
to impose fairly tight constraints on the dis- 9
position of people and activities. Moreover, 20
compared with the substantial buildings of 1
the village settlement, the constructions of 2
the hunter-gatherers are scarcely more that 3
shades and windbreaks. Most of life, for 4
hunter-gatherers, goes on around dwellings 5
rather than in them. Nevertheless, the fact 6
remains that hunter-gatherers do build shel- 7
ters of various kinds. So who are we to say 8
that they have no architecture? And if they 9
Figure 10.5 Building plans of three periods from the ancient do not, how are we to comprehend their 30
Mesopotamian site of Tell es-Sawwan.
building activity?
From J. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East, published by
The answer that emerges from Wilson’s 2
Thames and Hudson, London 1975.
account is that among hunter-gatherers, 3
erecting shelters is one of a suite of activi- 4
ties, along with food-collecting, cooking, toolmaking and repair, childminding, and so on, 5
that constitute the daily round for these people. Thus building activity is part and parcel 6
of life in an environment that is already given in nature, and that has not itself been arti- 7
ﬁcially engineered. With village architecture, by contrast, nature has to a degree been 8
covered over or transformed, so that what immediately confronts people is not a natural 9
environment but – in Wilson’s words – ‘an environment of their own making, the cultural’ 40
(1988: 8). If hunter-gatherers build as part of their adaptation to the given conditions of 1
the natural environment, villagers adapt to the conditions of an environment that is already 2
built. Either way, the environment is given in advance, as a kind of container for life to 3
occupy. Where, as among hunter-gatherers, building is a part of everyday life, it is not 4
supposed to have any lasting impact on the environment; where, as among villagers, the 5
environment has been manifestly built, the buildings are apparently made before life begins 6
in them. This, of course, is the architect’s perspective: ﬁrst plan and build the houses, 7
then import the people to occupy them.

Building, dwelling, living • 181 •

What, then, of the dwellings of nomadic pastoralists? A recent study comparing pastoral
tent dwellings and village houses in Turkey and Iran by the archaeologist, Roger Cribb
(1991), found that despite differences in the building materials used and the ﬂexibility
they afford, the tent and the house were virtually identical in their underlying organisational templates. What really distinguished the house from the tent was the degree to
which the imposed, cultural design – shared by villagers and nomads alike – is actually
translated into enduring, material structures. For such structures do not get built overnight;
they grow cumulatively in the course of a settlement’s continuous occupation, such that
‘each new alteration or addition builds on a series of existing structures’. But in the case
of a pastoral nomadic camp, ‘each occupation is a fresh event’, so that the camp ‘has no
such history but remains permanently retarded in the initial stages of the normal developmental cycle [of the settlement]’ (1991: 156). Thus, although pastoralists carry a basic
organisational template with them, there is little opportunity for its enduring physical realisation before the camp picks up and moves off somewhere else, where the occupation
process starts all over again. In such cases, building never proceeds beyond the ﬁrst phase
of temporary habitation (Ingold 1992c: 795–6).
In a statement that epitomises the building perspective, Amos Rapoport writes that ‘the
organisation of space cognitively precedes its material expression; settings and built environments are thought before they are built’ (1994: 488). In the case of villagers, the
environment is ready-built. In the case of nomadic pastoralists, it would seem, the environment, though thought, is never more than partially built. As for the hunter-gatherers,
it appears that the building hardly gets started at all: indeed Rapoport refers to the
camp sites of Aboriginal people of the Australian Central Desert as exemplars of the situation where the environment is thought but never built. On these grounds, as we saw in
Chapter Three (pp. 56–7), they are supposed to inhabit a ‘natural’ rather than an ‘artiﬁcial’
environment.

THE SEARCH FOR ORIGINS
Having spelled out the essence of the building perspective, let me now return to my earlier
observation, comparing the forms of the beaver’s lodge and the human house, that the
ﬁrst is tied, as it were, to the nature of the beaver itself, whereas the second is both historically and regionally variable. Among non-human animals, it is widely supposed, there
can be no signiﬁcant change in built form that is not bound to evolutionary changes in
the essential form of the species. With human beings, by contrast, built form is free to
vary independently of biological constraint, and to follow developmental pathways of its
own, effectively decoupled from the process of evolution. In his famous paper of 1917,
on ‘The Superorganic’, Alfred Kroeber declared: ‘Who would be so rash as to afﬁrm that
ten thousand generations of example would convert the beaver from what he is into a
carpenter or a bricklayer – or, allowing for his physical deﬁciency in the lack of hands,
into a planning engineer!’ (1952: 31). Yet human beings, through practice, example and
a good measure of ingenuity, coupled with their ability to transmit their acquired knowhow across the generations and to preserve it in long-term memory, have learned all these
trades, and many more besides.
However, this argument implies some kind of threshold in the evolution of our own
kind, at which point our ancestors were sufﬁciently endowed with the qualities of intelligence and manual dexterity to become the authors of their own projects of building.
Taking off from this point, the history of architecture must be supposed to have proceeded

Dwelling
from the earliest dwellings to the modern construction industry, the species-speciﬁc nature 1
of the human organism remaining all the while unchanged. But what was the earliest 2
dwelling? According to Kenneth Bock, an event in the history of architecture – such as 3
the construction of a Gothic vault – differs from an event in the evolution of species ‘in 4
that the former involves formation of intent or purpose on the part of an actor while the 5
latter does not’ (1980: 182). The same idea is implied by Joseph Rykwert when he suggests 6
that the essence of architecture lies in ‘taking thought about building’ (1991: 54). But 7
how did it come about that, at some decisive moment, our ancestors began to think about 8
what they built?
As Rykwert shows, in his study of the notion of the ‘primitive hut’ in the history of 10
architecture, this is a question that has long exercised the minds of Western thinkers. And 1
the title of his book, On Adam’s House in Paradise (1972), nicely conveys the mythic 2
quality of the many speculative answers that have been proposed. Reproduced in Figure 3
10.6 is one of the more delightful images of ‘the ﬁrst hut’, taken from the work of the 4
great French architectural theorist, Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, Histoire de l’habitation humaine, 5
published in 1875 (Viollet-le-Duc 1990: 26). Architecture began, for Viollet-le-Duc, when 6
the problem of the need for shelter was met through the procedures of rational planning. 7
In his tale of the building of the ﬁrst hut the secret is revealed to a hapless primitive tribe, 8
the Nairitti, by a progressive time-traveller by the name of Epergos, bestowed upon them 9
as a gift of his superior intelligence. For Viollet-le-Duc, as for many others, Rykwert notes, 20
it was ‘the difference of conception, the attachment of meaning to his task, that distin- 1
guishes man’s ﬁrst attempts [at building] from those of the instinctually driven beasts’ 2
(1972: 22). These attempts may have been decidedly inferior to the constructions of 3
animals, nevertheless they marked the turning point at which humanity was set upon the 4
road to culture and civilisation.
The search for the ﬁrst building continues to this day, though it is informed by a much 6
better knowledge both of the archaeological traces left by early human or hominid popu- 7
lations, and of the behaviour of those species of animals – namely the great apes – most 8
closely related to humankind. One of the most peculiar and distinctive aspects of the 9
behaviour of chimpanzees, gorillas and orang-utans is their habit of building so-called 30
‘nests’. In functional terms, they are not really nests at all: every individual animal builds 1
its own nest afresh, each evening, and uses it for the sole purpose of sleeping. Nor does 2
the nest site mark any kind of ﬁxed point in the animal’s movements; it may be built 3
anywhere, and is abandoned the next morning (Groves and Sabater Pi 1985: 23). 4
Nevertheless, assuming that the common ancestor of apes and humans would have had 5
a similar habit, attempts have been made to trace an evolutionary continuum from this 6
nesting behaviour to the residential arrangements of prototypical human groups (of which 7
the camps of contemporary hunter-gatherers have frequently been taken as the closest 8
exemplars, on the grounds of the presumed similarity of ecological context).
Comparing the nesting patterns of apes with the camping patterns of human hunter- 40
gatherers, Colin Groves and J. Sabater Pi note some striking differences. The human ‘nest’, 1
if we may call it that, is a ﬁxed point for the movements of its several occupants, and a 2
place to which they regularly return. In other words, it has the attributes of what the 3
ethologist, Heini Hediger, would call ‘home’: it is a ‘goal of ﬂight’ and a ‘place of maximal 4
security’ (Hediger 1977: 181). There is a difference, too, in the respective ways in which 5
apes and humans go about building their accommodation. For one thing, apes use material 6
that comes immediately to hand, normally by a skilful interweaving of growing vegeta- 7
tion to form an oval-shaped, concave bed; whereas humans collect suitable materials from 118

Building, dwelling, living • 183 •

Figure 10.6 The ﬁrst hut, as depicted by Viollet-le-Duc.
From The architectural theory of Viollet-le-Duc: readings and commentary, edited by M. F. Hearn, published
by MIT Press, 1990, p. 26.

a distance, prior to their assembly into a convex, self-supporting structure. For another
thing, the ape makes its nest by bending the vegetation around its own body; whereas
the human builds a hut, and then enters it (Groves and Sabater Pi 1985: 45). There is
a sense, as Hediger remarks, in which apes build from the ‘bottom up’, seeking support
for rest and sleeping, whereas humans build from the ‘top down’ seeking shelter from
sun, rain or wind (1977: 184). Yet there are also remarkable similarities between ape and
human living arrangements, in the overall number and layout of nests or huts and in the
underlying social organisation, and on the grounds of these similarities, Groves and Sabater
Pi feel justiﬁed in arguing that human campsites are but elaborations of a generalised ape
pattern. All the critical differences – the functioning of the site as a home-base, the collection of material prior to construction, the technique of building from the outside – can
be put down, they think, to one factor, namely the human ability ‘to visualise objects in
new conﬁgurations, and to bring these conﬁgurations into being on the basis of that
mental picture’ (1985: 45).

Dwelling
Figure 10.7 The ‘stone circle’ from Bed I of Olduvai Gorge.
From M. D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge (volume three), published by Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Though in substance based on fact rather than fantasy, the form in which this argu- 1
ment is cast is virtually identical to that of Viollet-le-Duc’s tale of the building of the 2
ﬁrst hut. Equipped, albeit by natural selection rather than providential intervention, with 3
foresight and intelligence, the ﬁrst builders set to work to execute a plan that was already 4
formed as a picture in their imagination. They had solved the problem of shelter in their 5
minds, prior to putting the solution into practical effect. It is in this light that we can 6
understand the extraordinary signiﬁcance that has been attached to the so-called ‘stone 7
circle’ discovered at the famous site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, and dated to some 8
1.75 million years ago (Figure 10.7). In her interpretation of the circle, Mary Leakey 9
writes that in its general appearance, it ‘resembles temporary structures often made by 40
present-day nomadic peoples who build a low stone wall round their dwellings to serve 1
either as a windbreak or as a base to support upright branches which are bent over and 2
covered with either skins or grass’ (1971: 24). A photograph of such a dwelling, from the 3
Okombambi people of Southwest Africa, is provided to substantiate the comparison. As 4
always in these matters, the speciﬁc interpretation has been challenged. What has not been 5
challenged, however, is the frame of mind that leads us to suppose that if the interpre- 6
tation were correct, we would have at last discovered the real ‘ﬁrst hut’, and with it not 7
just the origins of architecture, but the point of transition to true humanity.

Building, dwelling, living • 185 •

For it is the structure of our thought, not the patterning of the archaeological record, that
sets up a point of origin at the intersection of two axes, one of evolutionary change – leading
from ancestral pongids and hominids to human beings, the other of historical change – leading from Palaeolithic hunting and gathering to modern industry. (Why this should be so is a
matter to which I return in Chapter Twenty-one, pp. 388–90.) To explode the myth of the
ﬁrst hut thus requires nothing less than the dissolution of the dichotomy, which in modern
scholarship separates the biological sciences from the humanities, between evolution and
history, or between the temporal processes of nature and culture. Before indicating how this
might be done, I need to introduce what I have called the ‘dwelling perspective’.

THE DWELLING PERSPECTIVE
For this purpose I turn to Martin Heidegger’s evocative essay, ‘Building Dwelling
Thinking’, on which I have drawn for my title (Heidegger 1971: 145–61). In this essay,
Heidegger asks what it means to build and to dwell, and what the relation is between
these two – between building and dwelling. He begins with what might be taken as the
hegemonic view, as enshrined in the discourse of Western modernity. This is that building
and dwelling are separable but complementary activities, related as means to ends. We
build houses so that we may dwell in them (or, as is usual in industrial society, some
people build houses for other people to live in). To dwell, in this sense, means merely
‘to occupy a house, a dwelling place’. The building is a container for life activities, or
more strictly for certain life activities, since there are other kinds of activity that go on
outside houses, or in the open air. Yet, Heidegger asks, ‘do the houses in themselves hold
any guarantee that dwelling occurs in them?’ (1971: 146). To clarify matters, let us call
the physical structure, the building in itself, the house; and the setting within which people
dwell the home (Lawrence 1987). Heidegger’s question can then be rephrased as follows:
what does it take for a house to be a home (Pearson and Richards 1994: 6)? Merely to
pose the question in this form suggests that there must be more to dwelling than the
mere fact of occupation. What, then, does it mean, ‘to dwell’?
Heidegger tackles the issue through an exercise in etymology. The current German word
for the verb ‘to build’, bauen, comes from the Old English and High German buan,
meaning ‘to dwell’. Though this original meaning has been lost, it is preserved in such
compounds as the English ‘neighbour’, meaning one who dwells nearby. Moreover, this
sense of dwelling was not limited to one sphere of activity among many – to domestic
life, say, as opposed to work or travel. Rather it encompassed the whole manner in which
one lives one’s life on the earth; thus ‘I dwell, you dwell’ is identical to ‘I am, you are’.
Yet bauen has another sense: to preserve, to care for, or more speciﬁcally to cultivate or
to till the soil. And then there is the third sense: to construct, to make something, to
raise up an ediﬁce. Both these modern senses of building – as cultivation and as construction – are thus shown to be encompassed within the more fundamental sense of dwelling.
In the course of time, however, this underlying sense has fallen into disuse, such that
bauen has come to be reserved exclusively for cultivation and construction. Having
forgotten how the latter activities are grounded in dwelling, modern thought then rediscovers dwelling as the occupation of a world already built.
In short, where before, building was circumscribed within dwelling, the position now
appears reversed, with dwelling circumscribed within building. Heidegger’s concern is to
regain that original perspective, so that we can once again understand how the activities of
building – of cultivation and construction – belong to our dwelling in the world, to the

Dwelling
way we are. ‘We do not dwell because we have built, but we build and have built because 1
we dwell, that is because we are dwellers . . . To build is in itself already to dwell . . . Only 2
if we are capable of dwelling, only then can we build ’ (Heidegger 1971: 148, 146, 160, orig- 3
inal emphases). I take this to be the founding statement of the dwelling perspective.5 What 4
it means is that the forms people build, whether in the imagination or on the ground, arise 5
within the current of their involved activity, in the speciﬁc relational contexts of their 6
practical engagement with their surroundings. Building, then, cannot be understood as a 7
simple process of transcription, of a pre-existing design of the ﬁnal product onto a raw 8
material substrate. It is true that human beings – perhaps uniquely among animals – have 9
the capacity to envision forms in advance of their implementation, but this envisioning is 10
itself an activity carried on by real people in a real-world environment, rather than by a 1
disembodied intellect moving in a subjective space in which are represented the problems 2
it seeks to solve (see Chapter Twenty-three, pp. 418–19). In short, people do not import 3
their ideas, plans or mental representations into the world, since that very world, to borrow 4
a phrase from Merleau-Ponty (1962: 24), is the homeland of their thoughts. Only because 5
they already dwell therein can they think the thoughts they do.
To argue that the forms of buildings arise as a kind of crystallisation of human activity 7
within an environment clearly puts paid to my initial dichotomy between design and 8
execution. No longer can we assume, with Christopher Alexander, that form is ‘the ultim- 9
ate object of design’ (1964: 15), as though the one issued quite automatically and 20
unproblematically from the other. To the contrary, a dwelling perspective ascribes the 1
generation of form to those very processes whose creativity is denied by that perspective 2
which sees in every form the concrete realisation of an intellectual solution to a design 3
problem. Where, then, does this leave the constructions of non-human animals? The argu- 4
ment is equally damaging to the conventional biological account, which holds that the 5
outward, phenotypic form – not just of the animal itself, but of the constructions making 6
up its ‘extended phenotype’ – is the expression of a solution to some speciﬁc problem of 7
adaptation, already reached by natural selection, and transferred to the animal at the point 8
of conception, encrypted in the materials of heredity – the genes. That design is thus 9
imported into the organism, as a kind of ‘evolved architecture’ (Tooby and Cosmides 30
1992), prior to the organism’s development within an environmental context, is indeed 1
one of the great delusions of modern biology. For as I shall show in Chapter Twenty- 2
one, the forms of organisms are in no way preﬁgured in their genes but are the emergent 3
outcomes of environmentally situated development processes.
For any animal, the environmental conditions of development are liable to be shaped 5
by the activities of predecessors. The beaver, for example, inhabits an environment that 6
has been decisively modiﬁed by the labours of its forbears, in building dams and lodges, 7
and will in turn contribute to the fashioning of an environment for its progeny. It is in 8
such a modiﬁed environment that the beaver’s own bodily orientations and patterns of 9
activity undergo development. The same goes for human beings. Human children, like 40
the young of many other species, grow up in environments furnished by the work of 1
previous generations, and as they do so they come literally to carry the forms of their 2
dwelling in their bodies – in speciﬁc skills, sensibilities and dispositions. But they do not 3
carry them in their genes, nor is it necessary to invoke some other kind of vehicle for the 4
inter-generational transmission of information – cultural rather than genetic – to account 5
for the diversity of human living arrangements.
We can now see how, by adopting a dwelling perspective – that is, by taking the 7
animal-in-its-environment rather than the self-contained individual as our point of 118

Building, dwelling, living • 187 •

departure – it is possible to dissolve the orthodox dichotomies between evolution and
history, and between biology and culture. For if, by evolution, we mean differentiation
over time in the forms and capacities of organisms, then we would have to admit
that changes in the bodily orientations and skills of human beings, insofar as they are
historically conditioned by the work of predecessors (along with the enduring products
of that work, such as buildings), must themselves be evolutionary. And if, by cultural
variation, we mean those differences of embodied knowledge that stem from the diversity
of local developmental contexts, then far from being superimposed upon a substrate
of evolved human universals, such variation must be part and parcel of the variation of
all living things, which has its source in their enmeshment within an all-encompassing
ﬁeld of relations. It is not necessary, then, to invoke one kind of theory, of biological
evolution, to account for the transition from nest to hut, and another kind, of cultural
history, to account for the transition from hut to skyscraper. For once history is itself
recognised as an evolutionary process, the point of origin constituted by the intersection
of evolutionary and historical continua disappears, and the search for the ﬁrst hut –
for the beginnings of architecture, history and true humanity – becomes a quest after an
illusion.6

THE HOUSE AS ORGANISM
Let me conclude by returning to von Uexküll’s oak tree. Suppose that it stands, not in
the forest, but in the precincts of a house. Now at ﬁrst glance we might have no hesitation in regarding the house, but not the tree, as a building, or an instance of architecture.
For surely the house, as Godelier puts it, belongs to ‘that part of nature which is transformed by human action and thought [and] owes its existence to conscious human action
on nature’ (1986: 5, see also Chapter Five p. 79). The tree, on the other hand, has no
such debt to humanity, for it has grown there, rooted to the spot, entirely of its own
accord. On closer inspection, however, this distinction between those parts of the environment that are, respectively, built and unbuilt seems far less clear. For the form of the tree
is no more given, as an immutable fact of nature, than is the form of the house an imposition of the human mind. Recall the many inhabitants of the tree: the fox, the owl, the
squirrel, the ant, the beetle, among countless others. All, through their various activities
of dwelling, have played their part in creating the conditions under which the tree, over
the centuries, has grown to assume its particular form and proportions. And so, too, have
human beings, in tending the tree’s surroundings.
But the house also has many and diverse animal inhabitants – more, perhaps, than we
are inclined to recognise. Sometimes special provision is made for them, such as the kennel,
stable or dovecote. Others ﬁnd shelter and sustenance in its nooks and crannies, or even
build there. And all, in their various ways, contribute to its evolving form, as do the
house’s human inhabitants in keeping it under repair, decorating it, or making structural
alterations in response to their changing domestic circumstances. Thus the distinction
between the house and the tree is not an absolute but a relative one – relative, that is,
to the scope of human involvement in the form-generating process.7 Houses, as Suzanne
Blier notes (1987: 2), are living organisms. Like trees, they have life-histories, which consist
in the unfolding of their relations with both human and non-human components of their
environments. To the extent that the inﬂuence of the human component prevails, any
feature of the environment will seem more like a building; to the extent that the nonhuman component prevails, it will seem less so.

Dwelling
Building, then, is a process that is continually going on, for as long as people dwell in 1
an environment. It does not begin here, with a pre-formed plan, and end there, with a 2
ﬁnished artefact. The ‘ﬁnal form’ is but a ﬂeeting moment in the life of any feature, when 3
it is matched to a human purpose, likewise cut out from the ﬂow of intentional activity. 4
As the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once remarked, ‘from the moment of birth 5
we are immersed in action, and can only ﬁtfully guide it by taking thought’ (1938: 217). 6
And this applies, with equal force, to ‘taking thought about building’, the deﬁnitive char- 7
acteristic of the architectural attitude. We may indeed describe the forms in our 8
environment as instances of architecture, but for the most part we are not architects. For 9
it is in the very process of dwelling that we build.

Culture, nature, environment • 189 •

Chapter Eleven

The temporality of the landscape

PROLOGUE
I adhere to the view that social or cultural anthropology, biological anthropology and
archaeology form a necessary unity – that they are all part of the same intellectual enterprise. I am not concerned here with the link with biological or ‘physical’ anthropology,
but what I have to say does bear centrally on the unifying themes of archaeology and
sociocultural anthropology. I want to stress two such themes, and they are closely related.
First, human life is a process that involves the passage of time. Secondly, this life-process
is also the process of formation of the landscapes in which people have lived. Time and
landscape, then, are to my mind the essential points of topical contact between archaeology and anthropology. My purpose, in this chapter, is to bring the perspectives of
archaeology and anthropology into unison through a focus on the temporality of the
landscape. In particular, I believe that such a focus might enable us to move beyond the
sterile opposition between the naturalistic view of the landscape as a neutral, external backdrop to human activities, and the culturalistic view that every landscape is a particular
cognitive or symbolic ordering of space. I argue that we should adopt, in place of both
these views, what I have called a ‘dwelling perspective’, according to which the landscape
is constituted as an enduring record of – and testimony to – the lives and works of
past generations who have dwelt within it, and in so doing, have left there something of
themselves.
For anthropologists, to adopt a perspective of this kind means bringing to bear the
knowledge born of immediate experience, by privileging the understandings that people
derive from their lived, everyday involvement in the world. Yet it will surely be objected
that this avenue is not open to archaeologists concerned with human activities in the
distant past. ‘The people’, it is said, ‘they’re dead’ (Sahlins 1972: 81); only the material
record remains for their successors of our own time to interpret as best they can. But this
objection misses the point, which is that the practice of archaeology is itself a form of dwelling.
The knowledge born of this practice is thus on a par with that which comes from the
practical activity of the native dweller and which the anthropologist, through participation, seeks to learn and understand. For both the archaeologist and the native dweller,
the landscape tells – or rather is – a story, ‘a chronicle of life and dwelling’ (Adam 1998:
54). It enfolds the lives and times of predecessors who, over the generations, have moved
around in it and played their part in its formation. To perceive the landscape is therefore to carry out an act of remembrance, and remembering is not so much a matter
of calling up an internal image, stored in the mind, as of engaging perceptually with an
environment that is itself pregnant with the past. To be sure, the rules and methods of

Dwelling
engagement employed respectively by the native dweller and the archaeologist differ, as 1
do the stories they tell. Nevertheless, insofar as both seek the past in the landscape, they 2
are engaged in projects of fundamentally the same kind.1
It is of course part of an archaeological training to learn to attend to those clues which 4
the rest of us might pass over (literally, when they are below the surface), and which make 5
it possible to tell a fuller or a richer story. Likewise native dwellers, along with their 6
anthropological companions, learn through an education of attention. The novice hunter, 7
for example, travels through the country with his mentors, and as he goes, speciﬁc features 8
are pointed out to him. Other things he discovers for himself, in the course of further 9
forays, by watching, listening and feeling. Thus the experienced hunter is the knowledge- 10
able hunter (see Chapter Three, pp. 55–6). He can tell things from subtle indications that 1
you or I, unskilled in the hunter’s art, might not even notice. Called upon to explicate 2
his knowledge, he may do so in a form that reappears in the work of the non-native 3
ethnographer as a corpus of myths or stories, whereas the archaeologist’s knowledge – 4
drawn from the practices of excavation rather than hunting – may appear in the seem- 5
ingly authoritative form of the site report. But we should resist the temptation to assume 6
that since stories are stories they are, in some sense, unreal or untrue, for this is to suppose 7
that the only real reality, or true truth, is one in which we, as living, experiencing beings, 8
can have no part at all. Telling a story, as I observed in Chapter Three (p. 56), is not 9
like unfurling a tapestry to cover up the world, it is rather a way of guiding the attention 20
of listeners or readers into it. A person who can ‘tell’ is one who is perceptually attuned 1
to picking up information in the environment that others, less skilled in the tasks of 2
perception, might miss, and the teller, in rendering his knowledge explicit, conducts the 3
attention of his audience along the same paths as his own.
Following that preamble, I shall now go on to lay out the burden of my argument. 5
This is presented in four principal sections. In the ﬁrst two, I attempt to specify more 6
precisely what I mean by my key terms – landscape and temporality. I argue that tempo- 7
rality inheres in the pattern of dwelling activities that I call the taskscape. In the third 8
section I consider how taskscape relates to landscape and, ultimately by dissolving the 9
distinction between them, I proceed to recover the temporality of the landscape itself. 30
Finally, I draw some concrete illustrations of my arguments from a well-known painting 1
by Bruegel, The harvesters.
LANDSCAPE
Let me be begin by explaining what the landscape is not. It is not ‘land’, it is not ‘nature’, 6
and it is not ‘space’. Consider, ﬁrst of all, the distinction between land and landscape. Land 7
is not something you can see, any more than you can see the weight of physical objects. 8
All objects of the most diverse kinds have weight, and it is possible to express how much 9
anything weighs relative to any other thing. Likewise, land is a kind of lowest common 40
denominator of the phenomenal world, inherent in every portion of the earth’s surface yet 1
directly visible in none, and in terms of which any portion may be rendered quantitatively 2
equivalent to any other (Ingold 1986a: 153–4).2 You can ask of land, as of weight, how 3
much there is, but not what it is like. But where land is thus quantitative and homogeneous, 4
the landscape is qualitative and heterogeneous. Supposing that you are standing outdoors, 5
it is what you see all around: a contoured and textured surface replete with diverse objects 6
– living and non-living, natural and artiﬁcial (these distinctions are both problematic, as we 7
shall see, but they will serve for the time being). Thus at any particular moment, you can 118

The temporality of the landscape • 191 •

ask of a landscape what it is like, but not how much of it there is. For the landscape is a
plenum, there are no holes in it that remain to be ﬁlled in, so that every inﬁll is in reality
a reworking. As Meinig observes, one should not overlook ‘the powerful fact that life must
be lived amidst that which was made before’ (1979a: 44).
The landscape is not ‘nature’. Of course, nature can mean many things, and this is not
the place for a discourse on the history of the concept. Sufﬁce it to say that I have in
mind the rather speciﬁc sense whose ontological foundation is an imagined separation
between the human perceiver and the world, such that the perceiver has to reconstruct
the world, in consciousness, prior to any meaningful engagement with it. The world of
nature, it is often said, is what lies ‘out there’. All kinds of entities are supposed to exist
out there, but not you and I. We live ‘in here’, in the intersubjective space marked out
by our mental representations. Application of this logic forces an insistent dualism, between
object and subject, the material and the ideal, operational and cognised, ‘etic’ and ‘emic’.
Some writers distinguish between nature and the landscape in just these terms – the former
is said to stand to the latter as physical reality to its cultural or symbolic construction.
For example, Daniels and Cosgrove introduce a collection of essays on The iconography
of landscape with the following deﬁnition: ‘A landscape is a cultural image, a pictorial way
of representing or symbolising surroundings’ (1988: 1).
I do not share this view. To the contrary, I reject the division between inner and outer
worlds – respectively of mind and matter, meaning and substance – upon which such
distinction rests. The landscape, I hold, is not a picture in the imagination, surveyed by
the mind’s eye; nor however is it an alien and formless substrate awaiting the imposition
of human order. ‘The idea of landscape’, as Meinig writes, ‘runs counter to recognition
of any simple binary relationship between man and nature’ (Meinig 1979b: 2). Thus,
neither is the landscape identical to nature, nor is it on the side of humanity against
nature. As the familiar domain of our dwelling, it is with us, not against us, but it is no
less real for that. And through living in it, the landscape becomes a part of us, just as we
are a part of it. Moreover, what goes for its human component goes for other components as well. In a world construed as nature, every object is a self-contained entity,
interacting with others through some kind of external contact. But in a landscape, each
component enfolds within its essence the totality of its relations with each and every other.
In short, whereas the order of nature is explicate, the order of the landscape is implicate
(Bohm 1980: 172).
The landscape is not ‘space’. To appreciate the contrast, we could compare the everyday
project of dwelling in the world with the rather peculiar and specialised project of the
surveyor or cartographer whose objective is to represent it. No doubt the surveyor, as he
goes about his practical tasks, experiences the landscape much as does everyone else whose
business of life lies there. Like other people, he is mobile, yet unable to be in more than
one place at a time. In the landscape, the distance between two places, A and B, is experienced as a journey made, a bodily movement from one place to the other, and the
gradually changing vistas along the route. The surveyor’s job, however, is to take instrumental measurements from a considerable number of locations, and to combine these data
to produce a single picture which is independent of any point of observation. This picture
is of the world as it could be directly apprehended only by a consciousness capable of
being everywhere at once and nowhere in particular (the nearest we can get to this in
practice is by taking an aerial or bird’s-eye view). To such a consciousness, at once immobile and omnipresent, the distance between A and B would be the length of a line plotted
between two points that are simultaneously in view, that line marking one of any number

Dwelling
of journeys that could potentially be made (cf. Bourdieu 1977: 2). It is as though, from 1
an imaginary position above the world, I could direct the movements of my body within 2
it, like a counter on a board, so that to say ‘I am here’ is not to point from somewhere 3
to my surroundings, but to point from nowhere to the position on the board where my 4
body happens to be. And whereas actual journeys are made through a landscape, the board 5
on which all potential journeys may be plotted is equivalent to space.3
There is a tradition of geographical research (see, for example, Gould and White 1974) 7
which sets out from the premise that we are all cartographers in our daily lives, and that 8
we use our bodies as the surveyor uses his instruments, to register a sensory input from 9
multiple points of observation, which is then processed by our intelligence into an image 10
that we carry around with us, like a map in our heads, wherever we go. The mind, rather 1
than reaching into its surroundings from its dwelling place within the world, might be 2
likened in this view to a ﬁlm spread out upon its exterior surface. The sense of space 3
implicated in this cartographic view of environmental perception may be illuminated by 4
means of an analogy drawn from the linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure. To grasp the 5
essence of language, Saussure invites us to picture thought and sound as two continuous 6
and undifferentiated planes, of mental and phonic substance respectively, like two sides 7
of a sheet of paper. By cutting the sheet into pieces (words) we create, on one side, a 8
system of discrete concepts, and on the other, a system of discrete sounds; and since 9
one side cannot be cut without at the same time cutting the other, the two systems of 20
division are necessarily homologous so that to each concept there corresponds a sound 1
(Saussure 1959: 112–13).
Now when geographers and anthropologists write about space, what is generally implied 3
is something closely akin to Saussure’s sheet of paper, only in this case the counter-side 4
to thought is the continuum not of phonic substance but of the surface of the earth. And 5
so it appears that the division of the world into a mosaic of externally bounded segments 6
is entailed in the very production of spatial meanings. Just as the word, for Saussure, is 7
the union of a concept with a delimited ‘chunk’ of sound, so the place is the union of a 8
symbolic meaning with a delimited block of the earth’s surface. Spatial differentiation 9
implies spatial segmentation. This is not so of the landscape, however. For a place in the 30
landscape is not ‘cut out’ from the whole, either on the plane of ideas or on that of 1
material substance. Rather, each place embodies the whole at a particular nexus within it, 2
and in this respect is different from every other.
A place owes its character to the experiences it affords to those who spend time there 4
– to the sights, sounds and indeed smells that constitute its speciﬁc ambience. And these, 5
in turn, depend on the kinds of activities in which its inhabitants engage. It is from 6
this relational context of people’s engagement with the world, in the business of dwelling, 7
that each place draws its unique signiﬁcance. Thus whereas with space, meanings are 8
attached to the world, with the landscape they are gathered from it. Moreover, while places 9
have centres – indeed it would be more appropriate to say that they are centres – they 40
have no boundaries. In journeying from place A to place B it makes no sense to ask, 1
along the way, whether one is ‘still’ in A or has ‘crossed over’ to B (Ingold 1986a: 155). 2
Of course, boundaries of various kinds may be drawn in the landscape, and identiﬁed 3
either with natural features such as the course of a river or an escarpment, or with built 4
structures such as walls and fences. But such boundaries are not a condition for the consti- 5
tution of the places on either side of them; nor do they segment the landscape, for the 6
features with which they are identiﬁed are themselves an integral part of it. Finally, it is 7
important to note that no feature of the landscape is, of itself, a boundary. It can only 118

The temporality of the landscape • 193 •

become a boundary, or the indicator of a boundary, in relation to the activities of the
people (or animals) for whom it is recognised or experienced as such.
In the course of explaining what the landscape is not, I have already moved some way
towards a positive characterisation. In short, the landscape is the world as it is known to
those who dwell therein, who inhabit its places and journey along the paths connecting
them. Is it not, then, identical to what we might otherwise call the environment? Certainly
the distinction between landscape and environment is not easy to draw, and for many
purposes they may be treated as practically synonymous. It will already be apparent that
I cannot accept the distinction offered by Yi-Fu Tuan, who argues that an environment
is ‘a given, a piece of reality that is simply there’, as opposed to the landscape, which is
a product of human cognition, ‘an achievement of the mature mind’ (Tuan 1979: 90,
100). For that is merely to reproduce the dichotomy between nature and humanity.
The environment is no more ‘nature’ than is the landscape a symbolic construct. Elsewhere,
I have contrasted nature and environment by way of a distinction between reality of –
‘the physical world of neutral objects apparent only to the detached, indifferent observer’,
and reality for – ‘the world constituted in relation to the organism or person whose environment it is’ (Ingold 1992a: 44). But to think of environment in this sense is to regard it
primarily in terms of function, of what it affords to creatures – whether human or nonhuman – with certain capabilities and projects of action. Reciprocally, to regard these
creatures as organisms is to view them in terms of their principles of dynamic functioning,
that is as organised systems (Pittendrigh 1958: 394). As Lewontin succinctly puts it (1982:
160), the environment is ‘nature organised by an organism’.
The concept of landscape, by contrast, puts the emphasis on form, in just the same
way that the concept of the body emphasises the form rather than the function of a living
creature. If the body is the form in which a creature is present as a being-in-the-world,
then the world of its being-in presents itself in the form of the landscape. Like organism
and environment, body and landscape are complementary terms: each implies the other,
alternately as ﬁgure and ground. The forms of the landscape are not, however, prepared
in advance for creatures to occupy, any more than are the bodily forms of those creatures
independently speciﬁed in their genetic make-up. Both sets of forms are generated and
sustained in and through the processual unfolding of a total ﬁeld of relations that cuts
across the emergent interface between organism and environment (Goodwin 1988). Having
regard to its formative properties, we may refer to this process as one of embodiment.
Though the notion of embodiment has recently come much into fashion, there has
been a tendency – following an ancient inclination in Western thought to prioritise form
over process (Oyama 1985: 13) – to conceive of it as a movement of inscription, whereby
some pre-existing pattern, template or programme, whether genetic or cultural, is ‘realised’
in a substantive medium. This is not what I have in mind, however. To the contrary,
and adopting a helpful distinction from Paul Connerton (1989: 72–3), I regard embodiment as a movement of incorporation rather than inscription, not a transcribing of form
onto material but a movement wherein forms themselves are generated (Ingold 1990:
215). Taking the organism as our focus of reference, this movement is what is commonly
known as the life-cycle. Thus organisms may be said to incorporate, in their bodily
forms, the life-cycle processes that give rise to them. Could not the same, then, be said
of the environment? Is it possible to identify a corresponding cycle, or rather a series
of interlocking cycles, which builds itself into the forms of the landscape, and of which
the landscape may accordingly be regarded as an embodiment? Before answering this
question, we need to turn to the second of my key terms, namely ‘temporality’.

Dwelling
Let me begin, once again, by stating what temporality is not. It is not chronology (as 3
opposed to history), and it is not history (as opposed to chronology). By chronology, 4
I mean any regular system of dated time intervals, in which events are said to have taken 5
place. By history, I mean any series of events which may be dated in time according to 6
their occurrence in one or another chronological interval. Thus the Battle of Hastings was 7
an historical event, 1066 was a date (marking the interval of a year), and records tell us 8
that the former occurred in the latter. In the mere succession of dates there are no events, 9
because everything repeats; in the mere succession of events there is no time, as nothing 10
does. The relation between chronology and history, in this conception, has been well 1
expressed by Kubler: ‘Without change there is no history; without regularity there is no 2
time. Time and history are related as rule and variation: time is the regular setting for 3
the vagaries of history’ (1962: 72).
Now in introducing the concept of temporality, I do not intend that it should stand 5
as a third term, alongside the concepts of chronology and history. For in the sense in 6
which I shall use the term here, temporality entails a perspective that contrasts radically 7
with the one, outlined above, that sets up history and chronology in a relation of comple- 8
mentary opposition. The contrast is essentially equivalent to that drawn by Alfred Gell 9
(1992: 149–55) between what he calls (following McTaggart) the A-series, in which time 20
is immanent in the passage of events, and the B-series, in which events are strung out in 1
time like beads on a thread. Whereas in the B-series, events are treated as isolated happen- 2
ings, succeeding one another frame by frame, each event in the A-series is seen to encompass 3
a pattern of retensions from the past and protentions for the future. Thus from the 4
A-series point of view, temporality and historicity are not opposed but rather merge in 5
the experience of those who, in their activities, carry forward the process social life. Taken 6
together, these activities make up what I shall call the ‘taskscape’, and it is with the intrinsic 7
temporality of the taskscape that I shall be principally concerned in this section.
We can make a start by returning for a moment to the distinction between land and 9
landscape. As a common denominator in terms of which constituents of the environment 30
of diverse kinds may be rendered quantitatively comparable, I compared land with weight. 1
But I could equally have drawn the comparison with value or with labour. Value is the 2
denominator of commodities that enables us to say how much any one thing is worth by 3
comparison with another, even though these two things may be quite unlike in terms of 4
their physical qualities and potential uses. In this sense, the concept of value (in general) 5
is classically distinguished from that of use-value, which refers to the speciﬁc properties or 6
‘affordances’ of any particular object, that commend it to the project of a user (Ingold 7
1992a: 48–9, cf. Gibson 1979:127, Marx 1930: 169). Clearly, this distinction, between 8
value and use-value, is precisely homologous to that between land and landscape. But if 9
we turn to consider the work that goes into the making of useful things, then again we 40
can recognise that whilst the operations of making are indeed as unlike as the objects 1
produced – involving different raw materials, different tools, different procedures and 2
different skills – they can nevertheless be compared in that they call for variable amounts 3
of what may simply be called ‘labour’: the common denominator of productive activities. 4
Like land and value, labour is quantitative and homogeneous, human work shorn of its 5
particularities. It is of course the founding premise of the labour theory of value that the 6
amount of value in a thing is determined by the amount of labour that went into producing 7
it (I return to this theme in Chapter Seventeen, pp. 326–8).

TEMPORALITY

The temporality of the landscape • 195 •

How, then, should we describe the practices of work in their concrete particulars? For
this purpose I shall adopt the term ‘task’, deﬁned as any practical operation, carried out
by a skilled agent in an environment, as part of his or her normal business of life. In
other words, tasks are the constitutive acts of dwelling. No more than features of the landscape, however, are tasks suspended in a vacuum. Every task takes its meaning from its
position within an ensemble of tasks, performed in series or in parallel, and usually by
many people working together. One of the great mistakes of recent anthropology – what
Reynolds (1993: 410) calls ‘the great tool-use fallacy’ – has been to insist upon a separation between the domains of technical and social activity, a separation that has blinded
us to the fact that one of the outstanding features of human technical practices lies in
their embeddedness in the current of sociality. It is to the entire ensemble of tasks, in
their mutual interlocking, that I refer by the concept of taskscape. Just as the landscape
is an array of related features, so – by analogy – the taskscape is an array of related activities. And as with the landscape, it is qualitative and heterogeneous: we can ask of a
taskscape, as of a landscape, what it is like, but not how much of it there is. In short,
the taskscape is to labour what the landscape is to land, and indeed what an ensemble of
use-values is to value in general.
Now if value is measured out in units of money, and land in units of space, what is
the currency of labour? The answer, of course, is time – but it is time of a very peculiar
sort, one that must be wholly indifferent to the modulations of human experience. To
most of us it appears in the familiar guise of clock-time: thus an hour is an hour, regardless of what one is doing in it, or of how one feels. But this kind of chronological time
does not depend upon the existence of artiﬁcial clocks. It may be based on any perfectly
repetitive, mechanical system, including that (putatively) constituted by the earth in its
axial rotations and in its revolutions around the sun. Sorokin and Merton (1937), in a
classic paper, call it ‘astronomical’ time: it is, they write, ‘uniform, homogeneous;
. . . purely quantitative, shorn of qualitative variations’. And they distinguish it from ‘social
time’, which they see as fundamentally qualitative, something to which we can afﬁx
moral judgements such as good or bad, grounded in the ‘rhythms, pulsations and beats
of the societies in which they are found’, and for that reason tied to the particular circumstances of place and people (1937: 621–3; see also Chapter Seventeen, pp. 325–6).
Adopting Sorokin and Merton’s distinction, we could perhaps conclude that whereas
labour is measured out in units of astronomical time, or in clock-time calibrated to an
astronomical standard, the temporality of the taskscape is essentially social. Before we can
accept this conclusion, however, the idea of social time must be examined a little more
closely.
In my earlier discussion of the signiﬁcance of space, I showed that in the cartographic
imagination, the mind is supposed to be laid out upon the surface of the earth. Likewise
in the chronological perspective, time appears as the interface between mind and ‘duration’
– by which is meant an undifferentiated stream of bodily activity and experience. Taking
time in this sense, Durkheim famously likened it to ‘an endless chart, where all duration
is spread out before the mind, and upon which all possible events can be located in relation to ﬁxed and determinate guidelines’ (1976 [1915]: 10). Rather like Saussure’s sheet
of paper, it could be compared to a strip of inﬁnite length, with thought on one side and
duration on the other. By cutting the strip into segments we establish a division, on the
one hand, into calendrical intervals or dates, and on the other hand, into discrete ‘chunks’
of lived experience, such that to every chunk there corresponds a date in a uniform
sequence of before and after. And as every chunk succeeds the next, like frames on a reel

Dwelling
of ﬁlm, we imagine ourselves to be looking on ‘as time goes by’, as though we could take 1
up a point of view detached from the temporal process of our life in the world and watch 2
ourselves engaged now in this task, now in that, in an unending series of present instants. 3
Whence, then, come the divisions which give chronological form to the substance of 4
experience? Durkheim’s answer, as is well known, was that these divisions – ‘indispens- 5
able guidelines’ for the temporal ordering of events – come from society, corresponding 6
to the ‘periodical recurrence of rites, feasts, and public ceremonies’ (p. 10). Thus for 7
Durkheim, time is at once chronological and social, for society itself is a kind of clock, 8
whose moving parts are individual human beings (Ingold 1986b: 341).
This is not, however, the way we perceive the temporality of the taskscape. For we do 10
so not as spectators but as participants, in the very performance of our tasks. As Merleau- 1
Ponty put it, in reckoning with an environment, I am ‘at my task rather than confronting 2
it’ (1962: 416). The notion that we can stand aside and observe the passage of time is 3
founded upon an illusion of disembodiment. This passage is, indeed, none other than 4
our own journey through the taskscape in the business of dwelling. Once again we can 5
take our cue from Merleau-Ponty: ‘the passage of one present to the next is not a thing 6
which I conceive, nor do I see it as an onlooker, I effect it’ (1962: 421). Reaching out 7
into the taskscape I perceive, at this moment, a particular vista of past and a future; but 8
it is a vista that is available from this moment and no other (see Gell 1992: 269). As 9
such, it constitutes my present, conferring upon it a unique character. Thus the present is 20
not marked off from a past that it has replaced or a future that will, in turn, replace it; 1
it rather gathers the past and future into itself, like refractions in a crystal ball. And just 2
as in the landscape, we can move from place to place without crossing any boundary, 3
since the vista that constitutes the identity of a place changes even as we move, so like- 4
wise can we move from one present to another without having to break through any 5
chronological barrier that might be supposed to separate each present from the next in 6
line. Indeed the features that Durkheim identiﬁed as serving this segmenting function – 7
rites, feasts and ceremonies – are themselves as integral to the taskscape as are boundary 8
markers such as walls or fences to the landscape.
The temporality of the taskscape is social, then, not because society provides an external 30
frame against which particular tasks ﬁnd independent measure, but because people, in the 1
performance of their tasks, also attend to one another. Looking back, we can see that 2
Durkheim’s error was to divorce the sphere of people’s mutual involvement from that of 3
their everyday practical activity in the world, leaving the latter to be carried on by indi- 4
viduals in hermetic isolation. In real life, this is not how we go about our business. By 5
watching, listening, perhaps even touching, we continually feel each other’s presence in 6
the social environment, at every moment adjusting our movements in response to this 7
ongoing perceptual monitoring. For the orchestral musician, playing an instrument, 8
watching the conductor and listening to one’s fellow players are all inseparable aspects of 9
the same process of action: for this reason, the gestures of the performers may be said 40
to resonate with each other. In orchestral music, the achievement of resonance – or what 1
Schutz (1951: 78) called a ‘mutual tuning-in relationship’ – is an absolute precondition 2
for successful performance. But the same is true, more generally, of social life (Wikan 3
1992, Richards 1996). Indeed it could be argued that in the resonance of movement and 4
feeling stemming from people’s mutually attentive engagement, in shared contexts of prac- 5
tical activity, lies the very foundation of sociality.
Let me pursue the analogy between orchestral performance and social life a little further 7
since, more than any other artistic genre, music mirrors the temporal form of the taskscape. 118

The temporality of the landscape • 197 •

I want, by means of this analogy, to make three points. First, while there are cycles and
repetitions in music as in social life, these are essentially rhythmic rather than metronomic
(on this distinction, see Young 1988: 19). It is for precisely this reason that social time,
pace Durkheim, is not chronological. A metronome, like a clock, inscribes an artiﬁcial
division into equal segments upon an otherwise undifferentiated movement; rhythm, by
contrast, is intrinsic to the movement itself. Langer has argued that the essence of rhythm
lies in the successive building up and resolution of tension, on the principle that every
resolution is itself a preparation for the next building-up (1953: 126–7). There may of
course be rests or sustained notes within a piece, but far from breaking it up into segments,
such moments are generally ones of high tension, whose resolution becomes ever more
urgent the longer they are held. Only our last exhalation of breath is not a preparation
for the next inhalation – with that, we die; similarly with the last beat the music comes
to an end. Social life, however, is never ﬁnished, and there are no breaks in it that are
not integral to its tensile structure, to the ‘ebb and ﬂow of activity’ by which society itself
seems to breathe (Young 1988: 53).
My second point is that in music as in social life, there is not just one rhythmic cycle,
but a complex interweaving of very many concurrent cycles.4 While it reﬂects the temporal
form of social life, music in fact represents a very considerable simpliﬁcation, since it
involves only one sensory register (the auditory), and its rhythms are fewer and more
tightly controlled. In both cases, however, since any rhythm may be taken as the tempo
for any of the others, there is no single, one-dimensional strand of time. As Langer puts
it: ‘life is always a dense fabric of concurrent tensions, and as each of them is a measure
of time, the measurements themselves do not coincide’ (1953: 113). Thus the temporality
of the taskscape, while it is intrinsic rather than externally imposed (metronomic), lies not
in any particular rhythm, but in the network of interrelationships between the multiple
rhythms of which the taskscape is itself constituted. To cite a celebrated anthropological
example: among the Nuer of southern Sudan, according to Evans-Pritchard, the passage
of time is ‘primarily the succession of [pastoral] tasks and their relations to one another’
(1940: 101–2, my emphasis). Each of these relations is, of course, a speciﬁc resonance.
And so, just as social life consists in the unfolding of a ﬁeld of relationships among persons
who attend to one another in what they do, its temporality consists in the unfolding of
the resultant pattern of resonances.
Thirdly, the forms of the taskscape, like those of music, come into being through movement. Music exists only when it is being performed; it does not pre-exist, as is sometimes
thought, in the score, any more than a cake pre-exists in the recipe for making it. Similarly,
the taskscape exists only so long as people are actually engaged in the activities of dwelling,
despite the attempts of anthropologists to translate it into something rather equivalent to
a score – a kind of ideal design for dwelling – that generally goes by the name of ‘culture’,
and that people are supposed to bring with them into their encounter with the world.
This parallel, however, brings me to a critical question. Up to now, my discussion of
temporality has concentrated exclusively on the taskscape, allowing the landscape to slip
from view. It is now high time to bring it back into focus. I argued in the previous section
that the landscape is not nature; here I claim that the taskscape is not culture. Landscape
and taskscape, then, are not to be opposed as nature to culture. So how are we to understand the relation between them? Where does one end and the other begin? Can they
even be distinguished at all?
If music best reﬂects the forms of the taskscape, it might be thought that painting is
the most natural medium for representing the forms of the landscape. And this suggests

Dwelling
that an examination of the difference, in the ﬁeld of art, between music and painting 1
might offer some clues as to how a distinction might possibly be drawn between taskscape 2
and landscape as facets of the real world. I begin by following up this suggestion.
TEMPORALISING THE LANDSCAPE
At ﬁrst glance the difference seems obvious: paintings do not have to be performed, they 7
are presented to us as works that are complete in themselves. But on closer inspection, 8
this contrast appears more as an artefact of a systematic bias in Western thought, to which 9
I have already alluded, that leads us to privilege form over process. Thus the actual work 10
of painting is subordinated to the ﬁnal product; the former is hidden from view so that 1
the latter alone becomes an object of contemplation. In many non-Western societies, by 2
contrast, the order of priority is reversed: what is essential is the act of painting itself, of 3
which the products may be relatively short-lived – barely perceived before being erased 4
or covered up. This is so, for example, among the Yolngu, an Aboriginal people of northern 5
Australia, whose experience of ﬁnished paintings, according to their ethnographer, is limited 6
to ‘images ﬂeetingly glimpsed out of the corner of the eye’ (Morphy 1992: 187). The 7
emphasis, here, is on painting as performance.5 Far from being the preparation of objects 8
for future contemplation, it is an act of contemplation in itself. So, too, is performing or 9
listening to music. Thus all at once, the contrast between painting and music seems less 20
secure. It becomes a matter of degree, in the extent to which forms endure beyond the 1
immediate contexts of their production. Musical sound, of course, is subject to the prop- 2
erty of rapid fading: speeding outwards from its point of emission, and dissipating as it 3
goes, it is present only momentarily to our senses. But where, as in painting, gestures 4
leave their traces in solid substance, the resulting forms may last much longer, albeit never 5
indeﬁnitely.
Returning now from the contrast between music and painting to that between taskscape 7
and landscape, the ﬁrst point to note is that no more than a painting is the landscape 8
given ready-made. One cannot, as Inglis points out, ‘treat landscape as an object if it is 9
to be understood. It is a living process; it makes men; it is made by them’ (1977: 489). 30
Just as with music, the forms of the landscape are generated in movement: these forms, 1
however, are congealed in a solid medium – indeed, to borrow Inglis’s words again, 2
‘a landscape is the most solid appearance in which a history can declare itself ’ (ibid.). 3
Thanks to their solidity, features of the landscape remain available for inspection long 4
after the movement that gave rise to them has ceased. If, as Mead argued (1977 [1938]: 5
97), every object is to be regarded as a ‘collapsed act’, then the landscape as a whole must 6
likewise be understood as the taskscape in its embodied form: a pattern of activities ‘collapsed’ 7
into an array of features.
But to reiterate a point made earlier, the landscape takes on its forms through a process 9
of incorporation, not of inscription. That is to say, landscape formation is not a matter 40
– as James Weiner would have it (1991: 32) – of transforming ‘a sheer physical terrain 1
into a pattern of historically experienced and constituted space and time’, as though the 2
physical world pre-existed as a blank slate, a mere substrate of formless materiality, awaiting 3
the impress of cultural signiﬁcance. Human beings do not, in their movements, inscribe 4
their life histories upon the surface of nature as do writers upon the page; rather, these 5
histories are woven, along with the life-cycles of plants and animals, into the texture of 6
the surface itself (see Chapter Eighteen, pp. 347–8). Thus the forms of the landscape arise 7
alongside those of the taskscape, within the same current of activity. If we recognise a 118

The temporality of the landscape • 199 •

man’s gait in the pattern of his footprints, it is not because the gait preceded the footprints and was ‘inscribed’ in them, but because both the gait and the prints arose within
the movement of the man’s walking.
Since, moreover, the activities that comprise the taskscape are unending, the landscape
is never complete: neither ‘built’ nor ‘unbuilt’, it is perpetually under construction. This
is why the conventional dichotomy between natural and artiﬁcial (or ‘man-made’) components of the landscape is so problematic. Virtually by deﬁnition, an artefact is an object
shaped to a pre-conceived image that motivated its construction, and it is ﬁnished at the
point when it is brought into conformity with this image. What happens to it beyond
that point is supposed to belong to the phase of use rather than manufacture, to dwelling
rather than building. But the forms of the landscape are not pre-prepared for people to
live in – not by nature nor by human hands – for it is in the very process of dwelling
that these forms are constituted. We may recall here Heidegger’s remark, already cited
in the last chapter, that ‘to build is in itself already to dwell’ (1971: 146). Thus the
landscape is always in the nature of work in progress.
My conclusion that the landscape is the congealed form of the taskscape does enable
us to explain why, intuitively, the landscape seems to be what we see around us, whereas
the taskscape is what we hear. To be seen, a thing need do nothing itself, for the optic
array that speciﬁes its form to a viewer consists of light reﬂected off its outer surfaces.
To be heard, on the other hand, a thing must actively emit sounds or, through its movement, cause sound to be emitted by other objects with which it comes into contact. Thus,
outside my window I see a landscape of houses, trees, gardens, a street and pavement. I
do not hear any of these things, but I can hear people talking on the pavement, a car
passing by, birds singing in the trees, a dog barking somewhere in the distance, and the
sound of hammering as a neighbour repairs his garden shed. In short, what I hear is
activity, even when its source cannot be seen. And since the forms of the taskscape,
suspended as they are in movement, are present only as activity, the limits of the taskscape
are also the limits of the auditory world. (While I deal here only with visual and aural
perception, we should not underestimate the signiﬁcance of touch, which is important to
all of us but above all to blind people, for whom it opens up the possibility of access
to the landscape – if only through proximate bodily contact.)
This argument carries an important corollary. Whereas both the landscape and the
taskscape presuppose the presence of an agent who watches and listens, the taskscape must
be populated with beings who are themselves agents, and who reciprocally ‘act back’ in
the process of their own dwelling. In other words, the taskscape exists not just as activity
but as interactivity. Indeed this conclusion was already foreshadowed when I introduced
the concept of resonance as the rhythmic harmonisation of mutual attention. Having said
that, however, there is no reason why the domain of interactivity should be conﬁned to
the movements of human beings. We hear animals as well as people, such as the birds
and the dog in my example above. Hunters, to take another example, are alert to every
sight, sound or smell that reveals the presence of animals, and we can be sure that the
animals are likewise alert to the presence of humans, as they are also to that of one another.
On a larger scale, the hunters’ journeys through the landscape, or their oscillations between
the procurement of different animal species, resonate with the migratory movements of
terrestrial mammals, birds and ﬁsh. Perhaps then, as Reed argues, there is a fundamental
difference between our perception of animate beings and inanimate objects, since the
former – by virtue of their capacity for autonomous movement – ‘are aware of their
surroundings (including us) and because they act on those surroundings (including us)’

Dwelling
(Reed 1988a: 116). In other words, they afford the possibility not only of action but also 1
of interaction (cf. Gibson 1979: 135). Should we, then, draw the boundaries of the 2
taskscape around the limits of the animate?
Though the argument is a compelling one I ﬁnd it unsatisfactory, for two reasons in 4
particular. First, as Langer observes, ‘rhythm is the basis of life, but not limited to life’ 5
(1953: 128). The rhythms of human activities resonate not only with those of other living 6
things but also with a whole host of other rhythmic phenomena – the cycles of day and 7
night and of the seasons, the winds, the tides, and so on. Citing a petition of 1800 from 8
the seaside town of Sunderland, in which it is explained that ‘people are obliged to be 9
up at all hours of the night to attend the tides and their affairs upon the river’, Thompson 10
(1967: 59–60) notes that ‘the operative phrase is “attend the tides”: the patterning of 1
social time in the seaport follows upon the rhythms of the sea’. In many cases these natural 2
rhythmic phenomena ﬁnd their ultimate cause in the mechanics of planetary motion, 3
but it is not of course to these that we resonate. Thus we resonate to the cycles of light 4
and darkness, not to the rotation of the earth, even though the diurnal cycle is caused by 5
the earth’s axial rotation. And we resonate to the cycles of vegetative growth and decay, 6
not to the earth’s revolutions around the sun, even though the latter cause the cycle of 7
the seasons. Moreover these resonances are embodied, in the sense that they are not only 8
historically incorporated into the enduring features of the landscape but also develop- 9
mentally incorporated into our very constitution as biological organisms. Thus Young 20
describes the body as ‘an array of interlocking (or interﬂowing) cycles, with their own 1
spheres of partial independence within the solar cycle’ (1988: 41). We do not consult 2
these cycles, as we might consult a wrist-watch, in order to time our own activities, for 3
the cycles are inherent in the rhythmic structure of the activities themselves. It would 4
seem, then, that the pattern of resonances that comprises the temporality of the taskscape 5
must be expanded to embrace the totality of rhythmic phenomena, whether animate or 6
inanimate.
The second reason why I would be reluctant to restrict the taskscape to the realm of 8
living things has to do with the very notion of animacy. I do not think we can regard 9
this as a property that can be ascribed to objects in isolation, such that some (animate) 30
have it and others (inanimate) do not. For life is not a principle that is separately installed 1
inside individual organisms, and which sets them in motion upon the stage of the inan- 2
imate. To the contrary, as I have argued elsewhere, life is ‘a name for what is going on in 3
the generative ﬁeld within which organic forms are located and “held in place”’ (Ingold 4
1990: 215). That generative ﬁeld is constituted by the totality of organism–environment 5
relations, and the activities of organisms are moments of its unfolding. Indeed once we 6
think of the world in this way, as a total movement of becoming which builds itself into 7
the forms we see, and in which each form takes shape in continuous relation to those 8
around it, then the distinction between the animate and the inanimate seems to dissolve. 9
The world itself takes on the character of an organism, and the movements of animals – 40
including those of us human beings – are parts or aspects of its life-process (Lovelock 1
1979). This means that in dwelling in the world, we do not act upon it, or do things 2
to it; rather we move along with it. Our actions do not transform the world, they are part 3
and parcel of the world’s transforming itself. And that is just another way of saying that 4
they belong to time.
For in the ﬁnal analysis, everything is suspended in movement. David Reason expresses 6
the point in an eloquent passage that could stand as a summary of all I have argued 7
so far:

The temporality of the landscape • 201 •

Landscapes change; and change is itself an intrinsic aspect of our experience of landscape. The landscape is a polyrhythmic composition of processes whose pulse varies
from the erratic ﬂutter of leaves to the measured drift and clash of tectonic plates.
Relative to the human span, the view before us seems composed of ﬂeeting, ephemeral
effects which create a patina of transience on apparently stable forms.
(1987: 40)
As this passage reveals, what appear to us as the ﬁxed forms of the landscape, passive and
unchanging unless acted upon from outside, are themselves in motion, albeit on a scale
immeasurably slower and more majestic than that on which our own activities are
conducted. Imagine a ﬁlm of the landscape, shot over years, centuries, even millennia.
Slightly speeded up, plants appear to engage in very animal-like movements, trees ﬂex
their limbs without any prompting from the winds. Speeded up rather more, glaciers ﬂow
like rivers and even the earth begins to move. At yet greater speeds solid rock bends,
buckles and ﬂows like molten metal. The world itself begins to breathe. Thus the rhythmic
pattern of human activities nests within the wider pattern of activity for all animal life,
which in turn nests within the pattern of activity for all so-called living things, which
nests within the life-process of the world.
At each of these levels, as Mae-Wan Ho shows, coherence is founded upon resonance
(Ho 1989: 18–20). Reminding us of Whitehead’s maxim, that there is ‘no holding nature
still and looking at it’, Ho argues that the world is not anything we can look at but a
process that we are part of. Ultimately, then, by re-placing the tasks of human dwelling
in their proper context within the process of becoming of the world as a whole, we can
do away with the dichotomy between taskscape and landscape – only, however, by recognising the fundamental temporality of the landscape itself.6

THE HARVESTERS
In order to provide some illustration of the ideas developed in the preceding sections, I
reproduce here a painting which, more than any other I know, vividly captures a sense
of the temporality of the landscape. This is The harvesters, painted by Pieter Bruegel the
Elder in 1565 (Figure 11.1). I am not an art historian or critic, and my purpose is not
to analyse the painting in terms of style, composition or aesthetic effect. Nor am I
concerned with the historical context of its production. Sufﬁce it to say that the picture
is believed to be one of a series of twelve, each depicting a month of the year, out of
which only ﬁve have survived (Gibson 1977: 147). Each panel portrays a landscape, in
the colours and apparel appropriate to the month, and shows people engaged in the tasks
of the agricultural cycle that are usual at that time of year. The harvesters depicts the
month of August, and shows ﬁeld hands at work, reaping and sheaﬁng a luxuriant crop
of wheat, whilst others pause for a midday meal and some well-earned rest. The sense of
rustic harmony conveyed in this scene may, perhaps, represent something of an idealisation on Bruegel’s part. As Walter Gibson points out, Bruegel was inclined to ‘depict
peasants very much as a wealthy landowner would have viewed them, as the anonymous
tenders of his ﬁelds and ﬂocks’ (1977: 157–8). Any landowner would have had cause for
satisfaction in such a ﬁne crop, whereas the hands who sweated to bring it in may have
had a rather different experience. Nevertheless, Bruegel painted during a period of great
material prosperity in the Netherlands, in which all shared to some degree. These were
fortunate times.

Dwelling

Figure 11.1 The harvesters (1565) by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Rogers Fund, 1919 (19.164).
We are accustomed, by the conventions of modern society, to describe our experience 2
of landscape as though we were viewing a picture. What I am about to suggest, however, 3
is precisely the reverse. Rather than treating the world as its own painting I should like 4
you, the reader, to regard this painting by Bruegel as though it were its own world, into 5
which you have been magically transported. Imagine yourself, then, set down in the very 6
landscape depicted, on a sultry August day in 1565. Standing a little way off to the right 7
of the group beneath the tree, you are a witness to the scene unfolding about you. And 8
of course you hear it too, for the scene does not unfold in silence. So used are we to 9
thinking of the landscape as a picture that we can look at, like a plate in a book or an 40
image on a screen, that it is perhaps necessary to remind you that exchanging the painting 1
for ‘real life’ is not simply a matter of increasing the scale. What is involved is a funda- 2
mental difference of orientation. In the landscape of our dwelling, we look around (Gibson 3
1979: 203).7 In what follows I shall focus on six components of what you see around 4
you, and comment on each insofar as they illustrate aspects of what I have had to say 5
about landscape and temporality. They are: the hills and valley, the paths and tracks, the 6
tree, the corn, the church, and the people.

The temporality of the landscape • 203 •

The hills and valley
The terrain is a gently undulating one of low hills and valleys, grading off to a shoreline
that can just be made out through the summer haze. You are standing near the summit
of a hill, from where you can look out across the intervening valley to the next. How,
then, do you differentiate between the hills and the valley as components of this landscape? Are they alternating blocks or strips into which it may be divided up? Any attempt
at such division plunges us immediately into absurdity. For where can we draw the boundaries of a hill except along the valley bottoms that separate it from the hills on either side?
And where can we draw the boundaries of a valley except along the summits of the hills
that mark its watershed? One way, we would have a landscape consisting only of hills,
the other way it would consist only of valleys. Of course, ‘hill’ and ‘valley’ are opposed
terms, but the opposition is not spatial or altitudinal but kinaesthetic. It is the movements of falling away from, and rising up towards, that specify the form of the hill; and
the movements of falling away towards, and rising up from, that specify the form of the
valley. Through the exercises of descending and climbing, and their different muscular
entailments, the contours of the landscape are not so much measured as felt – they are
directly incorporated into our bodily experience. But even if you remain rooted to one
spot, the same principle applies. As you look across the valley to the hill on the horizon,
your eyes do not remain ﬁxed: swivelling in their sockets, or as you tilt your head, their
motions accord with the movement of your attention as it follows its course through the
landscape. You cast your eyes ﬁrst downwards into the valley, and then upwards towards
the distant hill. Indeed in this vernacular phrase, to ‘cast one’s eyes’, common sense has
once again grasped intuitively what the psychology of vision, with its metaphors of retinal
imagery, has found so hard to accept: that movement is the very essence of perception.
It is because, in scanning the terrain from nearby into the distance, your downward glance
is followed by an upward one, that you perceive the valley.
Moreover someone standing where you are now would perceive the same topographic
panorama, regardless of the time of year, the weather conditions and the activities in which
people may be engaged. We may reasonably suppose that over the centuries, perhaps even
millennia, this basic topography has changed but little. Set against the duration of human
memory and experience, it may therefore be taken to establish a baseline of permanence.
Yet permanence, as Gibson has stressed, is always relative; thus ‘it is better to speak of
persistence under change’ (Gibson 1979: 13). Although the topography is invariant relative to the human life-cycle, it is not itself immune to change. Sea-levels rise and fall with
global climatic cycles, and the present contours of the country are the cumulative outcome
of a slow and long drawn out process of erosion and deposition. This process, moreover,
was not conﬁned to earlier geological epochs during which the landscape assumed its
present topographic form. For it is still going on, and will continue so long as the stream,
just visible in the valley bottom, ﬂows on towards the sea. The stream does not ﬂow
between pre-cut banks, but cuts its banks even as it ﬂows. Likewise, as we have seen,
people shape the landscape even as they dwell. And human activities, as well as the action
of rivers and the sea, contribute signiﬁcantly to the process of erosion. As you watch, the
stream ﬂows, folk are at work, a landscape is being formed, and time passes.

The paths and tracks
I remarked above that we experience the contours of the landscape by moving through
it, so that it enters – as Bachelard would say – into our ‘muscular consciousness’. Reliving

Dwelling
the experience in our imagination, we are inclined to recall the road we took as ‘climbing’ 1
the hill, or as ‘descending’ into the valley, as though ‘the road itself had muscles, or rather, 2
counter-muscles’ (Bachelard 1964: 11). And this, too, is probably how you recall the paths 3
and tracks that are visible to you now: after all, you must have travelled along at least 4
some of them to reach the spot where you are currently standing. Nearest at hand, a path 5
has been cut through the wheat-ﬁeld, allowing sheaves to be carried down, and water and 6
provisions to be carried up. Further off, a cart-track runs along the valley bottom, and 7
another winds up the hill behind. In the distance, paths criss-cross the village green. Taken 8
together, these paths and tracks ‘impose a habitual pattern on the movement of people’ 9
(Jackson 1989: 146). And yet they also arise out of that movement, for every path or 10
track shows up as the accumulated imprint of countless journeys that people have made 1
– with or without their vehicles or domestic animals – as they have gone about their 2
everyday business. Thus the same movement is embodied, on the side of the people, in 3
their ‘muscular consciousness’, and on the side of the landscape, in its network of paths 4
and tracks. In this network is sedimented the activity of an entire community, over many 5
generations. It is the taskscape made visible.
In their journeys along paths and tracks, however, people also move from place to place. 7
To reach a place, you need cross no boundary, but you must follow some kind of path. 8
Thus there can be no places without paths, along which people arrive and depart; and 9
no paths without places, that constitute their destinations and points of departure. And 20
for the harvesters, the place to which they arrive, and whence they will leave at the end 1
of the day, is marked by the next feature of the landscape to occupy your attention . . . 2
The tree
Rising from the spot where people are gathered for their repast is an old and gnarled 6
pear-tree, which provides them with both shade from the sun, a back-rest and a prop for 7
utensils. Being the month of August, the tree is in full leaf, and fruit is ripening on the 8
branches. But this is not just any tree. For one thing, it draws the entire landscape around 9
it into a unique focus: in other words, by its presence it constitutes a particular place. 30
The place was not there before the tree, but came into being with it. And for those who 1
are gathered there, the prospect it affords, which is to be had nowhere else, is what gives 2
it its particular character and identity. For another thing, no other tree has quite the same 3
conﬁguration of branches, diverging, bending and twisting in exactly the same way. In its 4
present form, the tree embodies the entire history of its development from the moment 5
it ﬁrst took root. And that history consists in the unfolding of its relations with mani- 6
fold components of its environment, including the people who have nurtured it, tilled 7
the soil around it, pruned its branches, picked its fruit, and – as at present – use it as 8
something to lean against. The people, in other words, are as much bound up in the life 9
of the tree as is the tree in the lives of the people.8 Moreover, unlike the hills and the 40
valley, the tree has manifestly grown within living memory. Thus its temporality is more 1
consonant with that of human dwelling. Yet in its branching structure, the tree combines 2
an entire hierarchy of temporal rhythms, ranging from the long cycle of its own germi- 3
nation, growth and eventual decay to the short, annual cycle of ﬂowering, fruiting and 4
foliation. At one extreme, represented by the solid trunk, it presides immobile over the 5
passage of human generations; at the other, represented by the frondescent shoots, it 6
resonates with the life-cycles of insects, the seasonal migrations of birds, and the regular 7
round of human agricultural activities (Davies 1988). In a sense, then, the tree bridges 118

The temporality of the landscape • 205 •

the gap between the apparently ﬁxed and invariant forms of the landscape and the mobile
and transient forms of animal life, visible proof that all of these forms, from the most
permanent to the most ephemeral, are dynamically linked under transformation within
the movement of becoming of the world as a whole.

The corn
Turning from the pear-tree to the wheat-ﬁeld, it is no longer a place in the landscape but
the surrounding surface that occupies your attention. And perhaps what is most striking
about this surface is its uniformity of colour, a golden sheen that cloaks the more elevated
parts of the country for as far as the eye can see. As you know, wheat takes on this colour
at the particular time of year when it is ripe for harvesting. More than any other feature
of the landscape, the golden corn gathers the lives of its inhabitants, wherever they may
be, into temporal unison, founded upon a communion of visual experience. Thus whereas
the tree binds past, present and future in a single place, the corn binds every place in the
landscape within a single horizon of the present. The tree, we could say, establishes a
vivid sense of duration, the corn an equally vivid sense of what Fabian (1983: 31) calls
coevalness. It is this distinction that Bachelard has in mind when he contrasts the ‘beforeme, before-us’ of the forest with the ‘with-me, with-us’ of ﬁelds and meadows, wherein
‘my dreams and recollections accompany all the different phases of tilling and harvesting’
(Bachelard 1964: 188). You may suppose that the sleeper beneath the tree is dreaming of
corn, but if so, you may be sure that the people and the activities that ﬁgure in his dream
are coeval with those of the present and do not take him back into an encounter with
the past.9
Where the corn has been freshly cut, it presents a sheer vertical front, not far short of
a man’s height. But this is not a boundary feature, like a hedge or fence. It is an interface, whose outline is progressively transformed as the harvesters proceed with their work.
Here is a ﬁne example of the way in which form emerges through movement. Another
example can be seen further off, where a man is engaged in the task of binding the
wheat into a sheaf. Each completed sheaf has a regular form, which arises out of the
coordinated movement of binding. But the completion of a sheaf is only one moment
in the labour process. The sheaves will later be carried down the path through the ﬁeld,
to the haycart in the valley. Indeed at this very moment, one woman is stooped almost
double in the act of picking up a sheaf, and two others can be seen on their way down,
sheaves on their shoulders. Many more operations will follow before the wheat is eventually transformed into bread. In the scene before you, one of the harvesters under the
tree, seated on a sheaf, is cutting a loaf. Here the cycle of production and consumption
ends where it began, with the producers. For production is tantamount to dwelling: it
does not begin here (with a pre-conceived image) and end there (with a ﬁnished artefact),
but is continuously going on.

The church
Not far off, nestled in a grove of trees near the top of the hill, is a stone church. It is
instructive to ask: how does the church differ from the tree? They have more in common,
perhaps, than meets the eye. Both possess the attributes of what Bakhtin (1981: 84) calls
a ‘chronotope’ – that is, a place charged with temporality, one in which temporality takes
on palpable form. Like the tree, the church by its very presence constitutes a place, which

Dwelling
owes its character to the unique way in which it draws in the surrounding landscape. 1
Again like the tree, the church spans human generations, yet its temporality is not incon- 2
sonant with that of human dwelling. As the tree buries its roots in the ground, so also 3
people’s ancestors are buried in the graveyard beside the church, and both sets of roots 4
may reach to approximately the same temporal depth. Moreover the church, too, resonates 5
to the cycles of human life and subsistence. Among the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, 6
it is not only seen but also heard, as its bells ring out the seasons, the months, births, 7
marriages and deaths. In short, as features of the landscape, both the church and the tree 8
appear as veritable monuments to the passage of time.
Yet despite these similarities, the difference may seem obvious. The church, after all, is 10
a building. The tree, by contrast, is not built, it grows. We may agree to reserve the term 1
‘building’ for any durable structure in the landscape whose form arises and is sustained 2
within the current of human activity. It would be wrong to conclude, however, that the 3
distinction between buildings and non-buildings is an absolute one. Where an absolute 4
distinction is made, it is generally founded on the assumption that built form, rather than 5
having its source within nature, is superimposed by the mind upon it. That assumption, 6
however, presupposes the separation of mind and nature. But from the perspective of 7
dwelling there is no such separation. It is evident, from this latter perspective, that the 8
forms of buildings, as much as of any other features of the landscape, are neither given 9
in the world nor placed upon it, but emerge within the self-transforming processes of the 20
world itself. With respect to any feature, the scope of human involvement in these processes 1
will vary from negligible to considerable, though it is never total (even the most engi- 2
neered of environments is home to other species). Thus to recall our conclusion from the 3
last chapter, what is or is not a building is a relative matter; moreover as human involve- 4
ment may vary in the life history of a feature, it may be more or less of a building in 5
different periods.
Returning to the tree and the church, it is clearly too simple to suppose that the form 7
of the tree is naturally given in its genetic make-up, whereas the form of the church pre- 8
exists, in the minds of the builders, as a plan which is then realised in stone. In the case 9
of the tree, we have already observed that its growth consists in the unfolding of a total 30
system of relations constituted by the fact of its presence in an environment, from the 1
point of germination onwards, and that people, as components of the tree’s environment, 2
play a not insigniﬁcant role in this process. Likewise the ‘biography’ of the church consists 3
in the unfolding of relations with its human builders, as well as with other components 4
of its environment, from the moment when the ﬁrst stone was laid. The ﬁnal form of 5
the church may indeed have been preﬁgured in the human imagination, but it no more 6
issued from the image than did the form of the tree issue from its genes. In both cases, 7
the form is the embodiment of a developmental or historical process, and is rooted in the 8
context of human dwelling in the world.
In the case of the church, moreover, that process did not stop when its form came to 40
match the conceptual model. For as long as the building remains standing in the land- 1
scape, it will continue – as it does now – to ﬁgure within the environment not just of 2
human beings but of a myriad of other living kinds, plant and animal, which will incor- 3
porate it into their own life-activities and modify it in the process. And it is subject, too, 4
to the same forces of weathering and decomposition, both organic and meteorological, 5
that affect everything else in the landscape. The preservation of the church in its existing, 6
‘ﬁnished’ form in the face of these forces, however substantial it may be in its materials 7
and construction, requires a regular input of effort in maintenance and repair. Once this 118

The temporality of the landscape • 207 •

human input lapses, leaving it at the mercy of other forms of life and of the weather, it
will soon cease to be a building and become a ruin.

The people
So far I have described the scene only as you behold it with your eyes. Yet you do not
only look, you listen as well, for the air is full of sounds of one kind and another. Though
the folk beneath the tree are too busy eating to talk, you hear the clatter of wooden spoons
on bowls, the slurp of the drinker, and the loud snores of the member of the party who
is outstretched in sleep. Further off, you hear the swish of scythes against the cornstalks
and the calls of the birds as they swoop low over the ﬁeld in search of prey. Far off in
the distance, wafted on the light wind, can be heard the sounds of people conversing and
playing on a green, behind which, on the other side of the stream, lies a cluster of cottages.
What you hear is a taskscape.
In the performance of their particular tasks, people are responsive not only to the cycle
of maturation of the crop, which draws them together in the overall project of harvesting,
but also to each other’s activities as these are apportioned by the division of labour. Even
within the same task, individuals do not carry on in mutual isolation. Technically, it takes
only one man to wield a scythe, but the reapers nevertheless work in unison, achieving a
dance-like harmony in their rhythmic movements. Similarly the two women carrying
sheaves down into the valley adjust their pace, each in relation to the other, so that the
distance between them remains more or less invariant. Perhaps there is less co-ordination
between the respective movements of the eaters, however they eye each other intently as
they set about their repast, and the meal is a joint activity on which all have embarked
together, and which they will ﬁnish together. Only the sleeper, oblivious to the world, is
out of joint – his snores jar the senses precisely because they are not in any kind of
rhythmic relation to what is going on around. Without wakeful attention, there can be
no resonance.
But in attending to one another, do the people inhabit a world of their own, an exclusively human world of meanings and intentions, of beliefs and values, detached from the
one in which their bodies are put to work in their several activities? Do they, from within
such a domain of intersubjectivity, look at the world outside through the window of their
senses? Surely not. For the hills and valley, the tree, the corn and the birds are as palpably
present to them (as indeed to you too) as are the people to each other (and to you). The
reapers, as they wield their scythes, are with the corn, just as the eaters are with their
fellows. The landscape, in short, is not a totality that you or anyone else can look at, it
is rather the world in which we stand in taking up a point of view on our surroundings.
And it is within the context of this attentive involvement in the landscape that the human
imagination gets to work in fashioning ideas about it. For the landscape, to recall the
words of Merleau-Ponty (1962: 24), is not so much the object as ‘the homeland of our
thoughts’.

EPILOGUE
Concluding an essay on the ways in which the Western Apache of Arizona discover
meaning, value and moral guidance in the landscape around them, Keith Basso abhors
the tendency in ecological anthropology to relegate such matters to an ‘epiphenomenal’
level, which is seen to have little or no bearing on the dynamics of adaptation of human

Dwelling
populations to the conditions of their environments. An ecology that is fully cultural, 1
Basso argues, is one that would attend as much to the semiotic as to the material dimen- 2
sions of people’s relations with their surroundings, by bringing into focus ‘the layers of 3
signiﬁcance with which human beings blanket the environment’ (Basso 1984: 49). In 4
rather similar vein, Denis Cosgrove regrets the tendency in human geography to regard 5
the landscape in narrowly utilitarian and functional terms, as ‘an impersonal expression 6
of demographic and economic forces’, and thus to ignore the multiple layers of symbolic 7
meaning or cultural representation that are deposited upon it. The task of decoding the 8
‘many-layered meanings of symbolic landscapes’, Cosgrove argues, will require a geography 9
that is not just human but properly humanistic (Cosgrove 1989: 120–7).
Though I have some sympathy with the views expressed by these writers, I believe that 1
the metaphors of cultural construction they adopt have an effect quite opposite to that 2
intended. For the very idea that meaning covers over the world, layer upon layer, carries 3
the implication that the way to uncover the most basic level of human beings’ practical 4
involvement with their environments is by stripping these layers away. In other words, 5
such blanketing metaphors actually serve to create and perpetuate an intellectual space in 6
which human ecology or human geography can ﬂourish, untroubled by any concerns about 7
what the world means to the people who live in it. We can surely learn from the Western 8
Apache, who insist that the stories they tell, far from putting meanings upon the land- 9
scape, are intended to allow listeners to place themselves in relation to speciﬁc features of 20
the landscape, in such a way that their meanings may be revealed or disclosed. Stories 1
help to open up the world, not to cloak it.
And such opening up, too, must be the objective of archaeology. Like the Western 3
Apache – and for that matter any other group of people who are truly ‘at home’ in the 4
world – archaeologists study the meaning of the landscape not by interpreting the many 5
layers of its representation (adding further layers in the process) but by probing ever more 6
deeply into it. Meaning is there to be discovered in the landscape, if only we know how 7
to attend to it. Every feature, then, is a potential clue, a key to meaning rather than a 8
vehicle for carrying it.10 This discovery procedure, wherein objects in the landscape become 9
clues to meaning, is what distinguishes the perspective of dwelling. And since, as I have 30
shown, the process of dwelling is fundamentally temporal, the apprehension of the land- 1
scape in the dwelling perspective must begin from a recognition of its temporality. Only 2
through such recognition, by temporalising the landscape, can we move beyond the divi- 3
sion that has afﬂicted most inquiries up to now, between the scientiﬁc study of an 4
atemporalised nature, and the humanistic study of a dematerialised history. And no disci- 5
pline is better placed to take this step than archaeology. I have not been concerned here 6
with either the methods or the results of archaeological inquiry. However to the question, 7
‘what is archaeology the study of ?’, I believe there is no better answer than ‘the tempo- 8
rality of the landscape’. I hope, in this chapter, to have gone some way towards elucidating 9
what this means.

Culture, nature, environment • 209 •

Chapter Twelve

Globes and spheres
The topology of environmentalism

My purpose in this chapter is no more than to try out a rather embryonic idea. It concerns
the signiﬁcance of the image of the globe in the language of contemporary debate about
the environment. Though the image has long been deployed in geopolitical contexts, and
even longer in connection with navigation and astronomy, my impression is that its use
as a characterisation of the environment is rather recent. I have in mind such phrases,
which slip so readily off the tongues of contemporary policy-makers, as ‘global environmental change’. One is immediately struck by the paradoxical nature of this phrase. An
environment, surely, is that which surrounds, and can exist, therefore, only in relation to
what is surrounded (Ingold 1992a: 40). I do not think that those who speak of the global
environment mean by this the environment surrounding the globe. It is our environment
they are talking about, the world as it presents itself to a universal humanity. Yet how
can humans, or for that matter beings of any other kind, possibly be surrounded by a
globe? Would it not be fairer to say that it is we who have surrounded it?
My idea is that what may be called the global outlook may tell us something important
about the modern conception of the environment as a world which, far from being the
ambience of our dwelling, is turned in upon itself, so that we who once stood at its centre
become ﬁrst circumferential and are ﬁnally expelled from it altogether (Figure 12.1). In
other words, I am suggesting that the notion of the global environment, far from marking
humanity’s reintegration into the world, signals the culmination of a process of separation.
The image of the globe is familiar
to all of us who have gone through a
Western schooling and are used to
studying models upon which are
drawn, in outline, the continents and
oceans, and the gridlines of latitude
and longitude. We are taught that
this is what the earth looks like,
although none of us, with a handful
of signiﬁcant exceptions, has ever seen
it. By and large, life is lived at such
close proximity to the earth’s surface
that a global perspective is unobtainA
B
able. The signiﬁcant exceptions
comprise, of course, that privileged
band of astronauts who have viewed Figure 12.1 Two views of the environment: (A) as a lifeworld; (B)
the earth from outer space. In a sense, as a globe.

Dwelling

the astronaut’s relation to the real globe 1
seen through the window of the space- 2
craft mirrors the schoolchild’s relation to 3
the model globe in the classroom: in 4
both cases the world appears as an object 5
of contemplation, detached from the 6
domain of lived experience. For the child 7
the world is separately encapsulated in 8
the model; for the astronaut life is sepa- 9
rately encapsulated, albeit temporarily, in 10
the space module. My point with this 1
comparison is a simple one: with the 2
world imaged as a globe, far from coming 3
into being in and through a life process, 4
it ﬁgures as an entity that is, as it were, 5
presented to or confronted by life. The 6
global environment is not a lifeworld, it 7
is a world apart from life.
Before pursuing the implications of 9
this view, I should like to introduce an 20
Figure 12.2 The fourteen spheres of the world, as drawn by alternative image of the world which, 1
Giovanni Camillo Maffei of Solofra in his Scala Naturale (Venice, at least in European thought, is of far 2
1564). Giovanni’s patron, the Count of Altavilla, is shown begin- more ancient provenance. This is the 3
ning his ascent through the spheres.
image of the sphere. Something of 4
the difference in connotation between 5
‘globe’ and ‘sphere’ is suggested in their very acoustic resonance: ‘globe’ is hard and conso- 6
nantal; ‘sphere’ soft and vocalic. A globe is solid and opaque, a sphere hollow and 7
transparent. For the early astronomers, of course, the cosmos itself was seen to be comprised 8
of a series of such spheres, at the common centre of which stood man himself. The idea 9
was that as man’s attention was drawn ever outward, so it would penetrate each sphere 30
so as to reach the next. This is illustrated in Figure 12.2, taken from the Scala Naturale 1
of Giovanni Camillo Maffei, published in Venice in 1564, and dedicated to the Count 2
of Altavilla. Here there are fourteen concentric spheres which – Maffei tells us – may be 3
envisaged to form a giant stairway, the ascent of which affords, step-by-step, a compre- 4
hensive knowledge of the universe. In the picture, the Count is shown taking the ﬁrst 5
step, under Maffei’s direction (see Adams 1938: 58–9).
Unlike the solid globe, which can only be perceived as such from without, spheres – 7
as is clear from this ﬁgure – were to be perceived from within. The global view, we might 8
say, is centripetal, the spherical view centrifugal. Nor is it any accident that the percep- 9
tion of the spheres was imaged in terms of listening rather than looking. Visual perception, 40
insofar as it depends on the reﬂection of light from the outer surface of things, implies 1
both the opacity and inertia of what is seen and the externality of the perceiver. The 2
spheres, being transparent, could not be seen, but undergoing their own autonomous rota- 3
tions about the common centre, they could be heard: thus the motion of the spheres was 4
supposed to make a harmonious sound that could be registered by the sufﬁciently sensi- 5
tive ear. Dating back to Pythagoras and subsequently taken up by Plato and Aristotle, the 6
notion of the ‘music of the spheres’ was passed on to the Middle Ages through the writ- 7
ings of Boethius, and became integral to the ideas of the Renaissance, starting with Marsilio 118

Globes and spheres • 211 •

Ficino in the ﬁfteenth century (Hallyn 1993:
232). Still today, it is commonly argued that
the space of auditory perception is spherical
in form, a sphere that surrounds (without
enclosing) the listener at its centre. Thus
whereas we appear to be on the edge of visual
space looking in with the eye, we are always
at the centre of auditory space listening out
with the ear (Schafer 1985: 88, 94; cf. Ihde
1976, Carpenter and McLuhan 1960). The
globe is to the sphere, according to this argument, as vision is to hearing.1
The idea of the spherical cosmos is by no
means exclusive to the history of European
thought. Let me present one further example,
taken from Fienup-Riordan’s (1990) account
of the lifeworld of the Yup’ik Eskimos. Her
cross-sectional depiction of the cosmos as
perceived by the Yup’ik, reproduced in Figure
12.3, bears an uncanny resemblance to
Maffei’s diagram. At the centre is the dwelling,
from which roads lead in various directions
through the several surrounding spheres.

Figure 12.3 Yup’ik cosmology in cross section.
Reproduced from Eskimo essays: Yup’ik lives and how we
see them, by A. Fienup-Riordan, published by Rutgers
University Press, 1990, p. 111.

A person journeying far enough in any direction would eventually arrive at a point
where the earth folded back up into the skyland, the home of the spirits of the game
. . . Not only was the earth encompassed by a canopy from above, but below its thin
surface resided the spirits of the dead, both animal and human, each in separate villages.
Four or ﬁve ‘steps’ separated these two distinct but related domains.
(Fienup-Riordan 1990: 110)
Notice how in this image the surface of the earth, far from bounding the world externally, is but a thin and permeable membrane dividing the world internally, between upper
and lower hemispheres.
What I hope to have established, at least in outline, is that the lifeworld, imaged from
an experiential centre, is spherical in form, whereas a world divorced from life, that is
yet complete in itself, is imaged in the form of a globe. Thus the movement from spherical to global imagery is also one in which ‘the world’, as we are taught it exists, is drawn
ever further from the matrix of our lived experience. It appears that the world as it really
exists can only be witnessed by leaving it, and indeed much scientiﬁc energy and resources
have been devoted to turning such an imaginative ﬂight into an achieved actuality. One
consequence is the alleged discrepancy between what, in modern jargon, are called ‘local’
and ‘global’ perspectives. Insofar as the latter, afforded to a being outside the world, is seen
to be both real and total, the former, afforded to beings-in-the-world (that is, ordinary people) is regarded as illusory and incomplete. Retrieving from my shelves a geology textbook
published in 1964 – two years before the earth was ﬁrst photographed from space – I read
on the very ﬁrst page that ‘races of men [whose] horizons are limited to a tribal territory,
the conﬁnes of a mountain valley, a short stretch of the coast line, or the congested blocks

Dwelling
of a large city’ can have no conception of the true nature and extent of the world about 1
them (Putnam 1964: 3). If true knowledge is to be had by looking at the world, this state- 2
ment is self-evidently valid. My point, however, is that this speculist assumption is precisely 3
what has given us the imagery of the world as a globe. And it is this assumption, too, that 4
privileges the knowledge we get from school by looking at model globes over the know- 5
ledge we get from life by actively participating in our surroundings.
Do not misunderstand me. I am not some latter-day ﬂat-earther or pre-Copernican. I 7
do not mean to deny that the earth takes the form of a globe – something that has been 8
known, if not universally accepted, at least from the time of Pythagoras – or that it is 9
one of a number of planets revolving around a rather insigniﬁcant star. My question is 10
how it came to pass that this globe, the planet we call Earth, was taken to be an environ- 1
ment, or what my geology textbook called ‘the world about us’.
We can take a cue from the writings of Immanuel Kant who, in his Critique of pure 3
reason, drew a sophisticated analogy between the topological form of the earth and that 4
of the universe as a whole – that is, the ‘world’ conceived as the domain of all possible 5
objects of knowledge. Kant ﬁrst places himself in the shoes of one ignorant of the fact 6
that the earth is global in form:
If I represent the earth as it appears to my senses, as a ﬂat surface, with a circular 9
horizon, I cannot know how far it extends. But experience teaches me that wherever I 20
may go, I always see a space around me in which I could proceed further.
(1933: 606) 2
One is thus in the hapless position of realising that one’s knowledge is limited, but of 4
having no way of knowing just how limited it is. Once it is recognised, however, that the 5
earth is a globe, and given a knowledge of its diameter, it is immediately possible to calcu- 6
late, from ﬁrst principles, its surface area. And so, even though – as we traverse the surface 7
– new horizons are always opening up, not only can we work out, by subtraction, how 8
much there remains to be discovered, but also every fresh observation can be slotted into 9
position, in relation to each and every other, within a complete, unifying spatial frame- 30
work. Thus, to obtain a comprehensive knowledge of the environment, we must already 1
have in mind an image of the globe, or come pre-equipped with what Kant called ‘an 2
extended concept of the whole surface of the earth’, onto which may be mapped the data 3
of experience (see Richards 1974: 11). Moreover the same applies to knowledge in general, 4
which the mind sees as arrayed upon the surface of a sphere, at once continuous and 5
limited in extent: ‘Our reason is not like a plane indeﬁnitely far extended, the limits of 6
which we know in a general way only; but must rather be compared to a sphere, the 7
radius of which can be determined from the curvature of the arc of its surface . . .’ 8
(Kant 1933: 607). In this analogy, the topology of the earth’s surface comes to stand 9
for the fundamental idea, which the mind is said to bring to experience, of the unity, 40
completeness and continuity of nature. Here, surely, is to be found the very essence of 1
the global outlook.
Let us, then, compare an imaginary Kantian traveller, journeying across the globe in 3
search of new experiences to ﬁt into his overall conception, with the Yup’ik Eskimos, in 4
whose cycles of everyday and seasonal movement the cosmos, as they see it (Figure 12.3), 5
is continually being re-created (Fienup-Riordan 1990: 110–11). For both, the earth pro- 6
vides the ground on which they move, but whereas for the Yup’ik, this movement 7
is conducted within the world, the Kantian traveller, for whom the world is a globe, journeys 118

Globes and spheres • 213 •

upon its outer surface. It is at this surface, the interface between world and mind, sensation
and cognition, that all knowledge is constituted. Not only is the surface a continuous one,
it also lacks any centre. Anywhere upon it can serve, in principle, equally well as a point of
origin or as a destination. Thus if the ‘world about us’ is the globe, planet earth, it is not
a world within which we dwell, as is the Yup’ik world depicted with the house at its centre, but one on which we dwell. The globe, of course, does have a centre, yet a journey to
the centre of the earth, as immortalised in Jules Verne’s celebrated novel, is a voyage into
the unknown, a domain of strange and terrifying primordial forces.
In short, from a global perspective, it is on the surface of the world, not at its centre,
that life is lived.2 As a foundational level of ‘physical reality’, this surface is supposed
already to have been in existence long before there was any life at all. Then somehow,
through a series of events of near-miraculous improbability, there appeared on it ﬁrst life
and then, very much later, consciousness. These appearances are commonly pictured in
terms of the addition of extra layers of being to that basic layer represented by the earth’s
surface: hence the tripartite division into lithosphere, biosphere and noosphere, corresponding respectively to the inorganic substance of rocks and minerals, the organic substance
of living things and the superorganic substance of human culture and society.
Although spherical imagery is employed here, the spheres are deﬁned as layered surfaces
that successively cover over one another and the world, not as successive horizons disclosed
from a centre. And the outer wrapping is none other than the human mind and its products. This picture (see Figure 12.4) is the complete obverse of the medieval conception illustrated in Figure 12.2. The difference may be considered in relation to the genesis of
meaning. The world which the Count of Altavilla is setting out to explore in Maffei’s
diagram is itself a world of meaning which, through a kind of sensory attunement, an
education of attention, will be gradually revealed to him as he proceeds from one level of
understanding to the next. This world – like the world of the Dreaming in Aboriginal
Australia (see Chapter Three, p. 56) – has properties of both transparency and depth: not
only can one see into it, but also the more one looks the further one sees. By contrast, the
world depicted in Figure 12.4, insofar as it corresponds to ‘planet Earth’, consists of pure
substance, physical matter, presenting an opaque and impenetrable
surface of literal reality upon which
Noosphere
form and meaning are overlain by
the human mind. That is to say,
Biosphere
meaning does not lie in the relaLithosphere
tional context of the perceiver’s
involvement in the world, but is
rather inscribed upon the outer surface of the world by the mind of
the perceiver. To know the world,
then, is a matter not of sensory
attunement but of cognitive reconstruction. And such knowledge is
acquired not by engaging directly,
in a practical way, with the objects
in one’s surroundings, but rather
by learning to represent them, in
the mind, in the form of a map. Figure 12.4 Lithosphere, biosphere and noosphere.

Dwelling
I reserve discussion of the notions of mapping and mapmaking for the next chapter. It is 1
sufﬁcient to note, here, the immediate connection between the apprehension of the world 2
as a solid globe and the idea, commonly encountered even in anthropological literature, of 3
the environment as a substrate for the external imposition of arbitrary cultural form. The 4
world becomes a tabula rasa for the inscription of human history.
The familiar globes of geography classrooms provide a vivid example of such inscrip- 6
tion or covering over. Though the sea is painted blue, the continental land-masses are 7
frequently painted in a mosaic of contrastive colours, representing the territories of nation 8
states. Thus, we are led to think, has the order of human society wrapped itself around the 9
face of the world. Yet that order, we know, has its roots in the history of colonialism, and 10
the attendant voyages of (principally maritime) discovery and exploration. The image of the 1
world as a globe is, I contend, a colonial one. It presents us with the idea of a preformed 2
surface waiting to be occupied, to be colonised ﬁrst by living things and later by human 3
(usually meaning Western) civilisation. Through travel and exploration, it is said, mankind 4
has conquered the globe. Having now ﬁlled it up, and still multiplying in numbers at an 5
alarming pace, we are urgently searching around, not just in fantasy but also in fact, for 6
new worlds to colonise. Not only, then, does it appear that the world existed prior to 7
life; it also appears that life can hop from world to world and even – like a parasitic vector 8
ﬂying between successive hosts – exist temporarily in worldless suspension.
The idea that the world exists prior to the forms of life that come to occupy it, and 20
hence that each of these life-forms is itself separately encoded in a context-free vehicle, a 1
kind of free-ﬂoating capsule that can carry form from one site of occupation to another, 2
is deeply entrenched in both biological and anthropological thought. In biology it appears 3
as the doctrine of genetic preformation, according to which every organism may be spec- 4
iﬁed, independently of the environmental context of its development, as a unique 5
conﬁguration of self-replicating elements (genes). Through a process of variation under 6
natural selection, organisms are supposed to evolve in ways that make them better adapted 7
to the conditions of their environments, yet the very notion of adaptation implies that 8
these conditions are speciﬁable in advance, in terms of a set of exogenous parameters quite 9
distinct from the endogenous, genetically ﬁxed parameters of the adapting organisms. 30
There is thus one set of speciﬁcations for life, and another set for the world (see Lewontin 1
1983). In anthropology, cultural information is made to play much the same role as is 2
played by the genes in biology. Again, there is one set of speciﬁcations for the forms of 3
life that are carried around – as it used to be said – ‘inside people’s heads’. And there 4
is another set for the environment, often identiﬁed with ‘nature’ or ‘the physical world’, 5
upon which these forms are inscribed. And if we ask ‘What kind of world is this, that is 6
an environment for every form of life yet external to all of them?’, the answer, as we have 7
seen, is planet Earth, the globe.
Moreover, once the world is conceived as a globe, it can become an object of appro- 9
priation for a collective humanity. In this discourse, we do not belong to the world, neither 40
partaking of its essence nor resonating to its cycles and rhythms. Rather, since our very 1
humanity is seen to consist, in essence, in the transcendence of physical nature, it is the 2
world that belongs to us. Images of property abound. We have inherited the earth, it is 3
said, and so are responsible for handing it on to our successors in reasonably good condi- 4
tion. But like the prodigal heir, we are inclined to squander this precious inheritance for 5
the sake of immediate gratiﬁcation. Much of the current concern with the global environ- 6
ment has to do with how we are to ‘manage’ this planet of ours. That it is ours to manage, 7
however, remains more or less unquestioned. Such management is commonly described 118

Globes and spheres • 215 •

in the language of intervention. But to intervene in the world, as we have already had
occasion to note (Chapter Four, p. 63), implies the possibility of our choosing not to do
so (Williams 1972: 154). It implies that human beings can launch their interventions
from a platform above the world, as though they could live on or off the environment,
but are not destined to live within it. Indeed, this rendering of action towards the environment as planned intervention in nature is fundamental to the Western notion of production
(see Chapter Three, pp. 58–9). History itself comes to be seen as a process wherein human
producers, through their transforming reaction on nature, have literally constructed an
environment of their own making.
The idea is epitomised in the title of an inﬂuential volume, published in 1956, called
Man’s role in changing the face of the earth (Thomas et al. 1956). There are two points
about this title to which I wish to draw attention. The ﬁrst is that with the world envisaged as planet Earth, it is its face that is presented to humanity as the substrate for the
latter’s transforming interventions. This recalls my earlier observation that in the global
outlook, life appears to be lived upon the outer surface of the world rather than from an
experiential centre within it. The world does not surround us, it lies beneath our feet.3
The second point concerns the notion of change. It is not of course the case, as was
believed by some of the early advocates of uniformitarianism, that the earth has persisted
since the beginning of time in homeostatic equilibrium, at least until humans came along
to upset the balance. On the contrary, it has been – and continues to be – racked by
geological forces acting on such a scale as to make the most impressive feats of human
engineering seem puny by comparison. These earth-shaping processes, however, are considered to be immanent in the workings of nature. They are what the world undergoes. But
in speaking of the role of humanity, the world appears as an object of transformation.
Change ﬁgures as what is done to the planet by its present owner-occupiers, human beings.
It is thus exogenous rather than endogenous, not nature transforming itself, but nature
transformed through the imposition of non-natural, human design.
This is what is meant when, in ‘changing the face of the earth’, the universal agent –
‘man’ – is said to have replaced the natural environment with one which is, to an evergreater extent, artiﬁcial. Thus the construction of the human order appears to entail the
destruction of the natural one, as production entails consumption. We are, today, increasingly concerned to limit what are perceived to be the destructive consequences of human
activity. My point, however, is that the very notions of destruction and damage limitation,
like those of construction and control, are grounded in the discourse of intervention. That
is to say, they presume a world already constituted, through the action of natural forces,
which then becomes the object of human interest and concern. But it is not a world of
which humans themselves are conceived to be a part. To them, it is rather presented as a
spectacle. They may observe it, reconstruct it, protect it, tamper with it or destroy it, but
they do not dwell in it. Indeed, what is perhaps most striking about the contemporary
discourse of global environmental change is the immensity of the gulf that divides the
world as it is lived and experienced by the practitioners of this discourse, and the world
of which they speak under the rubric of ‘the globe’. No-one, of course, denies the seriousness of the problems they address; there is good reason to believe, however, that many of
these problems have their source in that very alienation of humanity from the world
of which the notion of the global environment is a conspicuous expression.
This point brings me back to the distinction, mentioned earlier, between ‘local’ and
‘global’ perspectives. The difference between them, I contend, is not one of hierarchical
degree, in scale or comprehensiveness, but one of kind. In other words, the local is not

Dwelling
a more limited or narrowly focused apprehension than the global, it is one that rests on 1
an altogether different mode of apprehension – one based on practical, perceptual engage- 2
ment with components of a world that is inhabited or dwelt-in, rather than on the 3
detached, disinterested observation of a world that is merely occupied. In the local perspec- 4
tive the world is a sphere, or perhaps a nesting series of spheres as portrayed in Figures 5
12.2 and 12.3, centred on a particular place. From this experiential centre, the attention 6
of those who live there is drawn ever deeper into the world, in the quest for knowledge 7
and understanding. It is through such attentive engagement, entailed in the very process 8
of dwelling, that the world is progressively revealed to the knowledge-seeker. Now different 9
centres will, of course, afford different views, so that while there is only one global perspec- 10
tive, indifferent to place and context, the number of possible local perspectives is potentially 1
inﬁnite. This does not mean, however, that they are in any sense incomplete, or that they 2
represent no more than fragments of a total picture. It is only when we come to repre- 3
sent local differences in terms of a globalising discourse that the centre from which each 4
perspective is taken is converted into a boundary within which every local view is seen to 5
be contained. The idea that the ‘little community’ remains conﬁned within its limited 6
horizons from which ‘we’ – globally conscious Westerners – have escaped results from a 7
privileging of the global ontology of detachment over the local ontology of engagement. 8
To the extent that it has been used to legitimate the disempowerment of local people 9
in the management of their environments, this idea has had serious practical consequences 20
for those amongst whom anthropologists have conducted their studies. To adopt a distinc- 1
tion from Niklas Luhmann (1979), it might be argued that the dominance of the global 2
perspective marks the triumph of technology over cosmology. Traditional cosmology places 3
the person at the centre of an ordered universe of meaningful relations, such as that 4
depicted by Maffei (Figure 12.2), and enjoins an understanding of these relations as a 5
foundation for proper conduct towards the environment. Modern technology, by contrast, 6
places human society and its interests outside what is residually construed as the ‘phys- 7
ical world’, and furnishes the means for the former’s control over the latter. Cosmology 8
provides the guiding principles for human action within the world, technology provides 9
the principles for human action upon it. Thus, as cosmology gives way to technology, the 30
relation between people and the world is turned inside out (Figure 12.1), so that what 1
was a cosmos or lifeworld becomes a world – a solid globe – externally presented to life. 2
In short, the movement from spherical to global imagery corresponds to the undermining 3
of cosmological certainties and the growing belief in, and indeed dependence upon, the 4
technological ﬁx. It is a movement from revelation to control, and from partial know- 5
ledge to the calculated risk.
Let me add one further comment in conclusion. I have written throughout as though 7
the characterisations of the environment, respectively, as globe and sphere were irrevo- 8
cably opposed, and thus mutually exclusive. But this is not really so, since each view 9
contains the seeds of the other. To regard the world as a sphere is at once to render 40
conceivable the possibility of its logical inverse, the globe; and of course vice versa. We 1
could say that both perspectives are caught up in the dialectical interplay between engage- 2
ment and detachment, between human beings’ involvement in the world and their 3
separation from it, which has been a feature of the entire history of Western thought and 4
no doubt of other traditions as well. Concretely, this is perhaps most clearly manifest in 5
the architectural form of the dome (Smith 1950). A sphere on the inside, a globe on the 6
outside, this form has a cosmic resonance of near-universal appeal. But for any society, 7
at any period of its history, we may expect one perspective to be ascendant, and the other 118

Globes and spheres • 217 •

to be associated with its more or less muted undercurrent. And my sense of the contemporary discourse on the environment in the West is that it continues to be dominated by
global imagery associated with the triumph of modern science and technology, but that
it is under increasing threat from those – including many anthropologists – who would
turn to local or indigenous cosmologies of engagement for sources of insight into our
current predicament.

POSTSCRIPT
Since this chapter was written, two further strands have emerged along which I think the
argument can be extended. One is to relate the image of the globe, discussed here, with
that of the tree, which is currently pervasive in the representation of biodiversity. The
second is to show how the distinction between globe and sphere, as alternative topologies of environmental awareness, crosscuts the conventional dichotomy, as it appears in
contemporary environmentalist debates, between ecocentrism and anthropocentrism.
The image of living things as arrayed upon the branches of a tree will already be familiar
from my discussion of the genealogical model in Chapter Eight (pp. 134–5). The deﬁnitive feature of the model, I argued, is that every creature is speciﬁed in its essential nature
through the bestowal of attributes passed down along lines of descent, independently and
in advance of its placement in the world. The idea that the world is presented to life as
a surface to be occupied, at once continuous and ﬁnite in extent – in short, as the surface
of a globe – is simply the obverse of this notion. The intrinsic connection between the
geological image of the world as a globe and the biological image of life as a tree is beautifully illustrated in an engraving by Johannes Christian Bendorp, dating from the turn
of the nineteenth century (reproduced in Bouquet 1995: Figure 2.6). Said to depict the
Tree of Jesse, it shows a bay tree – on whose trunk and branches are arrayed all the
descendants of Adam and Eve – springing from a point on the surface of a solid globe.
The precise location of this point is immaterial; what is signiﬁcant, however, is the inscription below, which reads: ‘God created the whole family of man from one blood, to inhabit
the entire Earth’ (Bouquet 1995: 51). Thus the Earth, as a globe, is there to be colonised
by those who ‘branch out’ over it, along their several lines of descent.
Now one of the consequences of the genealogical model, as I showed in Chapter Eight
(pp. 138–9), is that difference is rendered as diversity. Thus living things are classiﬁed
and compared, and their kinds enumerated, in terms of intrinsic properties that they are
deemed to possess by virtue of genealogical connection, irrespective of their positioning
in relation to one another in an environment. This is the basis for the modern concept
of biodiversity. It follows, however, that this very concept is founded in a global perspective. In other words, the mode of apprehension that would reveal the totality of living
things as a catalogue of biodiversity is also one that reveals the world as a globe in the
purview of a universal humanity. That is why the human species is itself so conspicuously
absent from mainstream conceptions of global biodiversity. Species can only be enumerated in the natural world by a humanity that has set itself above and beyond it, and that
– being simultaneously everywhere and nowhere – can set the whole of nature in its sights.
So far as human differences are concerned, these are typically understood in terms of a
concept of cultural diversity that is seen as analogous to biodiversity rather than as an
extension of it. And the analogy, of course, serves only to reinforce the belief that whatever differences may exist between peoples, on account of their divergent histories of
descent, are superimposed upon a humanity that is common to all.

Dwelling
To pick up the second strand: contemporary discussions concerning human rights 1
and responsibilities towards the environment, above all in global geopolitical arenas, have 2
tended to revolve around a pivotal opposition between the positions of so-called anthro- 3
pocentrism and ecocentrism. By anthropocentrism is usually meant an attitude which values 4
all things non-human – all inanimate and animate components of the environment barring 5
other people – solely as instrumental means to the realisation of exclusively human ends. 6
Against this, ecocentrism is deﬁned as that attitude which credits the world of nature – 7
and above all, of living things in their interrelationships – with an intrinsic value quite 8
independently of the purposes and activities, and even of the presence, of human beings. 9
Yet despite (or perhaps because of ) their conventional opposition, these two positions 10
share more in common than meets the eye. Both presuppose a global perspective. For 1
both, ‘there is just one big environment’, identiﬁed with the order of nature (Cooper 2
1992: 167). But by its very vastness, this all-embracing environment is profoundly alien 3
to human experience. It is, as David Cooper puts it, ‘much too big’ to be lived in. One 4
cannot relate to its components. The environment we relate to, by contrast, is the one 5
that surrounds us, that constitutes our milieu and our ambience. And this is spherical 6
rather than global in its topology.4
Since we are human, the world around us must necessarily be anthropocentric: this, in 8
itself, implies no lack of participation, nor does it entail an instrumental attitude. Indeed 9
it is decidedly odd that the term ‘anthropocentrism’ should have been adopted to denote 20
an attitude that, more than any other, withdraws human life from active participation in 1
the environment. It is an attitude that might be more accurately described as ‘anthro- 2
pocircumferentialism’. The term may be an impossibly cumbersome one; nevertheless I 3
believe we need it, if only to distinguish the discursive construction of the environment 4
characteristic of modern Western thought and science from the many pre-modern and 5
non-Western cosmologies that are anthropocentric in the strict sense of placing the 6
human being at the hub of a dwelt-in world, a centre of embodied awareness that reaches 7
out, through the activity of the senses, into its surroundings. Thus the shift from 8
anthropocentrism to anthropocircumferentialism is tantamount to the withdrawal of the 9
human presence from the centre to the periphery of the lifeworld (Figure 12.1). And 30
ecocentrism, ﬁnally, is just the other side of the coin from anthropocircumferentialism. 1
For once humanity is placed on the outside, surrounding the global environment, then 2
the environment – now surrounded rather than surrounding – no longer holds any place 3
for human beings.

Culture, nature, environment • 219 •

Chapter Thirteen

To journey along a way of life
Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation

INTRODUCTION
Everyone has probably had the experience, at some time or other, of feeling lost, or of
not knowing in which way to turn in order to reach a desired destination. Yet for most
of the time we know where we are, and how to get to where we want to go. Ordinary
life would be well-nigh impossible if we did not. It remains a challenge, however, to
account for everyday skills of orientation and wayﬁnding. This challenge is compounded
by the considerable potential for misunderstanding surrounding the question of what it
actually means to know where one is, or the way to go. For the map-using stranger, making
his way in unfamiliar country, ‘being here’ or ‘going there’ generally entails the ability
to identify one’s current or intended future position with a certain spatial or geographic
location, deﬁned by the intersection of particular coordinates on the map. But a person
who has grown up in a country and is conversant with its ways knows quite well where
he is, or in what direction to go, without having to consult an artefactual map. What,
then, does he have that the stranger lacks? According to a view that has found wide
support in the literatures of geography and psychology, there is no difference in principle
between them. Both are map-users. For both, knowing where one is means identifying
one’s position in the world with a location on the map. The difference is just that the
native inhabitant’s map is held not in the hand but in the head, preserved not on paper
but in memory, in the form of a comprehensive spatial representation of his usual surroundings. At any moment, it is supposed, he can access this mental or ‘cognitive’ map, and
determine his location in terms of it.
In this chapter I shall argue, to the contrary, that there is no such map, and that the
belief in its existence is a consequence of the mistaken attribution to native people of a
sense of what it means to know one’s whereabouts that effectively treats them as strangers
in their own country. Indeed the native inhabitant may be unable to specify his location
in space, in terms of any independent system of coordinates, and yet will still insist with
good cause that he knows where he is. This, as I shall show, is because places do not
have locations but histories. Bound together by the itineraries of their inhabitants, places
exist not in space but as nodes in a matrix of movement. I shall call this matrix a ‘region’.
It is the knowledge of the region, and with it the ability to situate one’s current position
within the historical context of journeys previously made – journeys to, from and around
places – that distinguishes the countryman from the stranger. Ordinary wayﬁnding, then,
more closely resembles storytelling than map-using. To use a map is to navigate by means
of it: that is, to plot a course from one location to another in space. Wayﬁnding, by
contrast, is a matter of moving from one place to another in a region. But while it would

Dwelling
be wrong, or at least misleading, to liken the countryman’s knowledge to a map, there is 1
a certain parallel to be drawn between the processes of knowing and mapping. Both are 2
environmentally situated activities, both are carried out along paths of travel, and both 3
unfold over time. Just as wayﬁnding has to be distinguished from navigation, however, 4
so also mapping must be distinguished from mapmaking. For the designs to which mapping 5
gives rise – including what have been variously categorised as ‘native maps’ and ‘sketch 6
maps’ – are not so much representations of space as condensed histories. Thus, to put 7
my thesis in a nutshell, knowing is like mapping, not because knowledge is like a map, 8
but because the products of mapping (graphic inscriptions), as those of knowing (stories), 9
are fundamentally un-maplike. What follows is an elaboration of this argument.
COGNITIVE MAPS
At the most general level, the question of how people ﬁnd their way around may be posed 4
in terms of two alternative metaphors. Following David Rubin (1988: 375), I call the 5
ﬁrst a complex-structure metaphor, and the second a complex-process metaphor. The 6
former, which has long been dominant in cognitive psychology, holds that even before 7
the individual steps forth into the environment, he has already had copied into his mind 8
– through some mechanism of replication – a comprehensive description of its objects, 9
features and locations, and the relations between them. This, of course, is the cognitive 20
map. Having determined his current whereabouts and desired destination within the map, 1
and having plotted the route between them, his actual movement from place to place is 2
a perfectly straightforward, indeed almost mechanical matter of executing the prescribed 3
course. Getting from A to B, in short, is explained through the harnessing of a simple 4
process, of bodily locomotion, to a complex structure, the mental map. With a complex- 5
process metaphor, on the other hand, little or no pre-structured content is imputed to 6
the mind. Instead, wayﬁnding is understood as a skilled performance in which the trav- 7
eller, whose powers of perception and action have been ﬁne-tuned through previous 8
experience, ‘feels his way’ towards his goal, continually adjusting his movements in response 9
to an ongoing perceptual monitoring of his surroundings. What the ﬁrst approach explains 30
through positing an isomorphism between structures in the world and structures in the 1
mind, the second explains as the unfolding of a ﬁeld of relations established through the 2
immersion of the actor-perceiver within a given environmental context. This is the 3
approach favoured by ecological psychology, and it is the one I follow here.
Before pursuing an ecological approach to wayﬁnding, however, it is worth reﬂecting 5
on the circumstances in which the notion of the cognitive map came to be introduced 6
in the ﬁrst place. At that time, some half a century ago, psychology was still in the grip 7
of the behaviourist paradigm. Animals, including human beings, were supposed to respond 8
more or less automatically, in ways conditioned by previous experience, to particular 9
environmental stimuli. Seeking to verify this simple model, psychologists devised numerous 40
experiments in which their star laboratory animal – the humble rat – was induced to run 1
through a variety of mazes. Starved at the outset, having successfully negotiated the maze 2
the rat would be rewarded with food from a box. The idea was that through repeated 3
trials, the animal would learn to take one particular path rather than another at each 4
successive ‘choice-point’ along the route. The whole route would then be remembered as 5
a chain of conditioned responses, such as right or left turns, triggered by the successive 6
appearance of particular stimuli in the form of gateways in the maze. But rats are enter- 7
prising creatures, and they often found ways of subverting the experimenters’ intentions. 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 221 •

They would, for example, manage to climb out of the maze near the start by pushing
back the cover and then run directly over the top to the food box, where they would
climb back down and eat. This caused some consternation in the behaviourist camp, since
according to the stimulus–response model they should have had no idea of the direction
in which to head off in search of food, knowing no other way than the familiar route
through the maze, with all its twists and turns.
To further test the rats’ abilities, psychologist Edward C. Tolman and his collaborators
devised what they called a ‘spatial orientation’ experiment (Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish
1946). A maze was ﬁrst set up as shown in Figure 13.1. Starting at A, the animals had
to run across an open circular table, then through the alley CD, and ﬁnally along the
roundabout route through E and F to reach the food box at G. Once they were accustomed to this, the original maze was replaced with the apparatus shown in Figure 13.2.
Starting again at A, the animals ran across the circular table and down the alley, only to
ﬁnd it blocked at one end. After returning to the table and exploring a little way down
the other radiating paths, each rat would eventually choose to run all the way out along
one of them. The overwhelming majority opted for path number 6 – the path that would
take them to precisely the same spot where, in the original set-up, the food box had been
located. This experiment seemed to provide convincing evidence that in their training for
the ﬁrst maze, the rats had not merely learned a ﬁxed sequence of steps that would lead
them reliably towards their goal. Rather, as Tolman hypothesised, they must have built
up ‘something like a ﬁeld map of the environment’, upon which could be traced all
possible routes and paths and their relationships.
Having located their own position and that of the
food box in terms of this map, the rats were able
to select the path, in the second maze, that led
F
G
H
directly from the one to the other. In light of this
ability it was clearly inadequate, Tolman reasoned,
to liken the animal’s central nervous system – as
the behaviourists had done – to a telephone switchE
board such that every incoming stimulus simply
‘dials up’ the appropriate response. The brain was
to be compared, instead, to a ‘map control room’
where stimulus-based information would be
collected and collated, and where the routes would
be plotted that would ﬁnally determine the animal’s
overt behavioural responses (Tolman 1948: 192).
Despite its provocative title, Tolman’s 1948
paper – ‘Cognitive maps in rats and men’ – had
B
much to say about rats but virtually nothing about
human beings. Ironically, what little Tolman did
have to say about humans had nothing to do with
A
their abilities of orientation and wayﬁnding, but
with certain psychopathologies which, he thought,
could be attributed to regimes of child training that Figure 13.1 The spatial orientation experiment: the
blocked the development of properly comprehen- original maze.
sive cognitive maps. Ending on a high moral tone, After Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish, Studies in spacial
Tolman preached that only by inculcating the para- learning I, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36,
mount virtues of reason and tolerance could our 1946.

Dwelling

children be furnished with maps sufﬁciently 1
broad and comprehensive to cope with ‘that great 2
God-given maze which is our human world’ 3
H
(1948: 208). It is hard to know what the rats 4
would have made of this! Be that as it may, more 5
recent work by James and Carol Gould on the 6
wayﬁnding abilities of honey bees helps to put 7
the rats’ capacities in perspective. For it turns out 8
that what rats can do, bees can do too: namely, 9
make their way directly to a food source, along 10
a course never taken before. And they can do 1
this without involving anything that we might 2
dignify by terms like ‘thought’, ‘reason’ or ‘imag- 3
ination’. The Goulds sound an appropriate note 4
of scepticism when they remark that the calcu- 5
A
lation a bee would have to undertake in order to 6
plan an optimal route would not be beyond a 7
simple computer. There is no obvious reason why 8
Figure 13.2 The spatial orientation experiment: the
the bee, or for that matter the rat, should have 9
replacement maze.
any more of an understanding of the task before 20
After Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish, Studies in spacial
learning I, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36, 1946. it than the computer, or why its solution should 1
call for any intelligence whatsoever (Gould and 2
Gould 1988: 224–5).
Here is what the Goulds did with their bees. First, a group of foragers were trained to 4
ﬂy to a feeding station in some woods out of sight of the hive. Later, individuals about 5
to set off from the hive to the feeder were captured and transported, in an opaque container, 6
to another location well off from their regular route and from which the feeder, likewise, 7
was hidden from view. Here they were released. It was found that the bees ﬂew straight 8
from this location to the feeder, along what can only have been an entirely novel route 9
for them. There is no way in which they could have done this, had they been constrained 30
to follow a ﬁxed sequence of steps between accustomed landmarks – as stipulated by the 1
stimulus-response model. Instead, the Goulds suggest, the bee does what we would do 2
under similar circumstances: ‘she would use nearby landmarks to ﬁgure out where she 3
is, determine in which direction her goal lies, and then depart directly towards it’ 4
(Gould and Gould 1988: 109). She navigates, in other words, in terms of a cognitive 5
map. That humans do likewise was suggested by experiments conducted by Worchel (cited 6
by Oatley 1977: 539–40), who led his subjects blindfold along two sides of a right-angled 7
triangle and then told them to make their way back along the hypoteneuse – a task they 8
completed with considerable accuracy. The ability to update one’s position on the cogni- 9
tive map, and thereby to keep on target despite twists and turns, is – according to Keith 40
Oatley – the basis for any kind of navigation, whether on land or at sea. But whatever 1
the conditions under which it is carried out, navigation ‘is a complex cognitive skill’ 2
(Oatley 1977: 537).
Comparing what the Goulds say about bees with what Oatley says about humans, we 4
ﬁnd more than a hint of double standards. Confronted with essentially the same task, its 5
successful accomplishment by humans is attributed to complex skills whereas bees 6
apparently do it on autopilot. I do not mean to deny that human wayﬁnding is a highly 7
complex, skilled process. But there seems good reason to suppose that it is skilled precisely 118

Block

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 223 •

to the extent that it goes beyond the simple computational operations described by cognitive map theorists. For the environment within which people ﬁnd their way about is not,
as Tolman would have it, a ‘great God-given maze’, with all its landmarks, routes, openings and obstructions already laid out in advance. It is rather an immensely variegated
terrain of comings and goings, which is continually taking shape around the traveller even
as the latter’s movements contribute to its formation. To hold a course in such an environment is to be attentive at all times to what is going on around you, and to respond in
ways that answer to your purpose. This is probably as true of rats, in their ordinary
environment, as it is of human beings in theirs. Rats are sensitive and intelligent creatures, and if their performance in experimental mazes manifests a basic computational
capacity but no real skill, this is only because the artiﬁcial set-up in which they ﬁnd themselves is a highly impoverished one that deprives them of any opportunity for the exercise
of normal powers of discrimination and judgement.

WHAT IS A MAP ANYWAY?
The core assumption of the cognitive approach to orientation and wayﬁnding is, as we
have seen, that perceptually salient aspects of the structure of the world are copied into
an analogous structure in the mind (Rubin 1988: 375). This copy is said to be a map,
or at least to be maplike in form. But why should this particular metaphor have been
adopted, rather than some other? Why maps rather than, say, pictures or images? What
is the difference between a map of the world and a picture or image of the world? Any
general deﬁnition of a map, say Arthur Robinson and Barbara Petchenik, ‘must be based
on its being simply a representation of things in space’ (1976: 15). Yet a perspective
drawing would satisfy this criterion, and we would surely not describe such a drawing as
a map. One possible approach to deﬁning a map, in contradistinction to the perspectival
image, is suggested by Alfred Gell (1985). The approach rests on the idea that maps
encode beliefs or propositions about the locations of places and objects that are true (or
taken to be true) independently of where one is currently positioned in the world. An
example of such a proposition might be that ‘Edinburgh is north of London’. One could
issue statements to this effect whether one was in London, Edinburgh, or anywhere else
for that matter, and they would all be equally valid. In Gell’s terms, these statements –
each of which is a token of the proposition in question – are non-indexical, in that their
truth conditions are not bound to the place where they are made.
Accordingly, Gell proceeds to deﬁne the map as ‘any system of spatial knowledge and/or
beliefs which takes the form of non-token-indexical statements about the spatial locations
of places and objects’ (1985: 278–9). Now a person equipped with knowledge in this
form ought, in principle, to be able to ﬁgure out just how the world should look from
any selected point of observation. If I were hiking in the mountains, for example, I should
be able to state how the various peaks would appear arrayed before me, were I standing
on a particular summit. Such statements, however, since they hold good only for the view
from that summit, and none other, are indexical of the place. Any set of beliefs and propositions whose tokens are indexical in this sense, having regard for what is where for a
subject positioned at a certain location, comprises what Gell calls an image (1985: 280).
Thus the difference between the image and the map comes to hinge on the criterion of
the indexicality or non-indexicality of its tokens. If our knowledge consisted only of images
– that is, of token-indexical spatial propositions – then, to follow Gell’s argument, we
would never be able to hold any coherent idea about our own location in space, or about

Dwelling
the locations of other places relative to ourselves. We know where we are, not because 1
what we see around us matches to a certain mental image, but because this image has 2
itself been uniquely derived from an underlying map, at a point deﬁned by a given set 3
of spatial coordinates that are indifferent to our own movement. As we travel from one 4
place to another, we pass through a sequence of images, each of which is speciﬁc to – 5
and in turn permits us to identify – a particular location along the way. But the map, 6
from which all these images are generated, remains the same wherever we are.
I shall return in due course to what Gell has to say about the nature of navigation and 8
wayﬁnding. For the moment I want to focus on the implications of this way of distin- 9
guishing between the map and the image. It is certainly true, as Gell intimates, that the 10
mere possession of a map, whether mental or artefactual, will not help you to ﬁnd your 1
way around unless you can use it to generate location-speciﬁc images for comparison with 2
immediate perceptual experience. It is also true that no map will do the work that cogni- 3
tive theorists expect of it unless the information it encodes is invariant with respect to 4
the location of the percipient. Consider Oatley’s assertion, for example, that the essence 5
of navigation lies in the ‘ability to update one’s position within the cognitive map while 6
travelling’ (1977: 539). How could this possibly be done if the map keeps changing as 7
one goes along? Oatley himself confuses the issue, when he speaks of the navigator’s cogni- 8
tive map as ‘a process, not just a picture’ (p. 546). For if the navigator is to look to the 9
map for directions, it can be neither process nor picture, neither embodying his own 20
movement nor representing any particular scenes along the route. ‘We only update maps’, 1
as Gell observes, ‘when the geography of the world changes, not whenever we move about 2
ourselves’ (1985: 274). Ultimately, the justiﬁcation for extending the map metaphor into 3
the domain of cognition must lie in the assumption, more often than not unstated, that 4
what the map affords is a representation of things in space that is independent of any 5
particular point of view.
This assumption, however, raises problems of its own. One of the difﬁculties that cartog- 7
raphers often face in their attempts to explain the nature of maps is that the very ﬁelds, 8
of cognition and communication, from which they might ﬁnd appropriate analogues have 9
already seized upon the map as an analogue from cartography. ‘When non-cartographic 30
writers use the term “map”’, as Robinson and Petchenik say, ‘they seem to mean that it 1
is possible to take isolated incidents, experiences, and so on, and arrange them intellec- 2
tually so that there is some coherence, some total relation, instead of individual isolation’ 3
(1976: 4). Thus scientists refer to their theories as maps, into which can be ﬁtted the data 4
of observation, while anthropologists are inclined to attribute a similar maplike quality to 5
culture and society (for example, Leach 1976: 51), on the grounds that it furnishes an 6
overarching framework of concepts and categories for the organisation of otherwise frag- 7
mentary sensory experience. These, and many other similar metaphorical usages make it 8
appear natural and self-evident that actual maps should function in the same way, as 9
schematic representations of the real world, which do not index any position but upon 40
which it should be possible to plot the position of everything in relation to everything 1
else. Now most people in Western societies, educated since their schooldays in the 2
conventions of modern cartography, probably do tend to think of maps as representations 3
of this kind. But whether the artefacts and inscriptions that have at one time or another 4
been designated as maps actually satisfy the requirement of non-indexicality, is moot. The 5
question, in short, is: are maps maplike?
David Turnbull, arguing from the perspective of a sociologist of science, makes a 7
compelling case to the effect that they are not. The idea that maps are independent of 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 225 •

any point of view, that the propositions they encode are equally valid wherever one stands
in the world, is, Turnbull contends, a myth – though it is one that has been avidly cultivated in the name of science and objectivity (Turnbull 1989: 15). The reality is that no
map, however ‘modern’ or sophisticated the techniques of its production, can be wholly
divorced from the practices, interests and understandings of its makers and users. Or to
put it another way, every map is necessarily embedded in a ‘form of life’. And to the
extent that it is so embedded, it must fail on the criterion of non-indexicality. As Turnbull
explains, ‘all maps are in some measure indexical, because no map, representation or theory
can be independent of a form of life’ (1989: 20). At ﬁrst glance, this argument seems to
run directly counter to Gell’s insistence that a representation can only be a map insofar
as the propositions encoded therein are non-indexical. Closer examination, however, reveals
a certain slippage in the meaning of indexicality. Is indexing a place the same as indexing
a form of life? If the map discloses a perspective or ‘point of view’, is this a view in the
world, as it appears from a particular place, or a view of the world, ﬁltered through the
concepts, categories and schemata of a received cultural tradition? Could a map be nonindexical in the ﬁrst sense and indexical in the second?
Consider an example to which both Gell and Turnbull refer. Micronesian mariners,1
who are used to voyaging across hundreds of miles of open sea between often tiny islands,
know the bearing of any island from any other by its so-called ‘star course’ – that is, by
a list of stars whose successive rising or setting points, during the night, indicate the direction in question. The expert mariner has committed to memory an entire compendium
of star courses, each unique to a particular pair of islands, and it is in this compendium,
according to Gell, that his ‘map’ consists. Now it is clearly the case that any statement
of the course between one island A, and another island B, will not depend for its validity
on one’s current position at sea. Thus star courses ‘have the essential map property of
non-token-indexicality; they do not change truth value according to where they are uttered’
(Gell 1985: 284). Yet it is also fair to say, with Turnbull, that the principles upon which
the Micronesian mariner’s map is constructed are securely embedded within the percepts
and practices of traditional seafaring, and therefore that it requires a knowledge of this
cultural context to be able to ‘read’ and understand the map. It would appear, in short,
that while the map indexes a tradition, it is non-indexical with regard to location. The
same, moreover, could be said of ‘modern’ maps, constructed on scientiﬁc principles with
the aid of sophisticated technological gadgetry. Modern science and technology, as
Turnbull remarks (1991: 36), are as dependent on tradition for their successful transmission as is Micronesian seafaring lore. And no more than Micronesian maps can modern
maps be understood without taking into account ‘the world view, cognitive schema or
the culture of the mapmaker’ (Turnbull 1989: 20).
There is, however, something deeply paradoxical about this argument. For to separate
tradition from locality, or culture from place, is also to divorce traditional knowledge from
the contexts of its production in the environmentally situated experience of practitioners.
Thus the form of life is reduced to a ‘world view’ or ‘cognitive schema’ – a set of rules
and representations for the organisation of sensory experience that individuals carry in
their heads and that are available for transmission independently of their bodily activity
in the world. It is as though culture were received along lines of traditional transmission
from ancestors, and imported into the sites of its practical application. But this is to
fall right back into the classical view of culture as a map, the analogy – as Bourdieu (1977:
2) points out – ‘which occurs to an outsider who has to ﬁnd his way around in a foreign
landscape and who compensates for his lack of practical mastery, the prerogative of the

Dwelling
native, by the use of a model of all possible routes’. So here is the paradox: actual maps 1
are made to appear indexical with regard to cultural tradition only by a rendering of 2
culture as non-indexical with regard to locality. The placing of maps within their cultural 3
context is paralleled by the displacing of culture from its context in the lifeworld. How, 4
then, are we to resolve this dilemma? How can we hold on to the commonsense notion 5
that maps retain a certain invariance as we move about, that they do not continually 6
recompose themselves to reﬂect the particularities of wherever we happen to be, while yet 7
recognising their embeddedness in locally situated practices? My answer, in brief, will be 8
that what maps index is movement, that the vision they embody is not local but regional, 9
but that the ambition of modern cartography has been to convert this regional vision into 10
a global one, as though it issued from a point of view above and beyond the world.
HOW TO SEE THE WORLD FROM EVERYWHERE AT ONCE
When you stand at a particular spot, everything appears from a certain angle, while much 5
of the environment will likely be hidden from view behind prominent foreground features. 6
Stand at another spot, and things will appear differently. In order to have any concep- 7
tion of the overall conﬁguration of one’s environment, it would seem necessary to be in 8
possession of some kind of totalising scheme into which every one of these location-speciﬁc 9
perceptual images could be integrated. This, as we have seen, is an argument commonly 20
adduced to justify positing the existence of cognitive maps. It is an argument, however, 1
that assumes a snapshot theory of vision, as if one could only ever see, in perspective, 2
from a ﬁxed point of observation. ‘Is not to see’, as Merleau-Ponty asks rhetorically, ‘always 3
to see from somewhere?’ He proceeds to answer, however, in the negative (Merleau-Ponty 4
1962: 67). To take up his own example, the house next door may be viewed from this 5
side or that, from inside or outside, or even from up above if one were to ﬂy overhead. 6
But what I see is none of these appearances; it is the house itself, in all its concrete actu- 7
ality. The form of the house is progressively disclosed to me as I move around and about, 8
and in and out, not as the sum of a very large number of images, arrayed in memory 9
like frames on a reel of ﬁlm, but as the envelope of a continually changing perspectival 30
structure. Observation, Merleau-Ponty claims, consists not in having a ﬁxed point of view 1
on the object, but ‘in varying the point of view while keeping the object ﬁxed’ (1962: 2
91). Thus the house is not seen from somewhere but from nowhere – or rather from 3
everywhere (pp. 67–9).
In keeping with his ecological approach to visual perception, James Gibson presents an 5
argument along very similar lines. Animals and people, Gibson writes, see as they move, 6
not just in the intervals between movements. Such ambulatory vision takes place along what 7
he calls a ‘path of observation’. A path is to be understood not as an inﬁnite series of 8
discrete points, occupied at successive instants, but as a continuous itinerary of movement. 9
Thus the environment one sees is neither ‘seen-at-this-moment’ nor ‘seen-from-this-point’. 40
On the contrary, ‘what one perceives is an environment that surrounds one, that is every- 1
where equally clear, that is in-the-round or solid, and that is all-of-a-piece’ (Gibson 1979: 2
195–7). But if the features of this environment are revealed as one travels along paths of 3
view, rather than projected from a sequence of points of view, where do these paths begin, 4
and where do they end? And if we see not at this moment in time, but over a certain period, 5
how long is this period? Such questions cannot be precisely answered. Of a minor feature 6
we might say, after only cursory exploration, that we have seen it all. But of a complex, 7
varied and extensive terrain, although we may have criss-crossed it along innumerable paths, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 227 •

we may still feel there is more to be discovered. As for our perception of the environment
as a whole, what else can this be than the outcome of a lifetime’s observation, along all the
paths we have ever taken? This is what Gibson means when he asserts that perceiving the
world over a sufﬁcient length of time, and along a sufﬁciently extended set of paths, is
tantamount to perceiving it ‘as if one could be everywhere at once’ (p. 197).
It is critically important to distinguish this sense of omnipresence from that implied
by the conventional notion of the ‘bird’s-eye view’ (Gibson 1979: 198–9). The latter, of
course, has nothing to do with the way birds in ﬂight actually see, but rather describes
how we imagine the world would look from a point of observation so far above the earth’s
surface that the entire territory with which we are familiar from journeys made at ground
level could be taken in at a glance. The higher one goes, it is supposed, the more
one’s vision transcends the locational constraints and narrow horizons of the view from
the ground. And by the same token, the more apparently maplike it becomes. Robinson
and Petchenik are right to point out that the analogy between the map and the bird’s
eye view is potentially misleading, not only because of their different geometries of projection, but also because the map is ‘a construction, an abstraction, an arrangement of
markings that relates to spatial “reality” only by agreement, not by sensory testability’
(1976: 53). Nevertheless, anyone who has ﬂown over familiar country by plane will have
been astonished, on the one hand, by how strange it looks, and on the other, by how
closely the view from the window resembles a topographic map of the same territory.
There is nothing strange, however, about the environment perceived from everywhere, in
the sense adduced by Merleau-Ponty and Gibson, nor do you have to leave the ground
to perceive it in this way. It is not a view from ‘up there’ rather than ‘down here’, but
one taken along the multiple paths that make up a country, and along which people come
and go in the practical conduct of life. Our perception of the environment as a whole,
in short, is forged not in the ascent from a myopic, local perspective to a panoptic, global
one, but in the passage from place to place, and in histories of movement and changing
horizons along the way.
The same point could be made, following Edward Casey (1996: 30), through a contrast
between vertical and lateral modes of integration. In the vertical mode, embraced by
modern cartography as well as by cognitive map theorists, local particulars obtained by
observation on the ground are ﬁtted within an abstract conception of space so as to form
a representation of the world as though one were looking down upon it from ‘up above’.
While the eyes of the body remain close to the ground, the mind’s eye – which is witness
to this maplike representation – is up with the birds. The lateral mode of integration,
by contrast, presupposes no such division between mind and body. For the work of integration is performed by the organism as a whole as it moves around, purposefully and
attentively, from place to place. Such movements do not merely connect places that are
already located in terms of an independent framework of spatial coordinates. Rather, they
bring these places into being as nodes within a wider network of coming and going. Casey
refers to this network of interplace movement as a region – that is, ‘an area concatenated
by peregrinations between the places it connects’ (1996: 24). Evidently, when Gibson
speaks of perceiving the environment from everywhere at once, that ‘everywhere’ is neither
space, nor a portion of space, but a region in this sense. Likewise, every ‘somewhere’ is
not a location in space but a position on a path of movement, one of the matrix of paths
comprising the region as a whole. In short, whereas everywhere-as-space is the world as
it is imagined from a point of view above and beyond, everywhere-as-region is the world
as it is experienced by an inhabitant journeying from place to place along a way of life.

Dwelling
This idea of the region may be illustrated by means of three ethnographic examples. 1
Among the Walbiri, an Aboriginal people of western central Australia, the entire country 2
is perceived ‘in terms of networks of places linked by paths’ (Munn 1973a: 215). Originally 3
laid down through the movements of ancestral beings in that formative era known as the 4
Dreaming, these paths are continually retraced in the journeys of the living people who 5
take after them. As they relate the stories of these journeys, Walbiri men and women may 6
draw web-like ﬁgures in the sand whose basic components are lines and circles. Every line 7
conveys a journey to or from camp, while every circle conveys the act of making camp 8
by walking all around it. Rather similarly for the Ongees, a group of hunter-gatherers 9
inhabiting the island of Little Andaman in the Bay of Bengal, places are brought into 10
being at the conﬂuences of the paths of movement of humans, animals and spirits. Asked 1
by the ethnographer, Vishvajit Pandya, to draw the places where humans and spirits live, 2
Ongee informants responded by sketching lines of movement (straight for humans, wavy 3
for spirits), leading to the demarcation of the various places at their intersections.2 4
The world of the Ongees, Pandya concludes, ‘is not a preconstituted stage on which things 5
happen, but rather an area or region created and constructed by the ongoing practice of 6
movement’ (Pandya 1990: 777). My third example is taken from A. Irving Hallowell’s 7
study of the Saulteaux (Ojibwa), hunters and trappers of the Berens River district near 8
Lake Winnipeg in Canada. In Saulteaux experience, to move in a certain direction is 9
always to travel from place to place. This is so not only for human persons, but also for 20
the sun, the moon and the winds, all of which are held to be persons of a kind. Thus 1
‘what we refer to abstractly as cardinal directions are to them the homes of the winds, the 2
places they come from. Similarly, east is thought of as the place where the sun rises; west, 3
the place where it sets; south is the place to which the souls of the dead travel, and the 4
place from which the summer birds come’ (Hallowell 1955: 191). For the Saulteaux, then, 5
as indeed for the Ongee and the Walbiri, ‘everywhere’ is not a space but a region concaten- 6
ated by the place-to-place movements of humans, animals, spirits, winds, celestial bodies, 7
and so on.
KNOWING AS YOU GO
We can now return to the paradox I introduced earlier. If our knowledge of the environ- 2
ment is embedded in locally situated practices, how come that it retains a certain constancy 3
as we move about? If all knowledge is context-dependent, how can people take their know- 4
ledge with them from one context to another? For clues towards a resolution I turn once 5
again to the work of David Turnbull. One of Turnbull’s aims is to break down the 6
conventional distinction between so-called indigenous knowledge and Western science. He 7
does so by emphasising that all knowledge, of whatever kind and historical provenance, 8
is generated within a ‘ﬁeld of practices’ (1989: 61). And since practices must be carried 9
out by particular people in particular places, all knowledge – including that which we call 40
science – must be inherently local. Let me set aside for the time being the contrary thesis, 1
which Turnbull confusingly appears to entertain at the same time, that the context for 2
both indigenous and scientiﬁc knowledge is something like a worldview or cognitive 3
schema, by nature detached from the local sites of its practical expression. I have already 4
drawn attention to the dangers of falling back on a concept of culture that divorces know- 5
ledge and its transmission from environmentally situated experience. My present concern 6
is with another difﬁculty in Turnbull’s argument. For while on the one hand, he insists 7
that a common characteristic of all knowledge systems is their ‘localness’, he also argues, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 229 •

on the other, that what is critical to the growth and reproduction of any knowledge system
is the work that goes into moving its diverse components – including practitioners, their
know-how and skills, technical devices and standards of evaluation – from one local site
of knowledge production to another (Turnbull 1993a: 30).
Consider the case of Western science. According to what might be called the ‘ofﬁcial’
view of science, data recorded by means of standardised procedures in diverse locations are
ﬁtted into a framework of theory consisting of propositions that are strictly non-indexical
with regard to place. What happens in practice, however, is a good deal more messy. Not
only is it unclear where data collection ends and theory building begins, but also there is
no uniﬁed body of theory under which all of experience can be subsumed. Rather, there
are as many theoretical growth-points as there are sites of practical investigation, and the
character of each is conditioned by circumstances peculiar to each place. Much of the labour
of science, Turnbull argues, lies in attempts to establish the connectivity and equivalence
that would render procedures developed and results obtained in one local context applicable in another (1993a: 37). But if science calls for the constant movement of personnel,
knowledge and techniques from place to place, and the assemblage, in each, of inputs of
heterogeneous provenance, how can it also share the characteristic of localness? As a system
of knowledge, science cannot be rooted in any particular place or places, but must rather
emerge from the total network of interplace relations constituting its ﬁeld of practice.
Furthermore, if that is so for science, then it should be equally so for any other knowledge
system. As Turnbull himself puts it, ‘all knowing is like travelling, like a journey between
the parts of a matrix’ (1991: 35). So what is this matrix? It is, of course, a region in the
sense deﬁned above – that is, as the sum of journeys made.
My point is that knowing, like the perception of the environment in general, proceeds
along paths of observation. One can no more know in places than travel in them. Rather,
knowledge is regional: it is to be cultivated by moving along paths that lead around,
towards or away from places, from or to places elsewhere. Conceived as the ensemble of
such place-to-place movements, the notion of region, far from denoting a level of generalisation intermediate between local particulars and global universals, offers a way out of
this kind of dichotomous and hierarchical thinking. As every place, through the movements that give rise to it, enfolds its relations to all others, to be somewhere is to be
everywhere at once. Rephrased in our terms, what Turnbull proposes is a compelling argument to the effect that all knowledge systems, including science, are integrated laterally
rather than vertically. The philosopher Joseph Rouse makes much the same point in
arguing that ‘we go from one local knowledge to another rather than from universal theories to their particular instantiations’ (Rouse 1987: 72). In light of the foregoing
considerations, I would prefer to say that we know as we go, from place to place. This
does not, however, alter the basic point, which is that science is distinguished from other
systems of knowledge by the lengths to which it goes to present itself as if it were vertically integrated, as if the scientist’s task were to ﬁt data to theory rather than to put the
knowledge that has brought him to one place to work in setting off towards another. To
create this illusion, science has to suppress, or to hide from view, the social labour involved
in establishing equivalences and connections across places (Turnbull 1996: 62). In this,
moreover, it is aided and abetted by modern cartography, which has been similarly
concerned to establish its scientiﬁc credentials through its claim to produce accurate and
objective representations of a world ‘out there’.
Cartographers, like scientists, and indeed like practitioners of any other knowledge
system, draw their material from all manner of sources, through both direct observation

Dwelling
and inquiry into local tradition. The collection and collation of this material may take 1
them – or agents operating on their behalf – on innumerable and often lengthy journeys. 2
None of this, however, appears in the ﬁnal form of the modern, ‘scientiﬁc’ map. To the 3
contrary, one of the most striking characteristics of the modern map is its elimination, or 4
erasure, of the practices and itineraries that contributed to its production (Turnbull 1996: 5
62). In the words of Michel de Certeau, ‘the map, a totalising stage on which elements 6
of diverse origin are brought together to form a tableau of a “state” of geographical know- 7
ledge, pushes away into its prehistory or into its posterity, as if into the wings, the 8
operations of which it is the result or the necessary condition’ (1984: 121). Just as science, 9
in the ofﬁcial view, is charged with the task of integrating site-speciﬁc data into an over- 10
arching, uniﬁed framework of theory, so the mission of cartography is ostensibly one of 1
representing the ‘geographic facts’ on the ground within a single, universal system of spatial 2
coordinates (Edney 1993: 55). The ideal is a perfect congruence between the world and 3
its representation, and progress is measured by the degree of approximation towards it. 4
Thus in the work of the modern cartographer, knowledge generated through movement 5
from place to place within a region is presented as if it issued from a totalising vision 6
above and beyond the world. In short, cartography transforms everywhere-as-region, the 7
world as experienced by a mobile inhabitant, into everywhere-as-space, the imaginary 8
‘bird’s-eye view’ of a transcendent consciousness.
The same transformation, of course, is worked on the ordinary perception of the environ- 20
ment by the theory of cognitive maps. As in the modern artefactual map, so too in its 1
‘mental’ analogue, all those movements of coming and going through which people develop 2
a knowledge of their environment are pushed into the wings, to recall de Certeau’s phrase, 3
leaving the map as a fait accompli, ﬁnal and complete, the product of a process of making 4
that begins with the layout of the world and ends with that layout copied into the mind. 5
Any journeys undertaken beyond that point are supposed to belong to the phase of map- 6
using rather than mapmaking, and therefore to play no further part in the formation of 7
the map itself. The traditional Micronesian seafarer, in this view, is just as much a map- 8
user as is the modern marine navigator with his charts and compass, even though his skill 9
‘is entirely mental and perceptual, using no instruments of any kind’ (Oatley 1977: 537). 30
But whereas modern artefactual maps have their authors, designers or manufacturers, the 1
origins of traditional mental maps appear lost in the mists of time. Indeed to say of such 2
maps that they are ‘traditional’ is virtually tantamount to an admission that they have no 3
maker or makers, but rather that they ‘make themselves’ – or that like myths, following 4
Lévi-Strauss’s celebrated aphorism, they ‘think themselves out’ through the medium of 5
men’s minds and without their knowledge (Lévi-Strauss 1966a: 56). In any case the 6
assumption is that the map is made before it is used, that it already exists as a structure 7
in the mind, handed down as part of a received tradition, prior to the traveller’s venturing 8
forth into the world.
My contention, to the contrary, is that people’s knowledge of the environment under- 40
goes continuous formation in the very course of their moving about in it. To return to 1
a distinction which I introduced at the outset, this is to account for such knowledge 2
in terms of the generative potentials of a complex process rather than the replication of 3
a complex structure. That process consists in the engagement of the mobile actor-perceiver 4
with his or her environment. As I have already suggested, we know as we go, not before 5
we go. Such ambulatory knowing – or knowledgeable ambulating – cannot be 6
accommodated within the terms of the conventional dichotomy between mapmaking and 7
map-using. The traveller or storyteller who knows as he goes is neither making a map 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 231 •

nor using one. He is, quite simply, mapping. And the
forms or patterns that arise from this mapping process,
whether in the imagination or materialised as artefacts,
are but stepping stones along the way, punctuating the
process rather than initiating it or bringing it to a close.
My perspective, in short, accords with what Robert
Rundstrom has called ‘process cartography’, in which
mapping is seen as ‘open-ended, ongoing, always
leading to the next instance of mapping, the next map’
(Rundstrom 1993: 21). In what follows, I ﬁrst show
in more detail how mapping differs from mapmaking.
I then turn to the distinction between mapping and
map-using. All wayﬁnding, I argue, is mapping; all
navigation map-using. Thus mapping is to map-using
as wayﬁnding to navigation. The overall structure of
the argument is summarised in Figure 13.3.

Mapmaking =
Cartography

Mapping =
Wayfinding

versus

Map-using =
Navigation

Figure 13.3 The relations between mapping,
mapmaking and map-using: a summary.

MAPPING IS NOT MAPMAKING
‘Mapping’ and ‘mapmaking’, according to Denis Wood, ‘do not mean the same thing’
(1992: 32). The difference, in his view, is akin to that between speaking and writing.
Wood thinks of mapping as a capacity universal to humans, established along with other
capacities of the human mind-brain through a process of evolution under natural selection. But the fact that all human beings are capable of mapping does not mean that they
all make maps. Likewise, just because all humans can speak does not mean they all write.
Whereas mapping, like speaking, might be regarded as a ‘universal expression of individual existence’, mapmaking, like writing, has to be seen as ‘an unusual function of
speciﬁable social circumstances arising only within certain social structures’ (Wood 1993a:
50). In other words, the emergence of mapmaking belongs not to the evolution of
humanity but to its history. Yet the difference between mapping and mapmaking, just as
that between speaking and writing, is for Wood a very ﬁne one. It is not the difference
between outwardly expressing an idea and ‘capturing’ that expression in an alternative
medium. For one thing, mapping is no more the externalisation of a map that already
exists in the mapper’s head than is speaking the externalisation of a thought. Rather, both
mapping and speaking are genres of performance that draw their meanings from the
communicative contexts of their enactment. It follows, for another thing, that neither
mapmaking nor writing can serve to transcribe pre-existent thoughts or mental representations onto paper. The map, like the written word, is not, in the ﬁrst place, the
transcription of anything, but rather an inscription. Thus mapping gives way to mapmaking
at the point, not where mental imagery yields an external representation, but where the
performative gesture becomes an inscriptive practice (Wood 1993a: 53).
Wood illustrates his argument with a nice example. Two boys have been playing
rollerblade hockey. At home over dinner, one explains the layout of the court by gesturing
with his hands and ﬁngers over a place mat. The other does the same at school, to impress
a friend, but in this case (it is during an art class) he gestures with pencil in hand, over
a sheet of paper. Whereas nothing remains of the ﬁrst boy’s gestures on the mat, those
of the second leave a trace in the form of an inscription, a sketch-map, that can be
preserved and reproduced indeﬁnitely beyond the context of its production. We may

Dwelling
suppose that the two boys were of equal ability, and moreover that the ﬁrst would have 1
had ready access to pencil and paper had he needed it. So why did the second make a 2
map and the ﬁrst not? The answer, for Wood, lies in the nature of the communicative 3
situation. In general, just as much as in this exemplary instance, it is the situation – at 4
once social and political – that calls for the map. And while the difference between 5
gesturing with an inscribing tool and gesturing without might seem slight, the socio- 6
political consequences are immense. It is the ‘ﬁne line of . . . inscription’, Wood concludes, 7
‘that differentiates . . . mapping . . . from mapmaking, and mapping societies from 8
mapmaking societies, in the latter of which it is the inscriptive property of the artefactual 9
map that permits it to serve the interests of the power elites who control the mapmaking 10
process (as well as those who would contest them)’ (1993a: 53).
Now while I agree with Wood that there is an important distinction to be made between 2
mapping and mapmaking, I would draw it along different lines. Before doing so, however, 3
we need to be more precise about the meaning of mapping. Wood himself seems unable 4
to make up his mind whether the term refers to a cognitive capacity, to actual movement 5
in the environment, or to the narrative reenactment of journeys made. At one point he 6
tells us that mapping ‘is the way we humans make and deploy mental maps’ (1992: 32), 7
while at another he dismisses the concept of the mental map only to declare that mapping 8
‘is really just . . . getting around’ (1993a: 53). Yet in his example of the two boys, mapping 9
appears to consist neither in having a pre-existent ‘map in the head’, nor in bodily move- 20
ment on the ground, but in a kind of retrospective storytelling. It seems to me that the 1
notion of an evolved capacity for mental mapping is deeply ﬂawed. One could hardly 2
expect any such capacity to spring, fully formed, from an individual’s genetic make-up, 3
in advance of his or her entry into the lifeworld. It would rather have to undergo devel- 4
opment in the very unfolding of the individual’s life within an environment. Thus the 5
life-historical process of ‘getting around’ – or in a word, wayﬁnding – would appear to 6
be a condition for the emergence of a ‘mapping capacity’, rather than a consequence of 7
its application. This leaves us with the third sense of mapping – the retelling of journeys 8
made (or possibly the rehearsal for journeys to be made) – as perhaps the most appro- 9
priate. I admit, however, that the distinction between wayﬁnding and mapping is not hard 30
and fast. For one way of retelling the story of a journey is to retrace one’s steps, or the 1
steps of ancestors who made the journey in the past. In effect, since travelling from one 2
place to another means remembering the way, all wayﬁnding is mapping, though not all 3
mapping is wayﬁnding. I return to this point below.
For the time being, let us continue to regard mapping as the re-enactment, in narrative 5
gesture, of the experience of moving from place to place within a region. In this sense, both 6
boys in Wood’s example were engaged in mapping. The fact that one left no trace whereas 7
the other produced a lasting inscription has no appreciable bearing on the nature of the 8
activity as such. The sketch-map that emerged, as the trace of the second boy’s gestures, 9
was a more or less incidental by-product of the mapping process, not its ultimate goal. 40
Rundstrom makes much the same point in his account of mapping among Inuit of the 1
central and eastern Canadian Arctic. An Inuit traveller, returning from a trip, could recount 2
every detail of the environment encountered along the way, miming with his hands the 3
forms of speciﬁc land and sea features. Such gestural performance, after a long journey, 4
could last many hours. It could also, given appropriate tools and materials, generate an 5
inscription. Many of these inscriptions were produced at the instigation of Western explor- 6
ers who made contact with the Inuit. They were often astonished at the accuracy of what 7
they regarded as ‘native maps’. But for Inuit mappers it was the performance that mattered 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 233 •

– ‘the recapitulation of environmental features’ – rather than any material artefacts or
inscriptions to which it gave rise (Rundstrom 1990: 165). Undoubtedly the vast majority
of maps that have ever been produced in human societies, like those of the Inuit, have been
improvised on the spot within a particular dialogic or storytelling context, and without any
intention for their preservation or use beyond that context. This applies, for example, to
the web-like sand drawings of the Walbiri, to which I have already referred (Munn 1973b:
196). ‘Most maps for most of the time’, as Wood observes, ‘have probably been ephemeral,
scratched in sand or snow, or, if committed to a more permanent medium, immediately
crunched up and thrown away’ (1993b: 83, see Lewis 1993: 99).
In the course of producing such a map, the mapper takes his interlocutors on a tour
of the country, and as he does so his moving hand, which may or may not hold an
inscribing implement, traces out the paths taken and the sights or landmarks encountered
along the way. Of the maps produced in aboriginal times by the Saulteaux, Hallowell
notes that ‘their purpose was not to delineate a section of the country as such, but to
indicate a route to be followed, and the emphasis was upon a succession of landmarks
roughly indicated in their relations to one another’ (Hallowell 1955: 195). Malcolm Lewis’s
studies of native North American and Inuit maps have shown that they invariably rest on
deictic principles: that is, they point to things, revealing aspects of how they look as one
proceeds along a path of observation from ‘here’ to ‘there’ (Lewis 1993: 102). Even in
contemporary Western societies, whose inhabitants are bombarded on a daily basis with
images founded upon cartographic geometries of plane projection – where they live, as
Wood puts it, ‘map-immersed in the world’ (1992: 34) – people continue to describe
their environment, to themselves and others, by retracing the paths of movement they
customarily take through it rather than by assigning each of its features to a ﬁxed location in space. ‘When we are asked for directions’, as Barbara Belyea notes, ‘few of us can
resist pointing and waving our arms, or tracing the traveller’s route over the surface of
his map. The gesture becomes a part of the map, a feature of its reception’ (Belyea 1996:
11, my emphasis). It may be misleading, Belyea suggests, to liken the inscriptive process
to writing, as though the purpose of the exercise were to represent the features of the
landscape in the same way that writing is supposed to represent the spoken word. For
the graphs on the map are not representations of anything. Every line is rather the trace
of a gesture, which itself retraces an actual movement in the world. To read the map is
therefore to follow the trace as one would the path of the hand that made it.3
The analogy between mapping and writing, however, may be closer than Belyea thinks.
For much of its history, at least in the Western world, writing was understood not as the
representation of speech but as a means by which what has been said or told could be
committed to memory (Carruthers 1990). Throughout the Middle Ages, as David Olson
notes, ‘written records were thought of and treated as reminders rather than representations’ (Olson 1994: 180). And the same was true of medieval maps, which served as
memoranda of itineraries, providing directions and advice to the traveller who would
undertake the same journey (de Certeau 1984: 120). In the history of writing as in that
of mapping, remembering gradually gave way to representation over the same period –
from the ﬁfteenth to the seventeenth century – that also saw the rise of modern scientiﬁc discourse. De Certeau has shown how, in the course of this transition, the map ‘slowly
disengaged itself from the itineraries that were the conditions of its possibility’. For some
time, maps would continue to be illustrated with pictures of ships, landforms, people and
beasts of various descriptions, winds and currents, and the like. Subsequently dismissed
as quaint decorations, these ﬁgures were really fragments of stories, telling of the journeys,

Dwelling
and the incidents that took place along them, from which the map resulted. But even- 1
tually, the map won out over these pictorial ﬁgurations, eliminating all remaining traces 2
of the practices that produced it (de Certeau 1984: 120–1). Thus the making of maps 3
came to be divorced from the experience of bodily movement in the world.4 The carto- 4
grapher has no need to travel, indeed he may have no experience whatever of the territory 5
he so painstakingly seeks to represent. His task is rather to assemble, off-site, the infor- 6
mation provided to him – already shorn of the particular circumstances of its collection 7
– into a comprehensive spatial representation. It is of course no accident that precisely 8
the same task is assigned, by cognitive map theorists, to the mind in operating upon the 9
data of sense.
It is at the point where maps cease to be generated as by-products of story-telling, and 1
are created instead as end-products of projects of spatial representation, that I draw 2
the line between mapping and mapmaking. In effect, mapmaking suppresses, or ‘brackets 3
out’, both the movements of people as they come and go between places (wayﬁnding), 4
and the re-enactment of those movements in inscriptive gesture (mapping). It thereby 5
creates the appearance that the structure of the map springs directly from the structure 6
of the world, as though the mapmaker served merely to mediate a transcription from one 7
to the other. I call this the cartographic illusion (see Figure 13.4). One aspect of this illu- 8
sion lies in the assumption that the structure of the world, and so also that of the map 9
which purports to represent it, is ﬁxed without regard to the movement of its inhabitants. 20
Like a theatrical stage from which all the actors have mysteriously disappeared, the world 1
– as it is represented in the map – appears deserted, devoid of life. No-one is there; 2
nothing is going on. Suppose, for example, that I describe a journey I have made by 3
tracing a path with my ﬁnger over the surface of a topographic map. Once the map has 4
been folded and put away, nothing 5
of this would remain. So far as the 6
map’s representation of the world is 7
Situated
concerned, I may as well have never 8
Movement
made the trip. Had I, alternatively, 9
traced my path with a pencil, the 30
resulting lines would be deemed to 1
have added nothing to the map, but 2
rather to have defaced it. To restore 3
the map, they would have to be 4
Wayfinding
Mapping
rubbed out! Either way, my gesture 5
does not become part of the map but 6
is excluded from it, as is my original 7
movement from the world it repre- 8
sents.5 This is in marked contrast to 9
the maps of native North American 40
Indians and Inuit, as described by 1
World
Mapmaking
Map
such scholars as Lewis, Rundstrom 2
and Belyea, which actually grow, line 3
Figure 13.4 The cartographic illusion. The environmen- by line, with every additional 4
tally situated movement entailed in both wayﬁnding and gesture. So do the charts used by 5
its narrative re-enactment (mapping) is bracketed out to
create the illusion that the form of the map arises, in Micronesian seafarers, which ‘liter- 6
mapmaking, as a direct transcription of the layout of the ally get larger, coconut-palm rib by 7
world.
cowrie shell, and stick by stone’ 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 235 •

(Wood 1992: 31). And so, too, do our own sketch-maps. In these instances the development of the map, as a ‘pattern of interconnected lines’ (Belyea 1996: 6), parallels that
of the region, as a network of coming and going. But the modern topographic map does
not grow or develop, it is made. And just as the process of its production is eliminated
from the ﬁnal form of the product, so the world it describes is not a world in the making,
but one ready-made for life to occupy.
It is this, ﬁnally, that lies behind the distinction between the map and the picture, as
alternative descriptions of the same country. For those of us schooled in the conventions
of modern cartography, the distinction may seem obvious enough. Maps are supposed to
furnish an objective record of the disposition of things in space, that is strictly independent of any point of view, whereas pictures show how these things might be experienced
by a subject positioned somewhere in that space, or moving through it (Turnbull 1989:
15). It is widely believed, as Svetlana Alpers observes, that ‘maps give us the measure of
a place and the relationship between places, quantiﬁable data, while landscape pictures are
evocative, and aim rather to give us some quality of a place or the viewer’s sense of it.
One is closer to science, the other is art’. Anything on the map that evokes the experience of place or movement is dismissed by the scientiﬁc cartographer as ‘mere decoration’;
anything in the picture that conveys factual information about spatial location is dismissed
by the artist as ‘mere topography’ (Alpers 1983: 124–6). But for the Dutch painters and
draughtsmen of the seventeenth century, who are the subjects of Alpers’s study, these
boundaries between maps and pictures, and between science and art, would have
made little sense. Mapping and picturing were, for them, one and the same, having as
their common aim ‘to capture on a surface a great range of knowledge and information
about the world’ (1983: 122). As mapmaking triumphed over mapping, however, and as
cartographers sought to dissociate themselves professionally from artists, so maps were
stripped of their pictorial attributes. Thus historians of cartography, viewing the development of mapmaking in retrospect, are able to present it as having progressed from being
an ‘art’ to being a ‘science’, replacing subjective fancy with hardwon and independently
veriﬁable factual information (Edney 1993: 56). Art, in the words of Brian Harley, was
gradually ‘edged off the map’ (Harley 1989: 4). But to edge art off the map is also to
edge human actor-perceivers off the world, to push their direct, sensory experience into
the wings, and to consign their narratives of movement and travel to the realms of fable,
fantasy and hallucination.

WAYFINDING IS NOT NAVIGATION
‘Navigation’, writes Edwin Hutchins, ‘is a collection of techniques for answering a small
number of questions, perhaps the most central of which is “Where am I?”’ (Hutchins
1995: 12). So – to return to a question I raised at the outset – what does it mean to
know where one is? What would one need to know in order to feel that the question has
been satisfactorily answered? First of all, according to Hutchins, one must possess some
representation of space – a map – whether internal or external, inscribed in the mind or
on a sheet of paper, within which every object or feature in one’s environment is assigned
a determinate location. One has then to be able to establish a coherent set of correspondences between what is depicted on the map and what is visible in one’s surroundings.
From these it should be possible to identify one’s current position in the world with a
speciﬁc location on the map. Only then has the question of where one is been answered
(Hutchins 1995: 12–13). Alfred Gell, in an article to which I have already referred, argues

Dwelling
along much the same lines. To know where one is, in Gell’s view, it is not enough to 1
have formed a perceptual image of the environment as seen from some place. This image 2
has to be matched to that generated from the map (mental or artefactual) at a particular 3
spatial location. ‘Navigation’, according to Gell, ‘consists of a cyclic process whereby images 4
generated from maps are matched up against perceptual information, and perceptual images 5
are identiﬁed with equivalent coordinates on a map’ (1985: 280). This process of matching 6
is essentially the same as what Hutchins means by ‘establishing correspondences’, such as, 7
for example, when we say ‘this here’ (pointing to contours on the map) corresponds to 8
‘that there’ (pointing to the outline of a hill on the horizon).
Now while Gell takes as his principal ethnographic example the classic case of 10
Micronesian seafaring, Hutchins chose to study the practices of nautical navigation on 1
board a large modern naval vessel. Both writers insist, however, that reduced to its bare 2
essentials, navigation is a cognitive task that all of us face all the time as we ﬁnd our way 3
about, whether at sea or on land. Navigational techniques may of course be distinguished, 4
as Gell admits, both in terms of their complexity and the volume of information handled, 5
and in terms of the extent to which this information is published or transmitted by rote 6
memorisation. But none of this, he claims, alters the fact that ‘the essential logical processes 7
involved in all way-ﬁnding, from the most elementary and subliminal, to the most complex 8
and laborious, are identical’ (Gell 1985: 286). For Hutchins, likewise, we are all naviga- 9
tors in our everyday lives, as the following passage reveals:
When the navigator is satisﬁed that he has arrived at a coherent set of correspondences, 2
he might look to the chart and say ‘Ah, yes; I am here, off this point of land.’ And it 3
is in this sense that most of us feel we know where we are. We feel that we have achieved 4
reconciliation between the features we see in our world and a representation of that 5
world.
(1995: 13, my emphasis) 7
Yet as soon as Hutchins takes us on board ship, and introduces us to the work of the 9
navigators on the bridge, things look rather different. For it turns out that establishing 30
correspondences between features on the chart and features in the environment is extremely 1
difﬁcult, and calls for specialised skills that can only be acquired through lengthy training 2
and hands-on experience. To reconcile the chart with the territory, as Hutchins explains, 3
one has to imagine how the world would look from a point of view – that of the ‘bird’s 4
eye’ – from which it is never actually seen, save from an aircraft or satellite. The ordi- 5
nary passenger, untutored in the techniques of navigation, is quite unable to do this, and 6
may confess to being bafﬂed by maps and charts. He cannot, in other words, translate 7
from his on-board experience of motion as ‘moving through a surrounding space’ to the 8
depiction of motion on the chart as ‘that of an object moving across a space’. Navigators, 9
on the other hand, become so used to thinking of the movement of the ship from this 40
peculiar perspective – as if they were manoeuvring it about like a counter on a game- 1
board – that they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to imagine this movement, any more, from the ordinary 2
passenger’s perspective (Hutchins 1995: 62).
I intend to argue, in accord with Hutchins’s ethnography but contrary to his general 4
claim, that we are no more navigators in our everyday lives – in ﬁnding our way around in 5
a familiar environment – than we are cartographers when we retrace these movements 6
in narrative. Navigation (or map-using) is, I contend, as strange to the ordinary practices of 7
wayﬁnding as is cartography (or mapmaking) to ordinary practices of mapping. It would be 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 237 •

hard to imagine why we should ﬁnd the navigator’s charts so bafﬂing, or why his skills
should be so specialised, if they were but analogues of cognitive structures and capacities
that we use all the time. Thus Gell, along with others who have had resort to the notion
of cognitive maps, is surely wrong to regard wayﬁnding and navigation as processes of
a similar or even identical kind. For when we move about, we do not normally think
of ourselves as piloting our bodies across the surface of the earth, as the navigator pilots his
ship across the ocean. Nor do we have to think in this way in order to know, at any moment,
where we are. This is because the question ‘Where am I?’ is not ordinarily answered in terms
of a location in space, determined by the intersection of an independent set of coordinates.
Hutchins to the contrary, it is not in this sense that most of us feel we know where we are.
Indeed I may know precisely where I am and yet have no idea of my geographic location.
For it is not by assigning the position where I currently stand to certain spatial coordinates
that an answer to the ‘where’ question is arrived at, but rather by situating that position
within the matrix of movement constitutive of a region.
To amplify this point, let me compare two, admittedly ﬁctional, scenarios. In the ﬁrst
you are walking with a friend through unfamiliar terrain, equipped with a topographic
map. Arriving at a place that affords a good panoramic view, your friend stops to ask,
‘Where are we?’ You look around, pointing to various landmarks which you proceed to
correlate with markings on the map. Finally, indicating with a ﬁnger a particular spot on
the map’s paper surface, you declare ‘We are here’. In the second scenario, you are walking
in familiar country around your home, with a companion who is a stranger to the area.
Once again, on arrival at a certain place, your companion puts the same question, ‘Where
are we?’ You may respond in the ﬁrst instance with a place-name. But then, realising that
the name alone leaves him none the wiser, you might go on to tell a story about the place
– about your own association with it, about other people who have lived and visited there,
and about the things that happened to them. Now in the second case you have no need
to consult an artefactual map, nor would it be of any avail to you, not because you have
resort instead to a map inside your head, but because knowing your present whereabouts
has nothing to do with ﬁxing your location in space. As someone who has lived in a
country, and is used to its ways, knowing where you are lies not in the establishment of
a point-to-point correspondence between the world and its representation, but in the
remembering of journeys previously made, and that brought you to the place along the
same or different paths. In the ﬁrst scenario, of course, you have no knowledge of this
kind. Having never visited the country before you do not know where you are, in the
sense you do when on home ground, even though you may be able to locate your own
position, and that of everything else, with pin-point accuracy on your map.
For those who know a country, in short, the answers to such basic questions as ‘Where
am I?’ and ‘Which way should I go?’ are found in narratives of past movement. It is in
this respect, as noted earlier, that wayﬁnding and mapping become one and the same: to
follow a path is also to retrace one’s steps, or the steps of one’s predecessors. And in this
respect, too, wayﬁnding differs fundamentally from navigation, just as mapping differs
from map-using. For when navigating in a strange country by means of a topographic
map, the relation between one’s position on the ground and one’s location in space, as
deﬁned by particular map coordinates, is strictly synchronic, and divorced from any narrative context. It is possible to specify where one is – one’s current location – without regard
to where one has been, or where one is going. In ordinary wayﬁnding, by contrast, every
place holds within it memories of previous arrivals and departures, as well as expectations
of how one may reach it, or reach other places from it. Thus do places enfold the passage

Dwelling
of time: they are neither of the past, present or future but all three rolled into one. 1
Endlessly generated through the comings and goings of their inhabitants, they ﬁgure not 2
as locations in space but as speciﬁc vortices in a current of movement, of innumerable 3
journeys actually made. Taking this view of place as my starting point, I now want to 4
show how wayﬁnding might be understood not as following a course from one spatial 5
location to another, but as a movement in time, more akin to playing music or story- 6
telling than to reading a map.
PATHS, FLOWS AND THE PASSAGE OF TIME
The inspiration for this move comes from Gibson, and follows from his insight – which 1
I explored in an earlier section – that the environment is perceived not from multiple 2
points of view but along a path of observation. Rejecting both of the dominant psycho- 3
logical approaches to wayﬁnding, as chains of conditioned responses to environmental 4
stimuli and as navigation by means of cognitive maps, Gibson proposes an alternative, 5
‘the theory of reversible occlusion’ (1979: 198). In brief, the theory states that one knows 6
the way in terms of the speciﬁc order in which the surfaces of the environment come into 7
or pass out of sight as one proceeds along a path. Suppose, for example, that you are 8
walking along a street in town, or through a valley in the countryside. The surfaces you 9
can see – the facades of buildings in the one case, or the ground rising on either side in 20
the other – comprise a vista. As Gibson explains, a vista is ‘a semienclosure, a set of 1
unhidden surfaces, . . . what is seen from here, with the proviso that “here” is not a point 2
but an extended region’. But now, as you turn the corner into another street, or reach 3
the brow of the ridge at the head of the valley, a new set of surfaces, previously hidden, 4
looms into view, while those of the original vista disappear from sight. The passage from 5
one vista to another, during which the former is gradually occluded while the latter opens 6
up, constitutes a transition. Thus to travel from place to place involves the opening up 7
and closing off of vistas, in a particular order, through a continuous series of reversible 8
transitions. It is through this ordering of vistas, Gibson maintains, that the structure of 9
the environment is progressively disclosed to the moving observer, such that he or she 30
can eventually perceive it from everywhere at once (Gibson 1979: 198–9).
Gibson’s notion of wayﬁnding through reversible occlusion has been further developed 2
in recent work by psychologist Harry Heft (1996). We have already seen how the forms 3
of environmental features are revealed as the envelopes of a continually modulating pers- 4
pective structure along a path of observation. Now this ﬂow of perspective structure, as 5
Heft points out, also speciﬁes the observer’s own movements relative to the layout of the 6
environment. As every path of travel gives rise to its own distinctive ﬂow pattern, so every 7
such pattern uniquely speciﬁes a certain path. To ﬁnd one’s way, Heft argues, means to 8
travel along a particular route so as to generate or recreate the ﬂow of perspective structure 9
peculiar to the path leading to one’s destination (1996: 122). One remembers the route as 40
a succession of vistas connected by transitions, rather as one might remember a piece of 1
music as a series of thematic sections linked by bridge passages. Just as with musical 2
performance, wayﬁnding has an essentially temporal character (1996: 112): the path, like 3
the musical melody, unfolds over time rather than across space. In this connection, it is 4
important to remind ourselves of Gibson’s contention that every path should be conceived 5
as a unitary movement, and not as a potentially inﬁnite set of adjacent points (Gibson 1979: 6
197). In music, a melodic phrase is not just a sequence of discrete tones; what counts is the 7
rising or falling of pitch that gives shape to the phrase as a whole. Likewise in wayﬁnding, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 239 •

the path is speciﬁed not as a sequence of point-indexical images, but as the coming-intosight and passing-out-of-sight of variously contoured and textured surfaces.
In this respect, too, the theory of wayﬁnding advanced here differs profoundly from
that which Gell has caricatured under the rubric of ‘mapless practical mastery’, and which
he attributes, inter alia, to Bourdieu (Gell 1985; see Bourdieu 1977: 2). ‘We can suppose’,
writes Gell, ‘that practical mastery of the environment consists of possessing complete
knowledge of what the environment looks like from all practically-available points of view’.
The master traveller, equipped with such knowledge, remembers the journey from A to
B as a ‘chain of linked landscape images’, each particular to a certain point along the
route, selected from the total stock of images ﬁled in memory. As he proceeds on his way
he will pause, every so often, to check that what he sees from the spot where he stands
corresponds to the image he has on ﬁle (Gell 1985: 274–5). Our argument, to the contrary,
is that mastery consists in knowing what the environment looks like from all practically
available paths of view, that what the traveller remembers are vistas and transitions rather
than location-speciﬁc images, and that keeping track is a matter of regenerating the ﬂow
of perspective structure over time. Now for Gell the theory of mapless practical mastery,
taken on its own, could not possibly work, since it would leave the traveller bereft of any
means to formulate navigational decisions. It is all very well to know that you are currently
where you ought to be – that what you see around you matches your expectations for a
certain stage in your journey. But this alone will not tell you in which direction to go to
reach the next checkpoint. Nor, if what you see does not match any of the images in the
chain for the particular journey you are making, do you have any way of working out
how to get back on track. In short, to go from A to B, or from any point to any other
along the way, you need to be able to ascertain their relative locations in space. And this,
Gell reasons, requires a map.
If it were true that all wayﬁnding consisted of navigation between ﬁxed points, Gell’s
argument would be unassailable. But it is not. Ordinary movement in a familiar environment lacks the stop-go character of navigation, in which every physical or bodily manoeuvre
(displacement in space) is preceded by a mental or calculative one (ﬁxing the course).
‘Finding one’s way’ is not a computational operation carried out prior to departure from
a place, but is tantamount to one’s own movement through the world. To recapitulate
my earlier point, we know as we go, not before we go. Thus the operation is not complete
until one has reached one’s ﬁnal destination: only then can the traveller truly claim to
have found his way. The notion of ‘ﬁnding’ has here to be understood in its original
sense of exploratory movement, at once improvisatory and assured, guided by past experience and by a continual monitoring of ﬂuctuations not only in the pattern of reﬂected
light but also in the sounds and ‘feel’ of the environment. There is no better illustration
of this than the example that Gell himself uses in an attempt to prove, to the contrary,
that wayﬁnding is based on the execution of pre-formulated ‘navigational decisions’ (1985:
282). This is the case of Micronesian seafaring. In a classic paper on the subject, Thomas
Gladwin describes how, at every moment during a voyage, the mariner is attentive to
‘a combination of motion, sound, feel of the wind, wave patterns, star relationships, etc.’,
all of which – through comparison with remembered observations from past experience
– translates into ‘a slight increase or decrease in pressure on the steering paddle, or a
grunted instruction to slack off the sail a triﬂe’ (Gladwin 1964: 171–2). Quite unlike the
European navigator, with his charts and compass, the Micronesian seafarer feels his way
towards his destination by continually adjusting his movements in relation to the ﬂow of
waves, wind, current and stars.6 In this respect his activity does not differ in principle

Dwelling
from that of the terrestrial traveller who responds to the ﬂow of perspective structure as 1
he journeys through a landscape. Both are essentially engaged in projects of wayﬁnding 2
rather than navigation: thus Hallowell’s observation that for the Saulteaux, direction always 3
has the meaning of ‘toward such-and-such a place’, is paralleled by Gladwin’s that the 4
Micronesian mariner proceeds as if he were constantly within sight of land (Hallowell 5
1955: 190–1, Gladwin 1964: 173). And once it is recognised that the wayﬁnder’s multi- 6
sensory monitoring is of ﬂows, not images, and that ﬂows specify paths and not spatial 7
locations, Gell’s objections to the idea of mapless practical mastery fall away.
Micronesian seafaring resembles terrestrial wayﬁnding in one other critical respect: every 9
journey is apprehended and remembered as a movement through time rather than across 10
space. Islands, for the mariner, are not pinned down to speciﬁc spatial or geographic loca- 1
tions, nor does he imagine his craft to be covering the distance over a planar surface from 2
one such location to another. Throughout the voyage he remains, apparently stationary, 3
at the centre of a world that stretches around as far as the horizon, with the great dome 4
of the heavens above. But as the journey proceeds the island of embarkation slips ever 5
farther astern while the destination island draws ever closer. At the same time an island 6
off to one side, selected as a point of reference for the voyage, is supposed to swing past 7
the boat, falling as it does so under the rising or setting positions of a series of stars. The 8
fact that the reference island (etak) is normally invisible below the horizon, and may not 9
even exist at all, has been a source of puzzlement to many interpreters who – assuming 20
that the mariner’s task is to navigate from one spatial location to another – have proposed 1
that the etak is used to obtain a locational ﬁx. Nothing in what the mariners themselves 2
have to say, however, suggests that it serves any such purpose. The alleged bearing of the 3
etak does not enter into any numerical computation. Rather, pointing to the etak is the 4
mariner’s way of indicating where he is in terms of the temporal unfolding of the voyage 5
as a whole (Hutchins 1995: 87–8). We have already seen how, in terrestrial wayﬁnding, 6
a route from one place to another is remembered as a temporally ordered sequence of 7
vistas. In much the same way, the Micronesian mariner remembers an inter-island voyage 8
as a sequence of etak segments, each of which begins as the reference island falls under 9
one particular star and ends as it falls under the next in line. At any movement, the 30
mariner will know what segment he is in. As it swings beneath the horizon, from segment 1
to segment, the etak island marks in its movement the passage of time, just as do the sun, 2
moon and stars overhead, in theirs. Completion of the penultimate segment should bring 3
the mariner, at length, to the ﬁnal ‘etak of sighting’, as the island for which he is bound 4
hoves into view.
THE WORLD HAS NO SURFACE
One further contrast remains to be drawn between wayﬁnding and navigation, and it takes 9
us back to the cartographic notion of the map as a representation of some portion of the 40
earth’s surface. The following ‘ofﬁcial’ deﬁnition of the map, issued by the International 1
Cartographic Association, is exemplary:
A map is a representation normally to scale and on a ﬂat medium, of a selection of 4
material or abstract features on, or in relation to, the surface of the Earth or of a celestial 5
body.
(cited in Robinson and Petchenik 1976: 17) 7

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 241 •

Now the idea that the world is presented to the traveller as a surface to be traversed
presupposes the specialised, ‘bird’s-eye view’ of the cartographer or navigator. Indeed the
world can only be perceived to have an exterior surface by a mind that is situated above
and beyond it. In ordinary wayﬁnding however, whether on land or at sea, the world
is apprehended from within. One makes one’s way through it, not over or across it. Of
course the traveller encounters surfaces of diverse kinds – of solid ground, water, vegetation, buildings, and so on – and it is largely thanks to the responses of these surfaces to
light, sound and the pressure of touch that he perceives the environment in the way
he does. For the mariner the ocean, with its subtle differences of tint and colour, sculpted
by the wind into waves and ripples, and breaking up around the boat into foam
and spray, presents an inﬁnitely variegated and ever changing surface. Likewise for the
pedestrian, making his way along a forest track, the surface of the ground is a patchwork
of mud, furrowed by the imprint of previous journeys, puddles, fallen leaves, broken
boughs, and outcropping rocks and stones. These are surfaces, however, in the world, not
of the world. That is to say, they are formed on the interface, not between matter and
mind, but between solid or liquid substance and the gaseous medium (air) in which
humans live and breathe, and which affords movement and sensory perception.7 In short
for its manifold inhabitants, journeying along their respective ways of life, the world itself
has no surface.
I noted earlier the parallel between the tracing of paths on the ground in wayﬁnding
and the tracing of lines on paper (or in sand, snow, etc.) in mapping: indeed to the extent
that all wayﬁnding is mapping, these are one and the same. Our conclusion, however,
that for the mapper or wayﬁnder the world has no surface, calls for some qualiﬁcation of
the view, for which I argued above, that mapping is an inscriptive process. This need not
be so. If a map consists of a network of interconnected lines, each corresponding to a
path of movement through the world, there is no necessary reason why these lines should
be inscribed on a surface. One could think of the gesturing hand, in mapping, as a weaving
hand rather than a drawing hand, and of the result as something more akin to a cat’s
cradle than a graph. The lines of the map could be threads, wires or sticks. Micronesian
mariners used coconut leaf ribs to map the intersecting courses of ocean swells (Turnbull
1991: 24). Or to take a familiar example from a contemporary urban context, one could
construct a route map for the London Underground out of stiff wire, soldered at the
intersections, and it would serve just as well as the conventional printed versions. The
fact that the map is generally reproduced on paper is a matter of obvious practical convenience, but not of logical necessity. The meaning of the map lies entirely in its routes and
intersections, whereas the paper surface has no signiﬁcance whatsoever. To read the map
is to trace a continuous path from one station to another, without regard to their respective locations on the surface. With the modern topographic map it is quite otherwise, for
in this case the paper surface of the map stands for nothing less than the surface of
the earth. One of the most revealing indicators of this change in the signiﬁcance
of the map-surface, corresponding to the transition from mapping to mapmaking, lies
in the appearance of frame boundaries. Native maps, as Belyea points out (1996: 6), are
never framed. A line or border drawn around and enclosing such a map would have
no meaning. The frame of the topographic map, by contrast, deﬁnes the portion of the
earth’s surface that the map purports to represent. Thus the appearance of borders
around the map corresponds to the disappearance of the itineraries and practices that give
rise to it.

Dwelling
There is a paradox at the heart of modern cartography. The more it aims to furnish a 3
precise and comprehensive representation of reality, the less true to life this representa- 4
tion appears. ‘To present a useful and truthful picture’, as Mark Monmonier writes, ‘an 5
accurate map must tell white lies’ (Monmonier 1991: 1). But the reason for the discrep- 6
ancy between truth and accuracy is not quite what Monmonier claims it to be. It is not 7
that the map must leave things out if critical information is not to be drowned in a welter 8
of ever ﬁner particulars. It is rather that the world of our experience is a world suspended 9
in movement, that is continually coming into being as we – through our own movement 10
– contribute to its formation. In the cartographic world, by contrast, all is still and silent. 1
There is neither sunlight nor moonlight; there are no variations of light or shade, no 2
clouds, no shadows or reﬂections. The wind does not blow, neither disturbing the trees 3
nor whipping water into waves. No birds ﬂy in the sky, or sing in the woods; forests and 4
pastures are devoid of animal life; houses and streets are empty of people and trafﬁc. To 5
dismiss all this – to suggest that what is excluded in the cartographic reduction amounts, 6
in Monmonier’s words, to a ‘fog of detail’ – is perverse, to say the least (Wood 1992: 7
76). For it is no less than the stuff of life itself. Were one magically transported into the 8
looking-glass world behind the map, one would indeed feel lost and disoriented, as in a 9
fog. But the fogginess is a function not of the amount or density of detail but of the 20
arrestation of movement. Detached from the ﬂow of which each is but a moment, details 1
settle like an opaque precipitate upon the surface of the earth. Little wonder, then, that 2
the cartographer feels the need to sweep them up, or that the navigator prefers to brush 3
them aside in plotting a course!
The ordinary wayﬁnder, on the other hand, is not generally troubled by detail. Quite 5
to the contrary, the richer and more varied the texture of the environment, the easier it 6
is to ﬁnd one’s way about. But above all, wayﬁnding depends upon the attunement of 7
the traveller’s movements in response to the movements, in his or her surroundings, 8
of other people, animals, the wind, celestial bodies, and so on. Where nothing moves 9
there is nothing to which one can respond: at such times – as before a storm, or during 30
an eclipse – the experienced traveller can lose his bearings even in familiar terrain. These 1
observations should ﬁnally lay to rest the cartographic illusion, namely that the world is 2
pre-prepared as a stage upon which living things propel themselves about, from one loca- 3
tion to another. Life, in this view, is an internal property of objects, transported upon 4
the exterior surface of a lifeless earth. In the view I have set forth here, by contrast, the 5
world is not ready-made for life to occupy. Contrary to the assumptions of cartographers 6
and cognitive map theorists, life is not contained within things, nor is it transported about. 7
It is rather laid down along paths of movement, of action and perception. Every living 8
being, accordingly, grows and reaches out into the environment along the sum of its paths. 9
To ﬁnd one’s way is to advance along a line of growth, in a world which is never quite 40
the same from one moment to the next, and whose future conﬁguration can never be 1
fully known. Ways of life are not therefore determined in advance, as routes to be followed, 2
but have continually to be worked out anew. And these ways, far from being inscribed 3
upon the surface of an inanimate world, are the very threads from which the living world 4
is woven.

CONCLUSION

Culture, nature, environment • 243 •

Chapter Fourteen

Stop, look and listen!
Vision, hearing and human movement

ON HEARING SOUNDS, AND SEEING THINGS
Near the house where I grew up was a path I often took, which crossed a railway line.
Beside the track was a notice which advised the pedestrian to ‘stop, look and listen’ before
attempting to cross the line. I may not always have followed this advice as closely as I
should, but at least I knew what it meant. To me, as doubtless to others who walked that
path, it made perfectly good sense. In the absence of automatic signalling arrangements,
how else is one to know whether a train is coming save by looking and listening? Only
later did I discover that what is obvious to pedestrians is, to philosophers, utterly bafﬂing.
To be sure, the philosopher might admit, our knowledge of the world can only come
through some form of perception. Yet it seems that the one thing we cannot perceive is
perception itself. You may claim to see a train, but only by way of the light that reaches
your eyes. And you hear it only by way of the sound that reaches your ears. So how can
you know that the train exists at a certain distance, as a detached material object, behind
the perceptual images, shaped in light and sound, that you have of it? And if it exists
only in your perception – in your eyes and ears, or even in your thoughts – then how
can it run you down? Nor is that all. Looking and listening, we receive one set of sensations through the eyes, and another, quite different set through the ears. Supposing that
our knowledge is ultimately founded on sensory experience, how do we know that the
sights and sounds that come to our notice are all manifestations of the same thing, the
train, that is bearing down on us? If we hear sounds rather than things (like trains), then
how do I know that this sound I hear belongs to that train I see?
These are among the most ancient of philosophical conundrums, and it is not my
intention to resolve them here. I do mean to suggest, however, that the way in which they
are posed bears the imprint of a certain way of imagining the human subject – namely, as
a seat of awareness, bounded by the skin, and set over against the world – that is deeply
sedimented in the Western tradition of thought. The problem of perception, thus, is one
of how anything can be translated or ‘cross over’ from the outside to the inside, from the
macrocosm of the world to the microcosm of the mind. This is why visual and aural
perception are usually described, in the writings of philosophers and psychologists, as
processes of seeing and hearing. Sight begins at the point where light enters the eyes of the
stationary perceiver, hearing at the point where sound strikes his ears – at the interface, in
short, between outside and inside. Yet the notice beside the railway tracks did not advise
the pedestrian to ‘stand, see and hear’. It advised him to ‘stop, look and listen’: that is, to
interrupt one bodily activity, of walking, and to initiate another, of looking-and-listening
(as I show later, these are better regarded as aspects of one activity than as two distinct

Dwelling
activities). In what, then, does this activity consist? Not in opening the eyes, since these are 1
open anyway; nor in opening the ears, since they cannot be closed save by stopping them 2
with the ﬁngers. It consists, rather, in a kind of scanning movement, accomplished by the 3
whole body – albeit from a ﬁxed location – and which both seeks out, and responds to, 4
modulations or inﬂections in the environment to which it is attuned. As such, perception 5
is not an ‘inside-the head’ operation, performed upon the raw material of sensation, but 6
takes place in circuits that cross-cut the boundaries between brain, body and world.
But I am running ahead of myself. There is much ground to be cleared before the 8
idea of perception outlined above can be substantiated. To begin this clearance we need 9
to inquire more closely into the assumptions we tend to make about our experiences of 10
seeing and hearing. You can attempt to ﬁnd out what these are by performing a simple 1
thought experiment. Suppose you are standing beside the tracks as a train is passing. You 2
see the locomotive and the coaches hurtling by, you hear the roar of the engine followed 3
by the clickety-clack of bogies as they roll over joints in the rail. These sights and sounds 4
are ordinarily so entangled in your experience that it is not easy to tell them apart, to 5
imagine what the train would look like without the noise it makes, or what it would 6
sound like without the appearance it presents. But you could try, nevertheless. Picture 7
yourself blindfolded, or on a pitch dark night, such that the visual component of experi- 8
ence is eliminated. The sound of the approaching train, as it swells, seems to assault and 9
ultimately to overwhelm every ﬁbre of your being. You cannot resist being swept along 20
with it until eventually, as the train recedes into the distance, you are left stranded by 1
the trackside, breathless and dizzy, in exactly the same spot where, in truth, you had been 2
standing all along! But now, as a second experiment, picture yourself with your ears 3
stopped, so as to cut out the auditory component of experience. This time the train 4
appears to pass before your eyes as though it were a spectre whose very existence lies in 5
dimensions other than those of the world to which you belong. You see it, you register 6
its presence and its passing, but you are not moved by it. The vision is just another sighting 7
to add to your collection.
If the results of these admittedly ﬁctitious experiments have any validity, they suggest 9
that far from being equivalent and mutually substitutable, vision and hearing are radically 30
opposed, as different as is standing on the river bank, watching the water ﬂow by, from 1
being tossed in with the current. As a participant observer in the event constituted by the 2
train’s passing the spot where you stand, at the intersection of the path and the tracks, 3
it would seem that whereas you participate aurally, you observe visually. Indeed the notion 4
that sound can get inside you and shake you up, in a way that light cannot, has a long 5
and distinguished pedigree in the history of ideas. Time and again, the ears are imagined 6
topologically as openings in the head that actually allow the sound to seep in and touch 7
the innermost surfaces of being. The eyes, by contrast, are supposed to be backed by 8
screens that let no light through, leaving the mind in the dark – like the inhabitants, 9
in Plato’s celebrated allegory, of a cave who can see nothing but shadows on the walls 40
cast by the light of their own ﬁre. Sound, it is said, reaches directly into the soul, whereas 1
in vision all one can do is reconstruct a picture of what the outside world might be like, 2
on the basis of light-induced sensations. But by the same token, we are more readily 3
convinced that we hear sound than that we see light. The objects of vision, we suppose, 4
are not sources or manifestations of light but the things that light illuminates for us. The 5
objects of hearing, on the other hand, are not things but sounds or sources of sound.1 6
True, there have been dissenting voices. One of them was Martin Heidegger. In his 7
essay on ‘The origin of the work of art’, Heidegger argued that only when we divert our 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 245 •

attention away from things, or listen abstractly (as we might, say, to classical music, with
our eyes closed), do we hear ‘bare sound’. In ordinary life, he insisted, we do not hear
sounds but things themselves – the door shutting in the house, the storm in the chimney,
the Mercedes as distinct from the Volkswagen (Heidegger 1971: 26). So too, Heidegger
would have said, we hear the train before the noise it makes. But this view is not easily
reconciled with everyday experience. For what we claim to hear, at least when we speak
of these matters, is the slamming of the door, the whistling of the wind, the humming
or chugging of the car engine, and the roar of the locomotive. Slamming, whistling,
humming, and so on are words that describe not things but actions or movements which,
because of the vibrations they set up, we actually sense as noises of various kinds. Or to
take another example, consider the word ‘cuckoo’. This is, in the ﬁrst place, an
onomatopoeic rendering of a sound that I have often heard in the countryside, and which
always seems to emanate from a far-off, undisclosed location in the woods. We say the
cuckoo is a bird, but in my experience the bird exists, purely and simply, as its sound. I
have never seen one (except in illustrated books on ornithology). But only through being
seen does the cuckoo come to be apprehended as a thing that makes a sound, instead of
the sound itself.2
In due course I shall proceed to qualify the idea that we see things before light, and
hear sound before things. I shall do so by showing that sound, strictly speaking, is no
more an object of hearing than is light an object of vision. Rather, just as to say there is
light is another way of saying that one can see, so also, to say there is sound is another
way of saying that one can hear. Light and sound are, in essence, the undersides of the
experiences of seeing and hearing respectively. Now as blind people are able to tell us, it
is in fact possible to hear things as well as to see them. And for sighted people, the eyes
are as much a part of the perceptual system for listening as are the ears part of the system
for looking. To that extent, vision and hearing are not so much disparate as interchangeable.
But behind the discovery, whether visual or auditory, of a world already made there lies
a deeper, pre-objective level of perception, a level at which sensory awareness rides on the
cusp of the very movement of the world’s coming-into-being. At this level, as I shall show,
the experiences of vision and hearing are not mutually substitutable in the way that – for
example – the signed language of the deaf is substitutable for oral speech. Instead, they
are virtually indistinguishable: vision is a kind of hearing, and vice versa. This argument
eventually leads me to reject the thesis that attributes the dominance of objective thinking
in the West to an obsession with the eye. For the moment, however, let me continue
with the contrast between seeing and hearing, as this is commonly understood, in order
to examine its implications for our understanding, ﬁrst, of persons and things; secondly,
of language, speech and writing; and thirdly, of the sensory practices of people in nonWestern societies.

VISION OBJECTIFIES, SOUND PERSONIFIES
Of all the implications of the contrast between vision and hearing, the most consequential has been the notion that vision, since it is untainted by the subjective experience of
light, yields a knowledge of the outside world that is rational, detached, analytical
and atomistic. Hearing, on the other hand, since it rests on the immediate experience of
sound, is said to draw the world into the perceiver, yielding a kind of knowledge that is
intuitive, engaged, synthetic and holistic. For those who would celebrate positive scientiﬁc inquiry as the crowning achievement of the human spirit, vision is undoubtedly the

Dwelling
superior sense. Yet for all that, it is not to be trusted. The visual path to objective truth, 1
it seems, is paved with illusions. Precisely because vision yields a knowledge that is indi- 2
rect, based on conjecture from the limited data available in the light, it can never be more 3
than provisional, open to further testing and the possibility of empirical refutation.3 But 4
while we can never be certain of what we see, there is no doubt about what we hear. 5
Since sound speaks to us directly, hearing does not lie. We do not suffer from aural as 6
we do from optical illusions (Rée 1999: 46). In short, when it comes to affairs of the 7
soul, of emotion and feeling, or of the ‘inwardness’ of life, hearing surpasses seeing as 8
understanding goes beyond knowledge, and as faith transcends reason.
Nothing better illustrates these attitudes to vision and hearing, so deeply embedded in 10
Western sensibilities, than these lines from the ‘Foreword’ to Victor Zuckerkandl’s classic 1
study of musical perception, Sound and Symbol. Here he is comparing the demeanour of 2
the blind and the deaf:
The quietness, the equanimity, the trust, one might almost say the piety, so often found 5
in the blind are in strange contrast to the irritability and suspicion encountered among 6
so many of the deaf . . . It seems as if, by the very fact that the blind man trusts himself 7
to the guidance of the ear instead of the eye, other modes of connection with the world 8
are revealed to him, modes that are otherwise overshadowed by the dominance of the 9
eye – as if, in the realms with which he thus comes into contact, man were less alone, 20
better provided for, more at home, than in the world of visible things to which the 1
deaf man is directed and to which an element of foreignness always clings.
(1956: 3) 3
As a stereotypic depiction of the behaviour of blind and deaf people this passage is, of 5
course, outrageous. It says much, however, about how we are inclined to view hearing as 6
warm, connecting and sympathetic; and sight as cold, distancing and unfeeling. No 7
wonder, then, that numerous commentators have sought to lay the ills of modern Western 8
civilisation at the door of its alleged obsession with vision (Jay 1993a, Levin 1988, 1993). 9
More than any other modality of perception, they say, vision leads us to objectify our 30
environment, to regard it as a repository of things, alien to our subjective selves, that are 1
there to be seized by the eyes, analysed by science, exploited by technology, and domi- 2
nated by power. If only we could redress the balance by restoring hearing to its proper 3
place in the sensorium, it is claimed, we might hope to regain a more harmonious, benev- 4
olent and empathetic awareness of our surroundings. Then, perhaps, we may rediscover 5
what it means to belong.4
These laments are not new; to the contrary, the denigration of vision is as ancient as 7
is its elevation to the top of the hierarchy of the senses. As Don Ihde points out, in his 8
study of the phenomenology of sound, ‘there is an old and deeply held tradition that 9
vision “objectiﬁes”, and, contrarily but not so widely noted, there is a tradition which 40
holds that sound “personiﬁes”’ (Ihde 1976: 21). To this latter tradition belong the claims 1
of many classical scholars that the very word, ‘person’, is derived from the Latin verb 2
personare, meaning literally ‘to sound through’. Whether the derivation is etymologically 3
well founded need not concern us;5 what count are rather the reasons that make it so 4
compelling. These, I contend, lie in its concordance with a widely held notion that behind 5
the visible aspect of the person, above all the face, lies an inner being that reveals itself 6
through the voice. In speaking, the voice ‘sounds through’ from the inside to the outside; 7
in hearing it conversely penetrates from the outside to the inside. Where vision places us 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 247 •

vis-à-vis one another, ‘face-to-face’, leaving each of us to construct an inner representation of the other’s mental state on the basis of our observations of outward appearance,
voice and hearing establish the possibility of genuine intersubjectivity, of a participatory
communion of self and other through shared immersion in the stream of sound. Vision,
in this conception, deﬁnes the self individually in opposition to others; hearing deﬁnes the
self socially in relation to others.

THE WRITTEN WORD AND THE SOUNDS OF SPEECH
Nowhere is the ambivalence surrounding attitudes to vision and hearing more evident than
in Western ideas about language, and above all about the distinction between speech and
writing. The distrust of writing is a recurrent theme throughout the history of Western
thought. Ever since Plato and Aristotle, philosophers have tended to regard writing as an
exterior, visible facade for the inner sonic reality of spoken words. Plato, in the Phaedrus
(274–7), has Socrates declare that writing provides no more than ‘the appearance and not
the reality of wisdom’ (Plato 1973). For Aristotle, only the spoken word truly represents
mental experience, while the written word stands for the spoken one (Aristotle 1938: 115).
Rousseau, for whom writing was ‘nothing but the representation of speech’, complained
bitterly (in writing of course) about the prestige and attention accorded by his contemporaries to writing when it was no more than a contrived and inauthentic cover for the real
thing (Derrida 1974: 36). And two of the giants of twentieth-century linguistics held to
much the same opinion. For Bloomﬁeld (1933: 21) writing was ‘merely a way of recording language by visible marks’, while according to Saussure (1959: 23), ‘language and
writing are two distinct systems of signs; the second exists for the sole purpose of representing the ﬁrst’. In a famous image
(Figure 14.1), Saussure located
language at the interface between
thought and sound, as though
human consciousness – the realm
of ideas – hovered over an ocean
of sound like air over water (1959:
112).
There is, in all these pronouncements, an implicit prioritisation of
hearing over vision, as though the
former gave access to intimacies
of human experience to which
the latter could only offer a pale
reﬂection. ‘The only true bond’,
as Saussure wrote, is ‘the bond Figure 14.1 Saussure’s depiction of language at the interface between a
of sound’ (1959: 25).6 Ironically, plane of thought (A) and a plane of sound (B). The role of language is
however, at the very same time to cut the interface into subdivisions, as indicated by the vertical dashed
that writing is rendered as having lines, thereby establishing a series of relations between particular ideas
and particular sounds. ‘Visualize the air in contact with a sheet of water’,
no other purpose than the model- says Saussure; ‘if the atmospheric pressure changes, the surface of the
ling of speech in a visible medium, water will be broken up into a series of divisions, waves; the waves
the apprehension of speech is itself resemble the union of thought with phonic substance’.
modelled on the inspection of the From F. de Saussure, Course in general linguistics, New York: The Philowritten word. Thus a visual bias sophical Library, 1959, p. 112.

Dwelling
enters, as it were by the back door, into our very notion of what language is. Recall 1
that the underlying assumption, shared by both champions of visual perception and 2
their critics, is that we do not see light but the objects it illuminates. You may not be 3
able to read, for example, without a source of illumination, but what you see is not the 4
light but the words on the page. Likewise, you cannot hear speech unless it is voiced 5
in sound. However your familiarity with the written word leads you to believe that what 6
you hear is not the sound itself but the words shaped in it. ‘Language-as-word’, as 7
Ihde notes, ‘even while sounding, does not draw attention to itself as sound’ (1976: 8
161). Rather, the sound ‘yields up’ or delivers the words we claim to hear. Thus it is 9
supposed that words can be extracted from the medium of sound, and can be preserved, 10
whether as impressions in the mind or as inscriptions on the page, independently of their 1
sounding.
Language, it seems, is the exception that proves the rule that we see things (not light), 3
and hear sounds (not things). When we listen to music, we attend to the sound as such, 4
for it is surely in the sound, no more and no less, that the music consists. But when it 5
comes to speech, we are inclined to treat hearing as a species of vision – a kind of seeing 6
with the ear, or ‘earsight’ – that reacts to sound in the same way that eyesight reacts to 7
light. Thus we are convinced that we apprehend words, not sound. It is almost as though 8
the sounds of speech were seen rather than heard. This, of course, is exactly what Saussure 9
had in mind when he described the verbal signiﬁer – the pattern of sound as registered 20
in the psyche – as a sound-image (1959: 66). So far as he was concerned, we recognise a 1
word of speech in the same way that we do a word of writing, by matching the perceived 2
pattern to a pre-existing mental schema. But what if we had never seen a word, if we had 3
no notion of a word as an object of vision? Granted that our familiarity with writing 4
leads us to model the hearing of the spoken word upon the sight of the written one, how 5
might the power of speech have been experienced by people with no knowledge of writing, 6
or for whom the written word was meant to be disseminated, at most, through being read 7
aloud rather than through its reproduction in print?
In his inﬂuential study, The Gutenberg Galaxy, Marshall McLuhan (1962) argued that 9
the invention of the printing press ushered in an entirely new era in the history of human 30
culture, marked by the absolute dominance of the eye, and with it a bias towards a way 1
of thinking that is objective and analytic, and that follows a linear path of explicit logical 2
connections. Even before the introduction of print technology, during the preceding ‘chiro- 3
graphic’ stage of culture, the substitution of written for spoken words had begun to tip 4
the balance between sight and hearing in favour of the former. But among peoples at an 5
‘oral-aural’ level of culture, to whom writing was unknown, the ear exercised an over- 6
whelming tyranny over the eye (McLuhan 1962: 28). And so too, McLuhan maintained, 7
their thought lacked the logical elaboration, analytic discrimination and objectivity that, 8
in the literate West, are normally considered to be the hallmarks of rationality. Building 9
on these ideas, one of McLuhan’s associates, Walter Ong, sought to derive all the essen- 40
tial characteristics of ‘orally based thought and expression’ from the features that distinguish 1
hearing from vision. Oral culture, he claimed, is aggregating, harmonic and holistic rather 2
than dissecting, analytic and atomistic; concrete and situationally speciﬁc rather than 3
abstract and context-independent; and focused on persons rather than things. Hearing 4
binds people together in community; vision isolates the individual vis-à-vis the world. 5
Finally, ‘the interiorizing force of the oral word relates in a special way to the sacral, to 6
the ultimate concerns of existence’. With the ascendancy of vision, however, religion gives 7
way to secular science (Ong 1982: 73–4).

Vision, hearing and human movement • 249 •

In their placing of oral cultures and literate civilisations on either side of a ‘great divide’,
both McLuhan and Ong effectively reproduced a dichotomy between oral participation
and visual observation that, as I have already shown, is deeply embedded within the
Western tradition. Thus sound, according to Ong, registers the interiority of things in a
way that is impossible with light, which merely reﬂects off their outer surfaces. The
following passage is exemplary:
Sight isolates, sound incorporates. Whereas sight situates the observer outside what he
views, at a distance, sound pours into the hearer . . . Vision comes to a human being
from one direction at a time . . . When I hear, however, I gather sound from every
direction at once: I am at the center of my auditory world, which envelops me, establishing me at a kind of core of sensation and existence . . . You can immerse yourself
in hearing, in sound. There is no way to immerse yourself similarly in sight.
(Ong 1982: 72)
It is in his contention that the listener in a ‘primarily oral’ culture hears words as sound,
rather than as images shaped in sound, that Ong takes issue with Saussure (1982: 17).
People in such a culture, ‘totally untouched by any knowledge of writing or print’, do
not hear words as if they were looking at them. In their speech, every word is a fugitive
movement carried on the crest of a sound that ‘exists only when it is going out of
existence’. It was writing, Ong contends, that tied words down and made them appear
thing-like, as ‘quiescent objects . . . for assimilation by vision’ (1982: 91). Thus writing
transforms the word rather than, as Saussure thought, merely representing it in an
alternative medium.

VISION AND HEARING IN ANTHROPOLOGY
Another of McLuhan’s collaborators was the anthropologist Edmund Carpenter. Writing
on the basis of ﬁeldwork conducted among the Aivilik Eskimo (Inuit) of Southampton
Island in the Canadian arctic, Carpenter claimed that the world of the Inuit is deﬁned,
above all, by sound rather than by sight (Carpenter 1973: 33). To inhabit such a world
is not to look out upon a space of ready-made objects, but to participate from the inside
in the perpetual movement of their generation. There are, strictly speaking, no things in
the Inuit world, only beings, which establish their presence, ﬁrst and foremost, by way of
their ongoing actions. Hearing is the resonant coupling of these actions with the movement of the listener’s attention. Thus Inuit hear sound rather than things, and are moved
by the sound itself, as they are by song. Indeed the distinction between speech and song,
so central to the literate conception of language, would make no sense to them (Carpenter
1966: 212; I return to this distinction in Chapter Twenty-three, pp. 407–10). Speaking
and singing are actions which, like hunting or carving, ‘bring out’ or release aspects of
being into the fullness of the acoustic space surrounding the person. Unlike the framed,
pictorial space surveyed by the eye, acoustic space is ‘dynamic, always in ﬂux, creating its
own dimensions moment by moment’ (1973: 35, see also Carpenter and McLuhan 1960).
Its form – as we recall from Chapter Twelve (pp. 210–11) – is that of a sphere, extending
outwards from the person equally in all directions. But this sphere has no outer surface
or boundary: it does not pre-exist and enclose the speaker and listener but rather takes
shape around them in the very process of their auditory engagement with one another
and with the environment.

Dwelling
Between them, McLuhan, Carpenter and Ong effectively laid the foundations for a 1
currently vibrant ﬁeld of inquiry that has come to be known as the anthropology of the 2
senses (Stoller 1989, Howes 1991a, Classen 1993, 1997). It is true that certain aspects of 3
their programme have come in for justiﬁed criticism from anthropological quarters: the 4
attribution of pre-logical mentalities to ‘tribal’ societies at the oral-aural level, the relative 5
neglect of other sensory modalities besides sight and hearing, and the consequent elision 6
of differences among cultures on either side of the ‘great divide’ between orality and 7
literacy (Howes 1991b: 172–3, Classen 1997: 403–4). However the basic idea, that cultures 8
can be compared in terms of the relative weighting of the senses through which people 9
perceive the world around them, has been retained. Thus it is not so much in what they 10
perceive as in how they perceive that cultures differ. It will no longer do to identify cultural 1
variations with alternative worldviews, as though everyone perceived their surroundings in 2
the same way (visually, by viewing it) but saw different things on account of their drawing 3
on different models for organising the data of perception into representations. For the 4
very idea that the world is known by representing it in the mind is bound up with assump- 5
tions about the pre-eminence of vision that are not applicable cross-culturally. Below I 6
brieﬂy review three studies in the anthropology of the senses, all of which accord partic- 7
ular prominence to hearing. The ﬁrst, by Paul Stoller, is of the Songhay of Niger, in West 8
Africa; the second, by Anthony Seeger, is of the Suyá of Mato Grosso, Brazil; and the 9
third, by Alfred Gell, is of the Umeda of Papua New Guinea.
For the Songhay, Stoller asserts, sound ‘is a foundation of experience’. Unlike vision, 1
which sets up a distance between the spectator and the object seen, sound ‘penetrates the 2
individual and creates a sense of communication and participation’ (1989: 103, 120). To 3
show how this is so, Stoller examines the signiﬁcance that Songhay attach to the sounds 4
of two kinds of musical instruments – the godji (monochord violin) and gasi (gourd drum) 5
– both played during possession ceremonies, of the praise-poetry that accompanies these 6
ceremonies, and of words spoken in sorcery. The godji produces a high-pitched cry, whereas 7
the gasi, depending on how it is beaten, produces a ‘clack’ or a ‘roll’. Both people and 8
spirits are excited by these sounds, ﬁnding them irresistible. Indeed for the Songhay, the 9
cries of the violin, and the clacks and rolls of the drum, are the voices of spirits that, in 30
rituals of possession, penetrate and shake up the bodies of those possessed. And while the 1
instruments are sounding, the praise-singer (sorko) recites the names of the spirits, shouting 2
them directly into the ears of the intended medium. The sonic force of the shout affects 3
the medium’s body much as wind affects ﬁre, igniting it into paroxysms that indicate the 4
onset of possession (Stoller 1989: 108–12). In sorcery, too, it is the actual sound of the 5
magical incantation that powerfully works its effects, whether for good or ill, on the body 6
of the victim or patient. The magical word is sound, which exists (and goes out of exis- 7
tence) in the act of its enunciation. As such, it is a phenomenon of the same order as 8
the cry, clack or roll of the musical instrument, or the shout of the praise-singer. In every 9
case it is the sound itself that people hear, and to which they respond. This sound is 40
supposed to have an existence of its own, ‘separate from the domains of human, animal 1
and plant life’ (1989: 112).
Among the Suyá, according to Seeger, the faculty of hearing is valued very highly, as 3
are the complementary faculties of speech and song. Speech is distinguished from song in 4
Suyá classiﬁcation, not however in terms of the detachment of words from sound, but as 5
poles on a continuum of alternative combinations of ‘phonetics, text, time, tone and 6
timbre’ (Seeger 1987: 46, 51). The signiﬁcance accorded to hearing, as well as to speech 7
and song, is highlighted through the massive expansion of the earlobes and (for men) the 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 251 •

lower lips, into which are inserted large discs of wood or rolled palm leaf. The word
ku-mba, in the Suyá language, translates not only as ‘to hear’ but also as ‘to understand’
and ‘to know’. It is the ability to ‘hear-understand-know’ well that deﬁnes the person as
a fully social being. And where we might describe the memory even of spoken words in
visual terms, as images in the mind, Suyá describe even a visual phenomenon such as a
weaving pattern, that has been learned and remembered, as lodged in the ear (Seeger 1975:
213–14). The sense of sight, to the contrary, is associated in Suyá thinking with morally
delinquent, anti-social tendencies. A person possessed of extraordinary powers of hearing
is a paragon of virtue, but someone with extraordinary vision is a witch. The witch sees
everything – his is a transparent world that offers no barriers to sight. ‘He can look up
and see the village of the dead in the sky; he can look down and see the ﬁres of the
people who live under the earth; and he can look around and see enemy Indians in their
own villages far away’ (1975: 216). In their elaboration of hearing as the morally superior
sense, and their distrust and fear of people with vision, Suyá seem to establish ‘some kind
of opposition between vision and social virtue’ which, Seeger suggests, may have resonances elsewhere – even in the traditions of the West (1975: 222).
The Umeda, like many other peoples of Papua New Guinea, inhabit an environment
of dense, and virtually unbroken forest, in which things are visible only at close range,
normally within a few tens of metres. Such an environment, Gell argues, ‘imposes a
reorganisation of sensibility’, giving pride of place to hearing, along with smell (Gell 1995:
235). Thus out hunting, Umeda walk with their eyes to the ground, listening for game
instead of looking for it, since it is by their sounds that animals announce their existence
and presence in the world of the hunter. This is not a world of preconstituted, visualspatial objects but is rather apprehended dynamically. Not only animals and plants, but
also landscape features such as ridges, knolls and pools, are grasped in the ﬁrst place as
movements rather than static forms. Alert to these movements, the body resonates rather
like a sounding cavity, and responds in kind through its own activity of speech (1995:
240). Thus the sound of the spoken word echoes to the movement of the being or feature
in the environment to which it corresponds, giving rise to the ‘phonological iconism’
which, as Gell shows, is such a pronounced feature of the Umeda language. Through their
speech, Umeda do not point to and label things in the world ‘out there’, but continually
bring the world into being around themselves, even as they are continually brought into
being through their own immersion in an ambience of sound. But Gell goes further, to
propose that the predominance of hearing over seeing leads to a ‘bias towards the expression of sympathy towards community members’ (1995: 235). The ‘auditory’ culture of
the Umeda, Gell claims, is a ‘culture of sympathy’.

THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SENSES: A FIRST CRITIQUE
What is so striking about the studies reviewed above is that in all three, a radical contrast
is established between hearing and vision along lines which, as we have seen, are already
sharply drawn within the Western tradition. Among the criteria of distinction, to recapitulate, are that sound penetrates whereas sight isolates, that what we hear are sounds
that ﬁll the space around us whereas what we see are things abstracted or ‘cut out’ from
the space before us, that the body responds to sound like a resonant cavity and to light
like a reﬂecting screen, that the auditory world is dynamic and the visual world static,
that to hear is to participate whereas to see is to observe from a distance, that hearing is
social whereas vision is asocial or individual, that hearing is morally virtuous whereas vision

Dwelling
is intrinsically untrustworthy, and ﬁnally that hearing is sympathetic whereas vision is 1
indifferent or even treacherous. Yet there are puzzles and inconsistencies which suggest 2
that these distinctions may reﬂect more upon the preconceptions of anthropological analysts 3
than upon the actual sensory experience of the peoples among whom they have worked. 4
Indeed it is hard to avoid the suspicion, voiced by Nadia Seremetakis (1994: 124), that 5
in the imputation to non-Western ‘Others’ of heightened auditory (along with tactile and 6
olfactory) sensibilities, they are being made to carry the burden of sensory modalities exiled 7
from the sensory structure of Western modernity on account of the latter’s attribution to 8
the hegemony of vision.
Stoller, for example, devotes a whole chapter to arguing the need for anthropologists 10
to transform themselves from ethnographic ‘spectators into seers’,7 by opening up to the 1
world of the other and allowing themselves to be penetrated by it. So convinced is he, 2
however, that ‘a person’s spatialized “gaze” creates distance’ that he can follow his own 3
advice only by learning to hear, rather than to see, as the Songhay do (1989: 120). In 4
this, his approach is entirely in accord with the convention that to attain real knowledge 5
one must abandon the illusions of vision and yield to the guidance of the ear. The true 6
‘seer’ of the Western tradition is the blind prophet: in Seeger’s words, ‘one who physically 7
cannot see’ (1975: 222). Yet by Seeger’s own account, this is not so for the Suyá, among 8
whom the witch is certainly a seer rather than a spectator, albeit of a morally undesirable 9
complexion. For the witch’s all-around sight does not view the world from the outside, 20
but opens it up from the inside. A similar inconsistency between analytic preconception 1
and native experience appears in Gell’s study of the Umeda. For having reasserted 2
the now familiar proposition that ‘hearing is (relatively) intimate, concrete, and tactile, 3
whereas vision promotes abstraction’, he goes on to tell us that Umeda themselves ‘treat 4
sight . . . as a climactic sense with connotations of intimacy and danger’ (1995: 235, 239, 5
my emphases). The intimacy of sight, for Umeda, lies in close-range, eye-to-eye contact, 6
and its danger is linked to the ever present possibility of sorcery attack. An angry glance 7
can terrify the one to whom it is directed. Umeda, it seems, would be the last to agree 8
that vision promotes abstraction!
Commenting on the Suyá case, David Howes suggests that ‘there may be a connection 30
between aurality and sociability, on the one hand, and visuality and individuality (or an 1
“asocial disposition”), on the other’. This connection, he argues, might even be rephrased 2
as a general law: ‘the more a society emphasizes the eye, the less communal it will be; the 3
more it emphasizes the ear, the less individualistic it will be’ (Howes 1991b: 177–8). Once 4
again, however, this ‘law’ merely reproduces a homology between two dualities, individual 5
versus social and seeing versus hearing, that has long been axiomatic in the Western tradi- 6
tion. And it glosses over fundamental differences between Western and (for example) Suyá 7
understandings, both of the ‘asocial individual’ and of vision. The Suyá ‘witch’ is not at 8
all, as Howes (1991b: 177) thinks, the counterpart of the Western ‘individual’. For one 9
thing, the witch’s vision penetrates the world rather than catching reﬂections off its outer 40
surfaces; for another he does not stand, as does the Western individual, vis-à-vis 1
others in society, but embodies in his being the active negation of sociality as a principle 2
of relationship. In this sense the witch is more anti-social than asocial.
Like the Suyá witch, the shaman among the Inuit possesses extraordinary powers of 4
vision, though these could be used for beneﬁcial as well as harmful ends. He, too, is a 5
seer rather than a spectator, whose sight could open up pathways into the parallel worlds 6
of animals and spirits. In the cosmology of the Yup’ik Eskimos, according to Anne Fienup- 7
Riordan, ‘vision was an act constituting knowledge, and witnessing was a potentially 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 253 •

creative act’ (1994: 316). The Eskimo cosmos, it transpires, teems with ever-watchful eyes.
Among Inuit generally, there is a close association between seeing and hunting: it is
through his clear and penetrating sight that the hunter initiates an encounter with the
game animal, which in turn is consummated with the animal’s willingly offering itself to
the hunter (Oosten 1992: 130). These observations bring us back to Carpenter’s seminal
study of Inuit sensory experience. Why, in the face of overwhelming evidence for the
centrality of eyesight to the Inuit perception of their environment, did Carpenter nevertheless insist to the contrary that, for them, the eye is subservient to the ear (Carpenter
1973: 33)? Could it be because he took with him into his study a preconceived notion
of vision, as analytic and reﬂective rather than active and generative (Schafer 1985: 96),
that was fundamentally incompatible with his ﬁne appreciation of the dynamic potential
and spherical topology of the Inuit lifeworld? And if, as Inuit ethnography suggests, it is
perfectly possible to combine the perception of a lifeworld of this kind with a thoroughgoing ocularcentrism, albeit of a kind radically different from that with which we are
familiar in the West, then how can we any longer attribute such perception to the predominance of hearing over sight in the balance of the senses?
Recall that it is on precisely these grounds that Gell accounts for the Umeda perception
of animals, plants and the landscape. Judging from the descriptions of Gell and Carpenter,
the parallels between the ways in which Umeda and Inuit constitute their worlds of
experience are remarkably close. Their respective environments, however, could hardly
be more different: dense, tropical forest as against treeless, arctic tundra. It is scarcely
surprising that in these conditions, the Umeda hunter should be obliged to rely on his ears,
and the Inuit hunter on his superior eyesight. Indeed Carpenter admits that when his Inuit
companions used their eyes, ‘it was often with an acuity that amazed me’ (1973: 36).
Yet to the extent that he depends on powers of vision rather than hearing, the Inuit hunter
does not, in consequence, ﬁnd his relation with the world turned inside out. He remains,
like his Umeda counterpart, at the centre of a dynamic cosmos, caught up in the process
of its perpetual generation. Beings do not, all at once, appear to him inert and thinglike,
nor does the hunter feel himself any more an observer, or any less a participant.
Thus in comparing the sensory proﬁle of Inuit or Umeda – or for that matter, Songhay
or Suyá – with that of the West, it is clear that what is at stake is not the priority of
vision over hearing, but the understanding of vision itself. Evidently, the primacy of vision
cannot be held to account for the objectiﬁcation of the world. Rather the reverse; it is
through its co-option in the service of a peculiarly modern project of objectiﬁcation that
vision has been reduced to a faculty of pure, disinterested reﬂection, whose role is merely
to deliver up ‘things’ to a transcendent consciousness. But while the eye, as Theodor
Adorno argued, has had to get used to perceiving a reality of objects (or more speciﬁcally,
of commodities), the ear has lagged behind in this development. There is something almost
‘archaic’, says Adorno, about hearing (Adorno 1981: 99). One of the ironies of the contemporary critique of visualism is that in calling for the restoration of hearing to its rightful
place in the ratio of the senses, it actually reproduces this opposition between hearing and
vision, and with it the very narrow and impoverished concept of vision to which its enlistment in the project of modernity has brought us. Having installed vision as the chief
instrument of objective knowledge, leaving hearing to ﬂoat in the primordial realms of
emotion and feeling, we know what it means to hear sound but have effectively lost touch
with the experience of light. To show how this has come about, I turn in the next section
to a ﬁgure whose thinking is widely acknowledged to occupy a pivotal place in this
transition – René Descartes.

Dwelling
Descartes began his Optics of 1637 by proclaiming his enthusiasm for the telescope. ‘Since 3
sight’, he wrote, ‘is the noblest and most comprehensive of the senses, inventions which 4
serve to increase its power are undoubtedly among the most useful there can be’ (1988: 5
57). And what more wonderful invention could one imagine than the telescope, which 6
has so enhanced the power of sight as to open up whole new vistas for the human under- 7
standing of nature and the universe? In according pride of place among the senses to 8
vision, Descartes was following in the footsteps of a long line of philosophers, reaching 9
back to Plato and Aristotle.8 Despite continuing doubts concerning the reliability of sight, 10
as opposed to hearing, the superiority of both vision and hearing over the so-called ‘contact’ 1
senses of touch, taste and smell was never in question. So far, I have had nothing to say 2
about the latter. Taste and smell raise a whole gamut of problems of their own which 3
lie beyond my present concerns, and while I admit that they would have to be included 4
in any discussion of human sensory experience that claimed to be truly comprehensive, I 5
do not intend to deal with them further here. But I can no longer put off some consid- 6
eration of touch. For in treatments of perception in the Western philosophical tradition, 7
it is above all to touch rather than hearing that sight has been compared. And in this, 8
Descartes was no exception. Indeed it was through an analogy with touch that he chose 9
to introduce the workings of vision.
Descartes invites us to consider a man who, blind from birth, is well practised in the 1
art of perceiving objects around and about him through the medium of a stick. What 2
happens is this. When the tip of the stick impacts upon an object (whether due to the 3
movement of the stick, the object or both), a mechanical impulse is passed to the hand, 4
whence it is further registered in the region of the brain from which the nerves of the 5
hand originate. These excitations in the brain then provide the data upon which is done 6
a mental act of calculation. Suppose, for example, that the blind man wishes to judge the 7
distance of an object, which he touches at the same point with two sticks, one held in 8
each hand. Knowing the distance between his hands, and the angle formed by each stick 9
with the line connecting them, it is a simple matter to work out how far the object lies 30
from the body. As Descartes himself remarks, the mental computational task involved in 1
the estimation of distance calls for ‘a kind of reasoning quite similar to that used by 2
surveyors when they measure inaccessible places by means of two different vantage points’ 3
(1988: 67).
The import of the analogy is that for Descartes, this is precisely equivalent to what 5
happens in vision. All you have to do is to substitute rays of reﬂected light for sticks, and 6
the two eyes for the two hands.9 Fluctuations in the patterns of reﬂected light reaching 7
the eyes, due to the movement either of environmental objects or of the eyes themselves, 8
are registered at the back of the retina, and thence in the part of the brain where the 9
optic nerve-ﬁbres have their source. The mind – or what Descartes calls the soul (in 40
French, âme) – then gets to work on these patterns of excitation, resulting in that aware- 1
ness of objects that allows us to claim to ‘see’ them. In defence of Descartes, it is important 2
to recognise two aspects of this account which are often overlooked. First, it was plain to 3
him that perception – whether visual or tactile – depended on movement. Were there no 4
movement of the body and its sensory organs relative to the environment, nothing would 5
be perceived. Ironically, this point has been lost in much of the subsequent psychology 6
of vision, only to be rediscovered by advocates of an ecological approach to visual per- 7
ception who adopt an explicitly anti-Cartesian stance. I return to this below. Secondly, 118

THE OPTICS OF DESCARTES

Vision, hearing and human movement • 255 •

Descartes did not, as is commonly supposed, argue that the function of the eyes is to
establish internal representations of external objects, which are then available for inspection by the mind. Indeed he was well aware of the absurdity of having to posit another
set of eyes, inside the brain, to view the internal image. Whatever reaches the brain, and
leads us to have sensory awareness of objects, no more resembles those objects than do the
movements of the blind man’s stick resemble the objects with which it comes into contact
(1988: 64).10
It remains the case, however, that for Descartes, the act of perception naturally divides
into two stages: the ﬁrst leading from the physical encounter with an object to a pattern
of nervous excitation in the brain; the second leading from these nervous impulses to a
mental awareness of the object in the perceiver’s line of sight. In which of these
two stages, then, does the essence of vision reside? The comparison with touch suggests
the former. Thus vision uses eyes and light-rays, touch uses hands and sticks. At a critical juncture in his exposition, however, Descartes shifts his ground. For it transpires that
it is no longer in the work of the eyes that the essence of vision lies, but rather in the
operations of the mind upon the deliverances of the senses. ‘It is the soul which sees’, he
declares, ‘and not the eye; and it does not see directly, but only by means of the brain’
(1988: 68). Initially introduced as an active mode of bodily exploration of the environment, vision – as it were – ‘goes indoors’, and perforce has to build a picture of the
outside world on the basis of intelligence received via the nervous system. Nor need this
intelligence be received exclusively by way of the eyes. As a purely cognitive faculty, vision
can also work upon the data of touch. Equipped with a stick, or even with bare hands,
the blind can see! So can sighted people, walking without a light on a pitch dark night
(1988: 58).
Thus we reach the extraordinary conclusion that vision, now conceived as an exclusively intellectual achievement, is no longer conditioned in any way by the embodied
experience of inhabiting an illuminated world.11 The role of light, being precisely equivalent to that of the blind man’s stick, is to effect a purely mechanical transduction. One
does not see light, any more than the blind man sees his stick. Rather one sees things
by means of the light and the stick. For what is registered in the brain, in the form of
patterns of nervous excitation, is information not about light, or about the stick, but about
the bodies in the environment with which it comes into contact, or off which it is deﬂected.
Once this information is inside the brain, at the point where vision proper begins, the
light – like the stick – has done its job, and plays no further part in the proceedings by
virtue of which the perceiver comes to ‘see’ the world spread out before him. At this point
the eyes, that look but cannot see, hand over to the ‘I’, the Cartesian cogito, who sees but
cannot look. Through the medium of light, my eyes can touch the world, and be touched
by it; but I cannot. Yet I can see. Evidently, then, the superiority of vision over touch is
not that of one sense over another, but that of cognition over sensation. This is why
Descartes chose to explain sight by making an example of the blind man. It was his
way of showing that light, in itself, is incidental to vision.

ON THE MEANING OF LIGHT
All this, however, still leaves us with a puzzle. If the power of sight lies in the cognitive
operations of the mind rather than the physical work of the eyes, then why should Descartes
have been so excited by the telescope, which surely augments the power of the eyes
but does nothing to assist the mind? It is the soul which sees, says Descartes. But the

Dwelling
telescope, which is not a computing device, does not help the soul to see! Were we to 1
maintain, to the contrary, that the power of sight lies ﬁrst and foremost in the work of 2
the eyes and not the operations of the mind, then the telescope might indeed be of some 3
assistance, yet by Descartes’ own argument there would no longer be any reason to elevate 4
the sense of sight over the contact sense of touch. If one could, with all equanimity, 5
substitute sticks for light rays, then what is so special about eyesight? The ambivalence, 6
in Descartes’ account, between eye and mind as the primary locus of seeing, or in other 7
words between vision as bodily observation and as mental speculation (Jay 1993a: 29), was 8
never resolved, and remains with us to this day. Moreover it has become entangled in 9
our thinking with another, equally puzzling dilemma, concerning the very signiﬁcance of 10
the word ‘light’. Does it refer to rectilinear rays which, reﬂected off the surfaces of things, 1
strike the eyes and thereby give rise to certain sensations? Or does its meaning lie in the 2
subjective experience that we have in consequence of these sensations, of a luminosity 3
within which things are given to consciousness as ‘visible objects’? Does light, in short, 4
shine in the world or in the mind?
For the philosophers of antiquity, this question did not arise, or not at least in this 6
form. Their physics was one that placed the ﬁgure of sentient man at the centre of the 7
cosmos, and each chapter of physics corresponded to a particular area of bodily sensation. 8
One such chapter was optics. It was about how knowledge of the surrounding world could 9
be obtained through the eye. Light, denoted by the term lux, was both the source of illu- 20
mination and the medium in which this knowledge was supposed to be represented. As 1
such it originated from the centre, with man, rather than from the cosmic periphery. But 2
the Copernican revolution overthrew this anthropocentric cosmology. By the ﬁrst half of 3
the seventeenth century, when Descartes was writing, humankind had been relegated 4
to the periphery of a universe that was supposed to run on principles entirely indifferent 5
to human sensibilities. The task of physics was now to discover these principles. Among 6
them are those whereby some physical impulse is propagated that, along with other effects, 7
stimulates a reaction in the eyes. This impulse came to be known as lumen. Now when 8
Descartes tells us that it is the soul that sees in the light of reason, rather than the eye 9
in the light of the physical world, the light he is referring to is clearly the lux of the 30
ancients – the light that shines in the mind.12 But when to the contrary, as throughout 1
the Optics, he speaks of light as reﬂected rays that excite the eye, he evidently intends to 2
refer to the lumen of the physicists. The paradox of the Optics is that while vision ‘goes 3
indoors’, from the world to the mind, light ‘goes outdoors’ from the mind to the world. 4
And as Descartes showed, this external light – lumen – is the one thing we cannot see. 5
The result is a curious disjunction between light and sight: the former on the outside, 6
the latter on the inside, of an interface between mind and world. In short, sight begins 7
where light ends.
Although more than three centuries have passed since Descartes was writing, we are 9
still no clearer about the meaning of light. From contemporary physics we learn that light 40
is a form of radiation that consists of waves or photons. This is to understand light in 1
the sense of lumen. Yet most people, naturally enough, continue to equate light – as the 2
thinkers of antiquity did – with the lux that illuminates the world of their perception. 3
They are convinced, however, that this lux is the same as the physicists’ lumen, and there- 4
fore that it has an external existence quite independent of their own eyes. Thus it is said 5
that light travels from external objects to the eyes, and that we see because of it. And it 6
is supposed that even if we close our eyes, the environment is still illuminated, as it was 7
before. Yet we know that in fact, whatever reaches the eyes from outside (waves, photons) 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 257 •

gets no further than the back of the retina. And the experience on which we report, of
an illuminated world, is apparently possible thanks to what goes on beyond that point,
in the optic nerves and the brain. So is there light only in consequence of the stimulation of the retinal surface? Does it exist only on the hither side of eyesight? And if so,
how can we claim, at one and the same time, that light reaches the eyes from afar? Physics
has colluded in this confusion, though in the reverse direction. For notwithstanding its
redeﬁnition from a physiology of the senses to an objective science of nature, it continues
to describe as ‘optics’ that branch of study dealing with light and its propagation, even
though in practice it has nothing whatever to do with the eye.
Vasco Ronchi, in the introduction to his Optics of 1957, illustrates these problems in
the conception of light by drawing an intriguing parallel with sound. The equivalent
of the distinction between lumen and lux is, in this case, that between mechanical vibration in the external medium and the sound we claim to hear when our ears are placed
within its ﬁeld of action. By rights, there should be no such thing as a physics of sound.
For as there is no sound without an ear and a brain, the study of sound – that is, acoustics
– could be undertaken only by combining the physics of vibratory motion with the physiology of the ear and the psychology of aural perception. Yet physicists, anxious to reserve
acoustics for themselves, and not to get mixed up with subjective phenomena of mind
and perception, persist in equating the vibrations that induce in the listener an experience of sound with the sound itself, thus perpetuating the error that ‘sound is actually a
physical, not a mental phenomenon’ (Ronchi 1957: 17). And so everyone else is happy
to go along with the illusion that sound actually travels through the air and is received
as such by the listener, when in fact all that reach the ears are vibrations and there is no
sound until these have been transformed into nerve impulses and carried to the mindbrain.
But if there is really no sound in the physical world beyond the brain, are we to
conclude that this world is silent? And likewise, if there is really no lux in the external
world, are we to conclude that the world ‘out there’ is dark? This is, indeed, the conclusion to which Ronchi moves. Our minds are ﬁlled with sound and light, even though
neither vibrations nor rays reach there, while the vibrant and radiant world is actually
silent and dark. Yet what can silence mean in a world without ears, or darkness in a world
without eyes? Questions about the meaning of light, as of sound, are surely wrongly posed
if they force us to choose between regarding light and sound as either physical or mental
phenomena. They are wrongly posed because they continue to regard the organs of sense
as gateways between an external, physical world and an internal world of mind.
Thus Ronchi, like Descartes before him, thinks of vision as a process that starts with
a movement in the world which, via a propagation of waves or particles that happen to
enter the eyes, causes impulses to travel along the optic nerves to the brain, and ends with
these impulses being ‘turned over to the mind’ which – on the basis of a comparison with
information already in its possession – ‘creates a luminous and colored ﬁgure’ (Ronchi
1957: 288). According to this view, a physiology of vision can tell us about what happens
on the far side of the ‘turn-over’ point, and a psychology of vision can tell us what happens
on the near side. Neither kind of account, however, can embrace the ‘turning over’ itself.
How it is that nervous impulses are passed to the mind – or how they ‘tickle’ the soul,
as Descartes rather quaintly put it (1988: 65) – remains a mystery.
It is my contention that there is no such interface between eye and mind. Far from
starting with incident radiation and ﬁnishing up with a mental image, the process of vision
consists in a never-ending, two-way process of engagement between the perceiver and his

Dwelling
or her environment. This is what we mean when we speak of vision, colloquially, as 1
‘looking’ or ‘watching’. And what Ronchi presents as a turn-over point is not that at all, 2
but a critical nexus in this process. It is at this nexus, rather than on either the near or 3
the far side of it, that the phenomenon we know as ‘light’ is generated. This phenom- 4
enon is not the objective, external lumen, nor is it the subjective, interior lux. It is rather 5
a phenomenon of experience, of that very involvement in the world that is a necessary 6
precondition for the isolation of the perceiver as a subject with a ‘mind’, and of the 7
environment as a domain of objects to be perceived. Establishing this understanding of 8
the process of vision and of the nature of light will be our next task.
THREE TWENTIETH-CENTURY THINKERS
In order to set out the groundwork for an alternative metaphysics of vision, I shall embark 3
in what follows on a kind of theoretical triangulation. I do this by reviewing the ideas of 4
three mid-twentieth-century thinkers, all of whom had important things to say about 5
vision which were critical, in one way or another, of Descartes. The ﬁrst, Hans Jonas, 6
went out of his way to stress the differences between vision, hearing and touch as sensory 7
modalities. For him, vision was indeed the superior sense, due not to its identiﬁcation 8
with reason, but to its peculiar phenomenal properties. The second, James Gibson, rejected 9
the two-stage model of visual perception, and with it the classic Cartesian dualism of body 20
and mind. Gibson argued that perception is an activity not of the mind, upon the deliv- 1
erances of sense, but of the whole organism in its environmental setting. Vision is not, 2
then, indirect, as Descartes maintained, but direct. The third, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 3
has perhaps gone further than any other recent thinker in recognising that vision is not 4
just a matter of seeing things but is crucially an experience of light. Refusing to set up 5
any absolute boundary, or line of demarcation, between the perceiver and the perceived, 6
Merleau-Ponty held that light is tantamount to what we experience, in vision, as an 7
opening up of the body onto the world.
Hans Jonas
The distinctiveness of sight, for Jonas, lies in three properties that are unique to this 2
sensory modality: namely, simultaneity, neutralisation and distance (Jonas 1966: 136). The 3
ﬁrst refers to the ability to take in the world at a glance, so that a manifold that is present 4
all at once can likewise be apprehended all at once. Neither hearing nor touch can achieve 5
this. Reiterating a well-established view that we have already encountered, Jonas argues 6
that whereas one can see things, one hears only sounds rather than the entities whose 7
activity gives rise to them. Thus one hears the bark but not the dog, whose presence can 8
only be inferred on the basis of non-acoustic information. And there is no sound that is 9
not suspended in the current of time. The duration of the sound one hears is the same 40
as that of one’s hearing it; what is disclosed over time is also apprehended over time. 1
True, distinct sounds may coexist or be juxtaposed, but each belongs to one of several 2
‘strands’ proceeding concurrently, and cannot be apprehended apart from the temporal 3
ﬂow. Arrest the ﬂow and what you have is not a coherent snapshot, but a collection of 4
atomic fragments. Touch shares with hearing this quality of temporality, at least so far as 5
the perceiver is concerned. Yet unlike hearing, the data of touch can be synthesised to 6
reveal the stable presence of objects. In this respect, touch comes closer to vision: thus, 7
up to a point, the blind can achieve with their hands what the sighted achieve with their 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 259 •

eyes. Nevertheless, the difference between touch and vision remains fundamental. The
discovery of objects through touch necessitates an active exploration of the environment:
this calls for movement and takes time. With vision you have only to open your eyes,
and the world is there, already spread out as a ground for any further exploration of it.
Only with vision, therefore, is it possible to distinguish being from becoming, and hence
to entertain a concept of change. For hearing and touch, since they can know the world
only through the movement of perceptual activity, there is neither change nor stasis, only
becoming (Jonas 1966: 136–45).
The second property of sight, what Jonas calls neutralisation, lies in the disengagement
between the perceiver and the seen. Touching something entails an action on your part,
to which the object responds according to its nature. Hearing presupposes an action on
the part of the object which generates the sound, to which you respond according to your
sensibility. Thus while the balance of agency shifts from the subject (in touch) to the
object (in hearing), there is in both an engagement between them, of a kind that is entirely
absent from vision. The object need do nothing to be seen, since the source of the light
by which it is revealed lies elsewhere. And to see the object one does not have to take up
an attitude towards it. ‘In seeing’, Jonas writes, ‘the percipient remains entirely free from
causal involvement in the things to be perceived’ (1966: 148). Thus vision is neutralising
since it reveals the object simply for what it is. What is lost in terms of an intuitive understanding of the connectedness of things is gained in terms of objectivity. Rather than
affecting the perceiver, as touch and hearing do, vision offers to the perceiver an image
which, handed over to thought, can be manipulated at will, without further consequence
for the object itself. But precisely because of their neutralisation, the objects of vision are
in a sense ‘mute’, since in revealing their presence they do not speak to us or address
human concerns (Jonas 1966: 145–9).
The third property of sight, spatial distance, is relatively self-evident. In an environment free from obstruction we can see a long way. Touch does not extend beyond the
reach of the body, augmented perhaps by sticks or other such prostheses. Sound carries
further, but has its limits, and is especially susceptible to distortion at the margins.
Moreover when I hear a far-off sound, though I may be able to estimate the direction
and distance of its source from where I now stand, I still have no idea – from the acoustic
information alone – of what lies in between. It is peculiar to vision, by contrast, that it
reveals not only distant objects, but also an encompassing landscape that stretches out
from my present location to the horizon. I could, then, set out along a path that would
take me to any one of these objects, with some foreknowledge of what to expect along
the way (Jonas 1966: 149–52). Yet in an appendix, Jonas adds a crucial qualiﬁcation to
this argument. As he now admits, vision would never reveal the world in the way it does,
arranged in depth and stretching away from us, were we not already used to moving
through it, and in so doing, incorporating its features into structures of tactile awareness.
Touch, in a word, conﬁrms the materiality of the visible. Hence the motility of the body
is a factor in the very constitution of vision and of the seen world. At ﬁrst glance, this
proposition seems at odds with the thesis of the simultaneity of visual perception: that
the world can be taken in at a glance, from a ﬁxed standpoint. Jonas’s solution to the
paradox is to argue that we are able to view the world as a spectacle, from a position of
rest, precisely because we do so in the light of the ‘accumulated experience of performed
motion’ (1966: 154) resulting from a history of previous activities. In short, the dynamics
of bodily movement establish the essential foundation for the static experience of vision,
but are not themselves part of that experience (Jonas 1966: 152–6).

Dwelling
With this last point, Gibson would have found himself in fundamental disagreement. 3
Movement, in his view, is as integral to vision as it is to touch; moreover there is no need 4
for the one sense to be validated by the other (Gibson 1966: 55). I shall not here attempt 5
a full review of Gibson’s ecological approach to visual perception, as others have done so 6
elsewhere (Michaels and Carello 1981, Reed 1988b; see also Chapter Nine, pp. 166–8). 7
However there are three aspects of this approach that I am particularly concerned to bring 8
out here. First, I shall explain more precisely what Gibson meant by saying that visual as 9
well as other modalities of perception are direct rather than indirect. Secondly, I show 10
how Gibson’s conception of the senses as perceptual systems, rather than as stimulus- 1
speciﬁc registers of experience, renders the distinctions between vision, hearing and touch 2
far less clearcut than we are inclined to think. Thirdly, I want to explore the speciﬁc argu- 3
ment by which Gibson denies that we ever see light as such. In this, I suggest, his ideas 4
are still ﬁrmly rooted in the Cartesian tradition.
For Descartes, it will be recalled, the mind is unable to mingle with the world. Locked 6
within the conﬁnes of a body, all it can do is to perform various calculative manoeuvres, 7
on the basis of stimuli registered in the brain, in order to build up a more or less accu- 8
rate representation of the world outside. This is what Descartes meant by describing 9
perception – whether visual or tactile – as indirect. Gibson maintains, to the contrary, 20
that perception is direct. By this he does not mean that it can somehow bypass the brain; 1
any such suggestion would obviously be absurd. His point is rather that we should cease 2
thinking of perception as the computational activity of a mind within a body, and regard 3
it instead as the exploratory activity of the organism within its environment. As such, it 4
does not yield images or representations. It rather guides the organism along in the further- 5
ance of its project. The perceptually acute organism is one whose movements are closely 6
tuned and ever responsive to environmental perturbations. For this reason, visual percep- 7
tion can never be disinterested or purely contemplative, as Jonas claimed. What we see is 8
inseparable from how we see, and how we see is always a function of the practical activity 9
in which we are currently engaged.
On the face of it Gibson would seem to agree with Descartes, that sight and touch are 1
strictly comparable as modes of sensory contact with the environment. ‘In many respects’, 2
he writes, ‘the [haptic] system parallels vision’ (1966: 134). Moreover we have seen that 3
Gibson’s view that perception of any kind depends on movement of the perceiver relative 4
to the perceived also ﬁnds resonances in Descartes. Beneath the apparent convergence, 5
however, their respective positions are diametrically opposed. For on the axis of contrast 6
that Jonas draws between neutralisation and engagement, and which for him distinguishes 7
sight from touch, the Cartesian perspective would join touch with sight on the side of 8
neutralisation, whereas the Gibsonian perspective joins sight with touch on the side 9
of engagement. Or to sum up:
Touch
Sight
Descartes:
Neutralisation
Neutralisation
Jonas:
Engagement
Neutralisation
Gibson:
Engagement
Engagement
It would be wrong, Gibson argues, to think of the eyes, the ears or the sensitive surfaces 7
of the skin simply as loci for banks of receptor cells that are, in turn, hooked up to centres 118

James Gibson

Vision, hearing and human movement • 261 •

of projection in the brain. Rather, they are to be understood as integral parts of a body
that is continually on the move, actively exploring the environment in the practical pursuit
of its life in the world. Sight, for instance, is not an effect of the stimulation of photoreceptors in the retina, coupled to processors in the visual cortex. It is rather an achievement
of a system that also encompasses the neuromuscular linkages controlling the movement
and orientation of the organs in which the receptors are located. These organs may be
speciﬁed on a number of levels of increasing inclusivity: thus ‘the eye is part of a dual
organ, one of a pair of mobile eyes, and they are set in a head that can turn, attached to
a body that can move from place to place’. Together these organs comprise what Gibson
calls the perceptual system for vision (Gibson 1979: 53, cf. 1966). Much of this is shared
with the system for hearing, and with that for touch. The head, for example, is common
to vision and hearing: the action of turning the head so as to balance the auditory input
from a sound source to the two ears, located on each side, also turns the eyes, at the
front, so that they are oriented directly towards the source. As this example demonstrates,
the perceptual systems not only overlap in their functions, but are also subsumed under
a total system of bodily orientation (Gibson 1966: 4, 49–51; 1979: 245). Looking, listening
and touching, therefore, are not separate activities, they are just different facets of the
same activity: that of the whole organism in its environment.
Hence the idea, proposed by Jonas, that having made a thorough exploration of the
world through movement, relying on the sense of touch, one could then stop still and
take it in at a glance through the eyes, would have made no sense to Gibson. This is for
two reasons: ﬁrst, that we explore the world with our eyes open (and even when we stop
we look about); and secondly, that vision does not yield a snapshot, or even a series of
snapshots. It rather yields an appreciation of objects ‘in the round’. We do not see an
object, any more than we feel it, from a single point of view. Rather, by ‘running our
eyes over it’ – as we might run our ﬁngers over it in tactile perception – we discover its
form as the envelope of a movement, that is of the continuous modulation of the array
of reﬂected light reaching the eyes. Indeed it is because vision, like touch, takes place over
time along what Gibson calls a ‘path of observation’ (1979: 197), that we can see aspects
of objects which, at any particular moment, may be hidden by occluding edges. And since
the information yielded by the operation of perceptual systems is speciﬁc to the things
encountered, rather than to the particular sensory keyboard that is activated, a switch in
the balance of stimulation – say from the tactile to the visual – may make little appreciable difference to what is actually perceived. Of course the sensations of vision are not
the same as those of touch and hearing. But the ‘patterns in the ﬂux of sound, touch,
and light from the environment’, which specify the objects of one’s attention, may be
strictly equivalent (Gibson 1966: 54–5; 1979: 243).
This argument carries an important corollary. For if what we see is delineated by the
patterning or modulation of reﬂected light as it is picked up by the moving organs of
sight, then the one thing we never actually see must be light itself. To the question, ‘Of
all the possible things that can be seen, is light one of them?’, Gibson answers categorically in the negative (1979: 54). Rather, he says, we see things by means of light. In view
of Gibson’s resolutely anti-Cartesian stance, this conclusion – which is fully in accord
with Descartes’ views on the matter – comes as something of a surprise. Indeed he admits
to being vexed by the question of how certain phenomena seem to announce their presence directly, as radiant light, rather than by way of the illumination of their surfaces
(1966: 220). Is this not how we come to perceive a ﬂaming ﬁre, a candle lamp, the sun
and moon, a shaft of sunlight through the clouds, a rainbow, the glare of the sun reﬂected

Dwelling
from a glossy surface, or the scintillations of light off water? Intuitively, it seems that in 1
every one of these cases light is just what we do see. Yet for each, Gibson has his answer: 2
the ﬁre and the lamp are ‘speciﬁc objects and are so speciﬁed’, as are the celestial bodies. 3
We do not really see shafts of sunlight, but only illuminated particles in the air. Dazzled 4
by the sun, what we actually perceive is a ‘fact about the body’, namely its excessive optical 5
stimulation, experienced as a kind of pain. As for rainbows, scintillations and the like, 6
these ‘are all manifestations of light, not light as such’ (1979: 55).
But as the examples mount up, Gibson’s defence becomes less and less plausible. In 8
what sense can we possibly regard a ﬂame as an object? Ignoring the knowledge of science 9
and schoolbooks, how are the sun and moon speciﬁed?13 When it comes to beams of 10
sunlight, common sense tells us that we see the light by way of airborne particles, and 1
not vice versa. If excessive optical stimulation causes pain, does this make it any less an 2
experience of light? What if the glare were less intense, and caused no appreciable discom- 3
fort: would we, then, cease to be aware of it? Finally, it is difﬁcult to see how ‘manifestations 4
of light’ can possibly be distinguished from ‘light as such’ without resorting to a highly 5
reductive notion of what light actually is. Indeed this is precisely what Gibson does. ‘All 6
we ever see’, he insists, ‘is the environment or facts about the environment, never photons 7
or radiant energy’ (1979: 55, my emphasis). Gibson’s ‘light’, in short, is the lumen of 8
modern physics.14 At no point does he ever think of it as anything other than a kind of 9
energetic impulse, a source of stimulation that, if it exceeds a certain threshold, causes 20
photoreceptor cells to ‘ﬁre’. The resulting sensations, he insists, do not in themselves 1
constitute the basis for visual perception. No amount of light will cause us to see, unless 2
that light is structured on account of its reﬂection from illuminated surfaces in the environ- 3
ment. Thus light carries the information for perception, but is never perceived as such. 4
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
It is here, above all, that Gibson’s ecological psychology parts company with the phenom- 8
enology of Merleau-Ponty. Though they speak very different intellectual languages, there 9
is much in common between what Gibson and Merleau-Ponty have to say. For both, the 30
senses exist not as distinct registers whose separate impressions are combined only at higher 1
levels of cognitive processing, but as aspects of functioning of the whole body in move- 2
ment, brought together in the very action of its involvement in an environment. Any one 3
sense, in ‘homing in’ on a particular topic of attention, brings with it the concordant 4
operations of all the others. In his Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty compares 5
this integration of the senses in action to the collaboration of the eyes in binocular vision 6
(1962: 230–3). Just as the unity of the object of vision is not the result of some ‘third 7
person process’ which produces a single image out of two monocular images, but is rather 8
given in the way the two eyes ‘are used as a single organ by one single gaze’, so the unity 9
of a thing as an ‘inter-sensory entity’ lies not in the mental fusion of images founded on 40
different registers of sensation, but in the bodily synergy of the senses in their convergent 1
striving towards a common goal. Thus ‘my gaze, my touch and all my other senses are 2
together the powers of one and the same body integrated into one and the same action’ 3
(1962: 317–18). In short, for Merleau-Ponty as for Gibson, it is in their collaborative 4
bearing on features of the world, rather than their common accountability to processing 5
centres in the mind, that the senses are conjoined.
Like Gibson, too, Merleau-Ponty regards touch and vision as comparable modes of 7
sensory engagement with the environment. This is not to say they are equivalent, since 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 263 •

each brings with it ‘a structure of being that can never be exactly transposed’ (1962: 225).
That is why formerly blind persons, whose sight has been restored, initially ﬁnd their
predicament so bewildering: tactile experience turns out to be a poor guide to the visual
world, not because it is relatively impoverished but because the tactile world is differently
structured (1962: 222–4). Nevertheless, Merleau-Ponty surmises that the visual gaze functions as a ‘natural instrument’ of perception in much the same way as does the blind
man’s stick (1962: 153). The analogy, of course, is drawn from Descartes. Yet in his celebrated essay on ‘Eye and mind’, Merleau-Ponty takes it as the starting point for an all-out
attack on the whole Cartesian programme (Merleau-Ponty 1964a: 169–78). His objection, however, is not to the comparison of the visual gaze to the tactile probe, but to the
idea that both are harnessed to the project of constructing internal representations of an
external reality. The truth, he maintains, is quite otherwise. For like the stick, the gaze is
caught up in a dialogic, exploratory encounter between the perceiver and the world, in
which every movement on the part of the perceiver is a questioning, and every reaction
on the part of the perceived is a response. Thus ‘the gaze gets more or less from things
according to the way it questions them, ranges over or dwells on them’ (1962: 153).
Both Gibson and Merleau-Ponty are adamant in their rejection of the Cartesian idea
of vision, in Merleau-Ponty’s words, ‘as an operation of thought that would set up before
the mind a picture or a representation of the world’ (1964a: 162). Indeed the perceiver,
they would say, has no need for such a picture in order to act in a way that is attuned
to the features of his or her surroundings. Since my body inhabits the world, and since
– to all intents and purposes – I and my body are one and the same (Merleau-Ponty
1962: 206), it follows that I, too, am an inhabitant of the world rather than of a space
inside my head. And for the same reason, I can always consult the world to orient my
movements, rather than an internal cognitive representation. Like Gibson, Merleau-Ponty
stressed that while there cannot be vision without movement, this movement must also
be visually guided: it must ‘have its antennae, its clairvoyance’ (1964a: 162). But whereas
Gibson asked how it is possible for the perceiver to see objects in the environment,
Merleau-Ponty went one step further back. For how could there be an environment full
of objects, he asked, except for a being that is already immersed in the lifeworld, in ‘the
soil of the sensible’ (1964a: 160), and therefore caught up in a visual ﬁeld that is preobjectively given? Such involvement must be ontologically prior to the objectiﬁcation of
the environment that Gibson takes as his point of departure. In short, before ‘I see things’
must come ‘I can see’. So what does it mean, to see?
Merleau-Ponty’s essay ‘Eye and mind’, his last published work, is an attempt to answer
this question. The arguments of the essay are not easy to follow, but one can get the gist
of them by performing a simple experiment. Close your eyes for a while, and then open
them again. Do you have the impression that you are staring out upon the world through
a hole (or perhaps two holes) in the front of your head? Is it as though you were looking
through the windows of your unlit house, having opened the shutters?15 Far from it.
Rather, it seems that you are out there yourself, shamelessly mingling with all you see,
and ﬂitting around like an agile spirit from one place to another as the focus of your
attention shifts. It is as if the walls and ceiling of your house had simply vanished, leaving
you out in the open. In short, you experience seeing not as seeing out, but as being out
– until, that is, you close your eyes again, at which point the spirit is instantly captured
and put back inside, imprisoned in the dark and eery conﬁnes of a shuttered enclosure,
your head. For Descartes the light of the mind (lux) was in this darkness, which is why
he thought the blind could see. But experience teaches us differently. It is, as Merleau-

Dwelling
Ponty writes, that through vision ‘we come into contact with the sun and the stars, that 1
we are everywhere all at once’. Or again, vision ‘is the means given me for being absent 2
from myself ’ (1964a: 186–7). We now have a clue to what Merleau-Ponty meant by his 3
repeated insistence on the indistinguishability of the seeing and the seen, or the ‘sensor 4
and the sensible’ (cf. 1962: 214). This is primordially evident in the case of my body, 5
which both sees and is seen, but equally true of the whole ‘fabric of the world’ in which 6
it is caught up. And we can understand what he means by the assertion that vision is not 7
of things but happens among them. For it is constitutive of the whole perceptual ﬁeld, 8
drawn around myself at its centre, which both they and I inhabit.
All this is a far cry from the picture that Jonas paints of the immobile and detached 10
spectator, contemplating a world with which he has no causal involvement whatever. 1
Returning to an opposition that I have already introduced in the context of my initial 2
discussion of the anthropology of the senses, Merleau-Ponty replaces the image of the 3
spectator with that of the seer. ‘Immersed in the visible by his body’, he writes, ‘the see- 4
er does not appropriate what he sees; he merely approaches it by looking, he opens himself 5
to the world’ (1964a: 162). Raise your eyelids, and you ﬁnd yourself, almost literally, ‘in 6
the open’. Indeed, this little phrase perfectly captures what Merleau-Ponty portrays as the 7
magic – or delirium (1964a: 166) – of vision. We live in visual space from the inside, 8
we inhabit it, yet that space is already outside, open to the horizon. Thus the boundary 9
between inside and outside, or between self and world, is dissolved. The space of vision 20
both surrounds us and passes through us (1964a: 178). Elsewhere, Merleau-Ponty imag- 1
ines himself gazing up at the blue sky:
As I contemplate the blue of the sky I am not set over against it as an acosmic subject; 4
I do not possess it in thought, or spread out towards it some idea of blue such as might 5
reveal the secret of it . . . I am the sky itself as it is drawn together and uniﬁed, and 6
as it begins to exist for itself; my consciousness is saturated with this limitless blue.
(1962: 214, original emphases) 8
Compare this with Gibson, who answers his own question of how one might visually 30
perceive ‘a luminous ﬁeld, such as the sky?’, with the response: ‘To me it seems that I see 1
the sky, not luminosity as such’ (1979: 54).
The sky presents a problem for Gibson precisely because he is unable to countenance 3
the environment in any other way than as a world of objects ‘set over against’ the perceiver, 4
and revealed through the patterns of ambient light reﬂected from its opaque, outer surfaces. 5
Yet the sky has no surface. It is not a thing, like a building or a tree, off which light 6
rebounds. On the contrary, the sky is openness or transparency itself, sheer luminosity, 7
against which things stand out by virtue of their opacity or closure. To suppose, as Gibson 8
does, that one sees the sky as distinct from its luminosity is like pretending that one hears 9
thunder rather than its sound, or feels the wind rather than a current of air. What is 40
thunder if not sound, or the wind if not airﬂow? On hearing thunder, or feeling the wind, 1
it is as though one’s very being mingles with the surrounding medium and resonates with 2
its vibrations. Likewise, sunlight and moonlight present themselves to vision, in Merleau- 3
Ponty’s words, as ‘kinds of symbiosis, certain ways the outside has of invading us and 4
certain ways we have of meeting this invasion’ (1962: 317). This is not to reduce light 5
to radiant energy or photons, as in a physicalist description; nor is it to conclude, on the 6
other extreme, that light shines only in the mind while the world might as well be pitch 7
dark. It is to recognise that for persons who can see, light is the experience of inhabiting 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 265 •

the world of the visible, and that its qualities – of brilliance and shade, tint and colour,
and saturation – are variations upon this experience.16
Perhaps Gibson was right, after all, to say that we do not see light ‘as such’, since light
is not an object. It rather constitutes, for the sighted, the pre-objective foundation of existence, that commingling of the subject with the world without which there could not be
visible things, or ‘facts about the environment’, at all. Light, in short, is the ground of
being out of which things coalesce – or from which they stand forth – as objects of attention. Thus as Merleau-Ponty writes (1964a: 178), we do not so much see light as see in
it. And for all who can see in it, the experience of light is perfectly real. Indeed we have
no more reason to doubt the reality of light than we have to question the experience of
blindness for those who cannot see in it. Yet we are all too ready to take it for granted:
it is the very familiarity of our experience, of that openness to the world sensed as light,
that causes it to hide from us. So busily preoccupied are we with all the things that vision
reveals to us that we forget the foundational experience upon which it rests. The process
of seeing in light is swallowed up by its products, objects of sight. And by the same token,
the joy and astonishment of the discovery that ‘I can see’ gives way to the mundane indifference of ‘I see things’. The message of Merleau-Ponty is that we need to reverse this
perspective, to recover the sense of vision that is original to our experience of the world,
and that is a precondition for its objectiﬁcation.17
This, ﬁnally, is what motivates the work of the painter. A painting, for Merleau-Ponty,
is not just another object of vision. You do not look at it, nor do you see it, as you would
any ordinary thing. Rather, you ‘see according to it, or with it’ (1964a: 164). Like all sighted
people, painters see in light, and it is the inspiration for their work. They cannot afford to
dismiss their experience as an illusion, and nor can we, unless we wish to write off the history
of painting as an aberration caused by the overstimulation of excessively susceptible minds
(1964a: 186–7). However the painter’s vision, Merleau-Ponty insists, ‘is not a view from
the outside, a merely “physical-optical” relation with the world’. It is rather a ‘continued
birth’, as though at every moment the painter opened his eyes to the world, like a new-born
infant, for the ﬁrst time. The birth of his vision is, at one and the same time, the ‘concentration or coming-to-itself of the visible’. And so the painting to which it gives rise is an
embodiment of this creative movement: it does not represent things, or a world, but shows
‘how things become things, how the world becomes a world’ (1964a: 167–8, 181).18 Thus
to see with, or according to, a painting is to question the ordinariness of our everyday
perception of objects, to rekindle in us the astonishment of vision, and to remind us that
there are things in the world to be seen only because we ﬁrst can see.
In the course of this review of the ideas of our three thinkers – Jonas, Gibson and MerleauPonty – we have progressed from a notion of vision as a mode of speculation, to one of
vision as a mode of participation, and ﬁnally to one of vision as a mode of being. For
Jonas the visual world is presented to the disinterested observer as a scene or spectacle;
for Gibson it becomes an environment that surrounds the engaged participant but whose
preformed surfaces nevertheless remain closed and impenetrable to the eye. For MerleauPonty the visual world is given to subjective experience as a cosmos that is open and
transparent, that one can see into rather than merely look at, and that continually comes
into existence around the perceiver. As we have already seen, recent debates in both anthropology and philosophy concerning the role of the senses in human societies have tended
to assume that vision is inherently speculative, and have paid little heed to the possibility
of alternative modalities. When it comes to touch and especially sound, however, a quite

Dwelling
different view prevails, and this has led to the positing of a great sensory divide between 1
visual perception on the one hand, and auditory and tactile perception on the other, and 2
with it, between Western societies in which the former allegedly dominates, and non- 3
Western societies which are said to be given over to the latter. My aim, now, is to replace 4
the orthodox, speculative notion of vision with a participatory or existential one. Once 5
this is done, the ‘great divide’ simply vanishes.
THE HEARING EYE AND THE SEEING EAR
After that long excursion into theories of vision, our immediate priority must be to return 10
to sound and hearing. Earlier on, I cited a passage from the work of the musicologist 1
Zuckerkandl, Sound and Symbol (1956), in which he contrasts the properties of sight and 2
hearing by way of a rather gross characterisation of the attitudes of deaf and blind people. 3
I shall consider what such people have to say about their own sensory experience in the 4
following section. For the moment, however, I intend to look rather more closely at 5
Zuckerkandl’s study, for two reasons. First, I want to bring out the close parallels between 6
the way Zuckerkandl speaks of the musical experience of sound, and the way Merleau- 7
Ponty speaks of the painterly experience of light. These experiences, it turns out, are 8
virtually identical. Secondly, although Zuckerkandl maintains that vision and hearing are 9
generally opposed, he admits that this is not universally so, and towards the end of his 20
study he speculates that this opposition may not have been given from the start, either 1
in the development of the individual or in the evolution of human culture. If he is right 2
in supposing that vision split off from hearing in the course of an evolution towards 3
modern Western civilisation, then it is clearly inadmissible to retroject the resulting distinc- 4
tion between these sensory modalities onto humanity at large.
For the most part, Zuckerkandl is quite categorical about the difference between 6
the way in which the world is perceived through the eye and through the ear. The eye 7
reinforces a barrier separating two domains: the inner domain of the mind or conscious- 8
ness, and the outer domain of the world. It keeps things at a distance. They stay ‘out 9
there’, ﬁxed in their proper places in an overall spatial array that can be mapped out in 30
terms of intervals and boundaries. The space of vision is one from which you, the viewer, 1
are excluded, a space where things are but you are not. Thus the visual experience of 2
space is essentially disjunctive. The domains of ‘inner’ and ‘outer’, as Zuckerkandl writes, 3
‘face each other like two mutually exclusive precincts on either side of an impassable 4
dividing line’. But in hearing, the distinction between ‘precincts’ is transformed into one 5
between ‘directions’. In the inward direction, the world penetrates consciousness; in 6
the reverse, outward direction, consciousness penetrates the world (1956: 368–9). In place 7
of the barrier that the eye throws up around the perceiving subject, the ear builds a 8
bridge which allows a two-way ﬂow of sensory trafﬁc. When you see things that are far 9
away, they are perceived to be at a distance, but when you hear far-off sounds they 40
seem to be coming from a distance (p. 291). The space of hearing, then, is not set over 1
against you, the listener, but streams towards you and into you. It is a space not of 2
places but of ﬂows, where nothing can be divided and nothing measured. Your auditory 3
experience is essentially participatory, one of immersion in a ‘boundless indivisible one- 4
ness’ (p. 336). And so the quality ‘out there’, that we experience in vision, is replaced 5
by the quality ‘from-out-there-toward-me-and-through-me’. Or in other words, the step 6
from visual to auditory perception is ‘like a transition from a static to a ﬂuid medium’ 7
(p. 277).

Vision, hearing and human movement • 267 •

What I ﬁnd so remarkable about Zuckerkandl’s account of hearing is that it matches
point by point, almost down to the details of the rhetoric, what Merleau-Ponty has to say
about vision. We have only to recall Merleau-Ponty’s conception of visual space as
both ‘surrounding’ and ‘passing through’ the perceiver, of consciousness as ‘saturated’ with
luminosity, of the seer as ‘immersed’ in the visible, of the outside ‘invading’ us and of our
‘meeting this invasion’ (1962: 214, 317; 1964a: 162, 178). Echoing Zuckerkandl’s notion
of inward and outward currents, Merleau-Ponty speaks of an ‘inspiration and expiration of
Being, action and passion so slightly discernible that it becomes impossible to distinguish
between what sees and what is seen’ (1964a: 167). Revealing, too, is the fact that in order
to convey the sense of what he means by vision, Merleau-Ponty has occasional recourse to
auditory metaphor – the precise reverse of the use of visual metaphor to describe auditory
experience that we have already encountered in the Saussurian notion of the sound-image.
‘Quality, light, colour, depth’, he writes, ‘are there only because they awaken an echo in
our body and because the body welcomes them’ (1964a: 164). If for Saussure it sometimes
seems as though the sounds of speech were seen and not heard, for Merleau-Ponty it can
seem as though we listen with the eyes. In other words, though our experience may be one
of seeing in light, it is nevertheless an experience that has all the qualities of hearing.
This thought had also occurred to Zuckerkandl. It arises in the context of a discussion
of the pros and cons of either playing or listening to music with the eyes closed. According
to one view, the eye is so closely implicated in a particular apprehension of space, occupied by ‘corporeal things in their places’, that it actively inhibits our involvement in the
ﬂuid space of forces that music opens up to us. It holds us back, and makes us unwilling
to entrust ourselves with the whole of our being to sound. But Zuckerkandl is not fully
convinced. Is it really necessary, he asks, to blind ourselves temporarily in order properly
to hear? Is vision capable only of seeing things in their places? ‘Can the eye perhaps hear
too?’ (1956: 341). Zuckerkandl believes that it can, albeit exceptionally, and that there
are indeed ‘activities of the eye that go beyond the function of seeing a thing in a place
– and go beyond it in a particular direction, which it seems natural to compare with the
mode of perception of the ear’ (p. 344, my emphases). To exemplify the point Zuckerkandl
imagines himself, just as had Merleau-Ponty before him, gazing into the blue sky. What
he sees is not a ‘thing out there’ but ‘boundless space, in which I lose myself ’. But whereas
Merleau-Ponty uses this example to illustrate the coalescence of the perceiver and the
world which he takes to be fundamental to apprehending the space of vision, Zuckerkandl
uses it to clarify his conception of auditory space! For him, the experience one has, looking
up at the sky, is precisely what it means to hear.
It seems, then, that the kind of opening up to the world that Merleau-Ponty calls seeing
is more or less identical to that which Zuckerkandl calls hearing. In Zuckerkandl’s book,
everything that Merleau-Ponty has to say about painterly vision would fall under the rubric
of ‘hearing with the eyes’. Indeed it is above all in the realm of painting, he thinks, that
we ﬁnd a perception of forces and dynamic relations strictly akin to the hearing of tones
in music. The space of the picture, along with the things represented therein, ‘is not
simply set off from the observer; rather it opens itself to him, takes him into itself, passes
into him’ (Zuckerkandl 1956: 345). But reversing the perspective, all of what Zuckerkandl
says about hearing could be regarded, from Merleau-Ponty’s angle, as ‘seeing with the
ears’. This expectation is conﬁrmed in the Phenomenology of Perception, where MerleauPonty devotes special attention to ‘the sight of sounds’. Thus ‘when I say that I see a
sound, I mean that I echo the vibration of the sound with my whole sensory being’ (1962:
234). This equivalence of seeing and hearing, however, raises an intriguing question. When

Dwelling
we hear with the eyes, or conversely when we see with the ears, is the experience one of 1
light or sound?
Before we can answer this question, we have ﬁrst to recognise that sound is no more a 3
physical impulse that arrives from outside than it is a purely mental, ‘inside the head’ phe- 4
nomenon. Indeed everything we have said about light applies to sound also. Like light, 5
sound exists neither on the inner nor on the outer side of an interface between mind and 6
world. It is rather generated as the experiential quality of an ongoing engagement between 7
the perceiver and his or her environment. Sound is the underside of hearing just as light is 8
the underside of vision; we hear in one as we see in the other. Now it would be foolish to 9
suggest that gazing up at the sky yields anything other than an experience of light. Yet as 10
seeing is tantamount, in this case, to hearing, it would be equally foolish to deny that it 1
could also, and at the same time, be experienced as sound. Poets, as Zuckerkandl points 2
out, have never had any difﬁculty with the idea (1956: 341). A particularly eloquent example 3
of the sight of sound, or hearing with the eye, is offered by the poet David Wright, who 4
speaks of how he ‘hears’ things, or rather movements, which most of us take to be silent: 5
I take it that the ﬂight of most birds, at least at a distance, must be silent . . . Yet it 7
appears audible, each species creating a different ‘eye-music’, from the nonchalant melan- 8
choly of seagulls to the staccato ﬂitting of birds.
(Wright 1990: 12) 20
The particular poignancy of this example derives from the fact that Wright is himself 2
deaf. He cannot therefore hear with the ears, as other people do. But for precisely that 3
reason, his visual experience has an auditory dimension that is missing for most people 4
with normal hearing, placed in similar situations.
Much has been made of the phenomenon of synaesthesia, the apparent capacity of 6
certain perceivers to register an experience in one sensory modality on the basis of sensa- 7
tions delivered in another. The synaesthetic may, for example, claim to see certain forms 8
or colours on hearing a musical melody, or to hear particular sounds on watching a silent 9
movement. Wright’s report of hearing the ﬂight of distant birds might well be taken as 30
an instance of the latter. Yet built into the very deﬁnition of synaesthesia is a two-fold 1
distinction between sensation and perception on the one hand, and between discrete 2
sensory modalities on the other. Following both Gibson and Merleau-Ponty, I have 3
suggested that the eyes and ears should not be understood as separate keyboards for the 4
registration of sensation but as organs of the body as a whole, in whose movement, within 5
an environment, the activity of perception consists. ‘My body’, as Merleau-Ponty puts it, 6
‘is not a collection of adjacent organs but a synergic system, all the functions of which 7
are exercised and linked together in the general action of being in the world’ (1962: 234). 8
Sight and hearing, to the extent that they can be distinguished at all, are but facets of 9
this action, and the quality of the experience, whether cast in light or sound, is intrinsic 40
to the bodily movement entailed, rather than possessed ‘after the fact’ by the mind. So 1
if I hear the ﬂight of birds it is because, following their course across the sky, the move- 2
ment of my own body – of my eyes, of my hand, indeed of my entire posture – resonates 3
with theirs. From this point of view, the ‘problem’ of synaesthesia simply vanishes.
For Zuckerkandl, too, when Dante speaks of Hell as ‘a place dumb of all light’, or 5
when Goethe declares that light ‘trumpets’, they are referring not to synaesthesia but to 6
‘a real perception through the eyes, but which nevertheless has the characteristics of hear- 7
ing’ (1956: 341). Under all normal circumstances, Zuckerkandl maintains, this kind of 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 269 •

perception is overshadowed by the ordinary sight of things, and re-emerges only during
rare moments of ecstasy when the boundary between the perceiver and the world appears
to dissolve. But for the new-born baby, opening its eyes upon the world for the ﬁrst
time, or the previously blind person to whom sight has been restored through a medical
procedure, the experience must be overwhelming. As William James wrote, with acknowledgement to Condillac, ‘The ﬁrst time we see light . . . we are it rather than see it’ (James
1892: 14). Light – or ‘I can see’, which is another way of saying the same thing – is in
this situation quintessentially an experience of being. Ihde notes that the ﬁrst impressions
of a blind person, on gaining sight, are often reported to be akin to those of listening:
the patient ‘is impressed by what we might call the ﬂux and ﬂow’ (Ihde 1976: 63).19
For the baby, of course, there are not yet things to be seen, for the separation of the self
from the world, and the consequent process of objectiﬁcation, have hardly begun. But
long before it ﬁrst opens its eyes, the baby can already hear quite well. For every newborn, as Schafer says (1985: 96), hearing precedes vision. Thus while Berger (1972: 7)
may be right to say that in the life of the child, ‘seeing comes before words’, it is still
the case that the infant hears the sounds of speech, and above all its mother’s voice, long
before it can see. It is therefore entirely understandable that the earliest visual perception
should be experienced as a hearing with the eyes.
The conclusion to be drawn from this, as Zuckerkandl recognises, is that the ‘normal’
function of the eye – ‘the perception of things in places’ – is not given from the start
but is the result of a development in the ﬁeld of vision, ‘whose earlier stages are not so
sharply differentiated from hearing as later ones’ (1956: 342). From this conclusion,
Zuckerkandl launches into an argument which, by his own admission, is entirely speculative, but which is nevertheless of profound signiﬁcance for the anthropology of the senses.
If vision gradually diverges from hearing in the life-history of the individual, could this
not also occur, along the same lines and through similar stages, in the evolution of culture?
Could the congruence of sight and hearing, so quickly overtaken in individual development, have once characterised an entire epoch? And could it persist, perhaps, in the
‘magical abilities of . . . primitives, . . . based upon a direct seeing of space as force, a
dynamic communication between within and without’? If so, then ‘we should have in
music the miraculous echo of a world that once lay open to sight’ – a world that otherwise survives only in the visual arts, especially painting (1956: 343–5). While the
ontogenetic and evolutionary assumptions built into this argument, and especially the
identiﬁcation of ‘primitive’ perception with that of children, may no longer be acceptable
today, Zuckerkandl’s remarks nevertheless suggest something very important, namely, that
the distinction between vision and hearing, as generally understood in the Western tradition, is not natural or universal to humanity but the outcome of a speciﬁc historical
development. In comparisons between Western and non-Western societies, therefore, the
distinction cannot form part of the explanation for differences in sensory experience, but
is part of what has to be explained.

THE SENSORY EXPERIENCE OF BLIND AND DEAF PEOPLE
It is now time to return to the two thought experiments with which I began. To recall, in
the ﬁrst you listen blindfold to the sound of an oncoming train; in the second you watch
it pass with your ears plugged. In the one case, you suppose, the sound gets inside you
and shakes you up; in the other it is as though the train glided by in a world apart from
the one you inhabit. Now these experiments do indeed tell us much about the ways we

Dwelling
imagine vision and hearing to work. But they turn out to be a poor guide to what is actu- 1
ally going on, at least in the case of people whose eyes and ears are functioning normally. 2
Seeing with the ears stopped is qualitatively different from seeing without, for the simple 3
reason that a good deal of the information controlling the movements of the organs of sight, 4
including the eyes, head and whole body, is picked up by hearing. Without that informa- 5
tion, vision is disoriented, which is precisely why, in the second experiment, your visual 6
attention seemed so detached from the train’s movement. Conversely, hearing blindfold is 7
qualitatively different from hearing with one’s eyes open, for although the ears (unlike the 8
eyes) are immobile relative to the head, hearing is affected by head and body movements 9
which are partially guided by information picked up by the operations of sight. Again, it is 10
the lack of such information, and the ensuing loss of auditory control, that accounts for the 1
violence with which the sound of the unseen train seems to assault your senses.
If our experiments mislead us when it comes to normal vision and hearing, could they 3
nevertheless tell us something about the experience of people who are deaf or blind? Is 4
the deaf person, of necessity, an impassive observer of things in a world from which he 5
or she feels somewhat alienated? And are the blind, conversely, participants in a world in 6
which all is movement and becoming, yet inevitably at the mercy of its currents? Such 7
views are commonly encountered; I have already cited, as an example, a passage to this 8
effect from Zuckerkandl. They are not, however, supported by the testimony of blind and 9
deaf people themselves. These people do not feel that their experience of the world is any 20
less complete, or has any less integrity, than that of anyone else. In this respect it is quite 1
unlike the experience of normally sighted and hearing persons, on ﬁnding themselves 2
suddenly but temporarily blinded or deafened. Is it the case, then, that those for whom 3
blindness or deafness is a permanent condition compensate for the lack of one sense by 4
augmenting the powers of those remaining? Once again, the answer appears to be ‘no’. 5
Indeed David Wright, speaking as one who is profoundly deaf, argues that the theory of 6
compensation is a mistake, and an irritating one at that (Wright 1990: 12, 111). It is in 7
error for two reasons: ﬁrst, aural perception actually deteriorates when it is not oriented 8
by vision, and vice versa; and secondly, the theory mistakes a heightened sensitivity to 9
speciﬁc movements – aural or gestural – which are critical for the interpretation of what 30
is going on for a general enhancement of the sense as a whole. Blind and deaf people, 1
like everyone else, sense the world with their whole body, and like everyone else, too, 2
they have to cope with the resources available to them. But their resources are more 3
limited, and for this there is absolutely no compensation. The life of the blind person, as 4
John Hull puts it, ‘is experienced as being intact, although the scope of activity has in 5
many ways become smaller’. It is not like a round cake from which a substantial slice has 6
been cut out. It is more like a smaller cake (Hull 1997: xii).
Granted that the experience of the blind or deaf person is not any particular segment, 8
or ‘cut’, of the total experience of the visually and aurally unimpaired, but is a totality of 9
a very different kind, I believe (with Ihde 1976: 44) that we can still learn a great deal 40
about how visual and auditory perception work – even for people with normal sight and 1
hearing – from a comparison of these different experiences. The comparison is of course 2
complicated by the fact that there are individual variations in degrees of blindness and 3
deafness. In what follows I shall assume the total non-functioning of eyes and ears respec- 4
tively. I begin with blindness, drawing on the superb and extremely moving account by 5
John Hull of his own experience of going blind, and of adjusting to this condition, as an 6
adult. The account is revealing in two ways. First, it highlights features of visual percep- 7
tion that we normally rely on but tend to take for granted, by bringing out the problems 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 271 •

that ensue from their absence. Secondly, it reveals unexpected properties of aural perception that are critical for the blind, but which may be equally at work among sighted
people although not recognised for what they are. Apropos the ﬁrst, I shall focus on eyeto-eye contact; apropos the second, I shall consider the phenomenon of echolocation. As
a prelude to both, however, a few general remarks are in order about how blind and
sighted people, respectively, perceive the space around them.

Being blind
There is much in Hull’s account that corroborates the ideas of Hans Jonas, reviewed in
an earlier section. The perception of the blind person, dependent as it is on touch and
hearing, is fundamentally suspended in the current of time. Visual space is presented to
the sighted all at once, but tactile space has to be assembled by the blind, bit by bit,
through a repetitive and time-consuming exploration with the ﬁngers. Thus the blind
person may take days ‘to discover what the sighted person will grasp in a split second’
(Hull 1997: 183). Acoustic space is similarly temporal. Unlike the objects of touch,
however, which can always be touched again, the manifold inhabitants of acoustic space
have an ephemeral nature, passing in and out of existence along with the sounds they
make. This is not a world of being – ‘the silent, still world where things simply are’ –
but a world of becoming where there is only action, and where every sound marks a locus
of action (pp. 72–3). In this world, ‘sounds come and go in a way that sights do not’
(pp. 145–6). So do the agents, especially people, who make the sounds. As a sighted
person, I can see when someone else is in the room before he or she begins to speak or
approaches to shake my hand. But for the blind person, the voice or handshake comes
from nowhere. One has the feeling of being grasped or accosted, unable either to resist
or to choose one’s assailant (p. 87). Other people, with their voices and tactile gestures,
appear suddenly and disappear equally abruptly. ‘The intermittent nature of the acoustic
world’, Hull writes, ‘is one of its most striking features’ (p. 73). The seen world can never
escape one’s eyes, it is always there, and one can return to it again and again. But the
world of sound escapes as fast as it comes into being. And the sound that has passed can
never be recovered (p. 145).
Can the blind person, then, ever enjoy an experience comparable to that of the sighted,
of being placed in something like a landscape that can be taken in as a totality, with its
inﬁnitely variegated surfaces, contours and textures, inhabited by animals and plants, and
littered with objects both natural and artiﬁcial? There is one circumstance in which
this is possible, in Hull’s experience, namely when it is raining. For the sounds of raindrops, which are perceived to come not from any particular point but from all quarters
at once, reveal in every detail the surfaces on which they fall. ‘Rain’, Hull writes, ‘has a
way of bringing out the contours of everything; it throws a coloured blanket over previously invisible things; instead of an intermittent and thus fragmented world, the steadily
falling rain creates continuity of acoustic experience . . . This is an experience of great
beauty’ (1997: 26–7). There is indeed a certain parallel between the ecstasy of hearing
that Hull describes and what, for the sighted, I have described as the astonishment of
vision, when the world is revealed to the seer as though the fog in which it had been
enveloped were lifted, and he or she were gazing upon on it for the ﬁrst time. Rain does
for the blind what sunshine does for the sighted, bathing the world in sound as the sun
bathes it in light. Immersed in the audible, to borrow and adapt Merleau-Ponty’s words,
the listener opens himself to the world: ‘My body and the rain intermingle, and become

Dwelling
one audio-tactile, three-dimensional universe, within which and throughout the whole of 1
which lies my awareness’ (Hull 1997: 120).
Now in my earlier discussion of the maxim ‘vision objectiﬁes, sound personiﬁes’, I 3
noted that it is closely bound in the Western tradition with a certain construction of the 4
person, according to which an inner essence, identiﬁed with the voice, is supposed to hide 5
behind – but nevertheless to sound through – an outer mask identiﬁed with the face. The 6
voice can be heard, the face seen – unless, that is, one is in the company of another who 7
happens to be blind. Yet the view is commonly expressed that for the blind their inability 8
to see the faces of others can be a positive advantage. For they are not, like the rest of 9
us, susceptible to outward impressions. Thus did David Hume, in the eighteenth century, 10
address a blind acquaintance, the Edinburgh poet Thomas Blacklock: ‘Your passion . . . 1
will always be better founded than ours, who have sight: we are so foolish as to allow 2
ourselves to be captivated by exterior beauty: nothing but beauty of the mind can affect 3
you’ (cited in Rée 1999: 40). In our present times the blind French writer Jacques 4
Lusseyran takes the same view: the blind inhabit a world ‘free of the deception of phys- 5
ical appearances, where what and how something is said reveals its true purpose’ (cited 6
in Hill 1985: 109). But in Hull’s experience matters are not that simple. For him the 7
face is not a mask but is as intimately bound up with the life and identity of the self as 8
is the voice. And of all the components of the face, the most revealing, and the topic of 9
our greatest attention and fascination, are the eyes.
If there is a critical difference between face and voice, it is not so much that one 1
is seen and the other heard, than that you can hear your own voice whereas you cannot 2
see your own face. ‘I live in the facial expressions of the other’, writes Merleau-Ponty, 3
‘as I feel him living in mine’ (1964b: 146). From this stems what John Berger calls ‘the 4
reciprocal nature of vision’ – a reciprocity that is even more fundamental, in Berger’s view, 5
than that of spoken dialogue. For in eye-to-eye contact, he writes, ‘the eye of the other 6
combines with our own eye to make it credible that we are part of the visible world’ 7
(Berger 1972: 9).20 Thus your visibility, your identity, indeed your very existence as a 8
person, is conﬁrmed in the sight of others. In normal circumstances, to see another person 9
is to know you can be seen by them; to see a place is to know that you could, in prin- 30
ciple, be seen by someone standing there. But when the other person is blind the reciprocity 1
of vision breaks down. Suppose that I am sighted and you are blind: while I can see your 2
face, I am also aware that you are not looking at me. It seems that I am not there for 3
you. But not being able to see the faces of others leads you to imagine that others, 4
conversely, cannot see you. Hull vividly describes the nagging fear of having no face, the 5
loss of consciousness associated with perceived invisibility. ‘Because I cannot see, I cannot 6
be seen . . . It would make no difference if my whole face disappeared. Being invisible to 7
others, I become invisible to myself ’. It requires a real effort of will, if you are blind, 8
to remind yourself that you can still be seen (Hull 1997: 51–2).
Far from leading to deep intersubjectivity, to a greater sense of belonging, connected- 40
ness and participation, as the received stereotype implies, blindness results – at least in 1
Hull’s experience – in an overwhelming feeling of distance and withdrawal. ‘People’, as 2
he puts it, ‘become mere sounds’, and ‘sounds are abstract’ (1997: 21, 48). For him, quite 3
contrary to conventional wisdom, vision personiﬁes, whereas sound objectiﬁes. Hull writes 4
as one who has been fully blind for only a few years: he knows very well what it is like 5
to be able to see the faces of others, and what he says must surely resonate with the expe- 6
rience of every sighted person. Why then, against all the evidence of our senses, do we 7
cling to the illusion that sight is inimical to sociality, that it individualises, isolates and 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 273 •

abstracts? Is it because we take, as a prototypical scenario of vision, the situation of looking
at an inert, opaque object, rather than that of looking into the eyes of an active, lively
subject – whose eyes are also looking into one’s own? If so, does this not provide further
proof of what has already become apparent from my ﬁrst critique of the anthropology of
the senses: namely, that it is not vision that objectiﬁes the world, but rather the harnessing
of vision to a project of objectiﬁcation that has reduced it to an instrument of disinterested observation? Our very familiarity with the reciprocal, intersubjective nature of vision,
it seems, has conspired to hide it from us. It becomes the tacit ground against which is
projected an explicit image of vision as the sight of things.
Blind people, of course, cannot see things any more than they can see faces. But they
can listen to them. Blind participants in a study conducted by Miriam Hill reported
listening to mailboxes, signs, openings, doors, posts, poles and trees, as well as ‘the sounds
that bounce off buildings’ (Hill 1985: 102). The ability to perceive objects in this way,
beyond the reach of touch, seems to be based on a principle of echolocation. Just as for
the sighted, recalling Gibson’s argument, the presence and forms of environmental objects
are revealed through modulations in the array of reﬂected light reaching the eyes of a
moving observer, so for the blind they are revealed through modulations in the array of
reﬂected sound. Yet it is not only the ears that are at work in this process. ‘What the
blind person experiences in the presence of an object’, as Lusseyran explains, ‘is pressure’
(cited in Hill 1985: 107). Hull reports on precisely the same experience, describing the
pressure as sometimes so intense that one instinctively wants to put up a hand to the face
to protect oneself.
One shrinks from whatever it is. It seems to be characterised by a certain stillness in
the atmosphere. Where one should perceive the movement of air and a certain openness, somehow one becomes aware of a stillness, an intensity instead of an emptiness,
a sense of vague solidity.
(Hull 1997: 23)
For the blind actor-musician Tom Sullivan, it seemed that he could feel, on his face,
waves of air that had been pushed away by the body during movement and returned at
an angle from some obstacle (Sullivan and Gill 1975: 68). He called this ‘facial vision’.
Not surprisingly, it does not work well in windy weather (Hill 1985: 103).
There is some doubt, then, as to whether facial vision is a form of hearing or of touch:
indeed the phenomenon raises in a peculiarly acute form the problem of the distinction
between these sensory modalities. Hull claims that ‘the sense of pressure is upon the skin
of the face, rather than upon or within the ears’ (1997: 24). Elsewhere he describes the
sensation of being in an empty building as one that goes beyond mere hearing; ‘there
must be a certain sensitivity of the entire body to vibrations and to air pressure as well
as to inaudible echoes’ (p. 85). Evidently the same vibrations which, as they excite the
membrane of the ear, are discerned as sound can also excite receptors distributed over the
skin, but are then discerned as ‘pressure’. Paul Rodaway (1994: 50) regards facial vision
as a form of ‘global touch’, by which he means the body’s general contact with the environment, across all its surfaces. But as he points out, it could just as well be described as a
subtle form of auditory perception. The implication, that we hear not just with the ears
but with the whole body, is, as we shall see in a moment, of great signiﬁcance for understanding the sensory experience of the deaf. For the present, I should like to conclude my
discussion of the experience of blindness with three points.

Dwelling
First, the clear distinction that sighted people are inclined to make between touch and 1
hearing may in fact be a consequence of vision, and of the precise delineation of tangible 2
surfaces, at the interface between solid objects and the surrounding medium, that it affords. 3
This may be why the multimodal feeling-hearing of the blind, which is neither touch, echo, 4
nor motion but a blending of all of these, may be so hard for the sighted to grasp (Hill 5
1985: 104). Secondly, the commonplace supposition that vision is inherently spatial and 6
hearing inherently temporal needs to be qualiﬁed. Through the principle of echolocation, 7
hearing can disclose a world of stable forms – of things in their places – just as vision can. 8
And while it is true that such disclosure depends upon the perceiver’s motion relative to the 9
perceived, the same is equally true of vision (Rodaway 1994: 124–5). In essence, both 10
looking and listening are aspects of a movement that, being generative of both space and 1
time, is ontologically prior to any opposition we might draw between them. Thirdly, it 2
seems probable that even sighted people, albeit unawares, are signiﬁcantly guided by echo- 3
location or ‘facial vision’ (Ihde 1976: 67–70). They simply do not pay any attention to it. 4
As Rée writes, for all of us ‘becoming acquainted with buildings or landscapes is partly a 5
matter of getting to know their acoustic proﬁles – listening to the sounds they produce and 6
the echoes they give back’ (1999: 53). To be at home in a place, especially in the dark, 7
means knowing how it sounds and resounds.21 Thus listening is just as much a means of 8
active inquiry and of orienting oneself in the world as is looking.
Being deaf
Turning now to the experience of the deaf, there are two aspects of what Wright aptly 3
calls ‘deafmanship’ (1990: 113) on which I want to focus. For the ﬁrst, I return to the 4
point that we hear with the whole body, in order to bring out the range of auditory expe- 5
rience even for people who, like Wright himself, have no use of the ears whatever. Secondly, 6
I refer to the sign language of the deaf, in order to show that the contrast between hearing 7
and vision as sensory modalities of verbal communication is far less fundamental than is 8
commonly supposed. On the ﬁrst point, and judging from Wright’s autobiographical 9
account, it seems that deafness is never absolute in the way that blindness can be (Wright 30
1990: 9, see Ihde 1976: 45, Rée 1999: 36–7). This is because what we experience as 1
sound is caused by vibrations in surrounding media and surfaces, to which the ears are 2
not alone in responding. Standing on a resonant surface such as wooden ﬂoorboards, one 3
can ‘hear’ approaching footsteps through the feet. But one cannot do this if the surface 4
is, say, of stone or concrete. In speech, one hears the sound of one’s own voice, in part, 5
through an internal conduction of vibrations set up in the bones of the head. Insofar as 6
these vibrations bypass the mechanism of the ear, they may still be sensed by a speaker 7
who is deaf. In addition, deaf people can judge the quality of their voice by placing a 8
ﬁnger to their neck, at the location of the larynx, and they can likewise ‘hear’ the sound 9
of a musical instrument, radio or record player by touching the sound box or ampliﬁer 40
(Rée 1999: 36).
But in these instances of ‘touch-hearing’, what is heard is nothing like the complete 2
sound as it would be experienced by a listener whose ears are functioning normally. Much 3
depends on the particular resonant properties of the surfaces with which one comes into 4
contact, principally through the hands and feet. As a rule, however, the sound ‘comes 5
across as a blurred bumble of noise’ (Wright 1990: 9). Timbre and pitch are indetermi- 6
nate, but there is an overwhelming concentration on frequencies at the lower end of the 7
spectrum. The sounds that can be ‘heard’ at these frequencies tend to be abrupt and 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 275 •

percussive, like explosions or the noise of heavy machinery. Since they cannot be placed
within the ﬁnely differentiated acoustic ﬁeld of background and foreground sounds such
as is revealed by the ears, it is hard to pin them down to speciﬁc sources or locations.
They tend, rather, to appear and disappear, suddenly and without warning. Moreover
low-frequency external noise, picked up through bodily vibration, is easily confused with
that generated internally in the course of normal metabolic and respiratory processes – of
the kind that the doctor can ‘hear’ by means of a stethoscope (Rodaway 1994: 100–1,
Rée 1999: 53–4).
Besides this touch-hearing, however, Wright reports on another kind of experience of
sound, registered not through feeling but through sight. Only where nothing moves, as
on a perfectly calm day, does the world appear to be shrouded in total silence. Upon the
slightest movement, this silence is shattered. I have already referred to such experience as
an instance of the ‘sight of sound’, exempliﬁed in Wright’s observation that ‘birds, ﬂying,
sing with wings instead’ (1990: 3, 11–12). Yet he admits that this ‘visionary noise’, unlike
the palpable sensations of touch-hearing, is actually a thing of the imagination. It does
not really exist. I have to say that I am not convinced by the implied distinction between
real and imaginary sound. For even the sounds that people with normal hearing routinely
describe as real are no less phenomena of lived experience, and it is perfectly clear from
Wright’s description of vision-hearing that the sounds he sees are, for him, every bit as
vivid as are the sounds that other people hear, for them. Wright himself wonders whether
his eye for sound may owe something to unconscious childhood memories, for deafness
did not strike him until the age of seven. He recalls that at the time, he did not notice
he was deaf, and only gradually became aware of his condition on account of his inability
to pick up the sounds of unobservable movements like the ticking of a clock (1990: 22,
see Rée 1999: 37). In the case of visible movements, the fact that his ears had ceased to
function made no perceptible difference, at least at ﬁrst, to what he heard. This surely
furnishes compelling evidence for the view that even for the aurally unimpaired, hearing
is critically guided by the ‘antennae’ of sight. And it ﬁts with Hull’s observation that when
people go blind, their hearing does not improve but rather deteriorates (Hull 1997: 117).
Now when people are speaking to one another, the movements of their speech may be
visible in the face, and especially the lips. This is the basis for the skill of lip-reading. It
is normal, too, for speech to be accompanied, and ampliﬁed in its expressive force, by
visible gestures of the hands. In communities of the deaf, gestural systems have been elaborated to the point of constituting languages in their own right, fully commensurate with
spoken ones. These are conventionally known as signed languages (Armstrong, Stokoe and
Wilcox 1995). Neither speech nor sign has quite the intimacy of eye-to-eye contact, since
in both cases there is a functional differentiation, within the overall bodily system of
perception and action, between the organs of sense and motion. In speech the division is
between the ears and the voice; in sign it is between the eyes and hands. But as speech
and sign are formally equivalent in this regard, the possibilities of establishing a direct,
mutual involvement of self and other through sign must be just as great as they are through
speech. This is the point at which to remind ourselves of what McLuhan, Ong and their
followers have to say about the properties of thought and expression in the oral-aural
modality. For setting aside the likelihood of deaf signers’ familiarity with the written word,
there seems no good reason to doubt that these properties should be attributable to the
manual-visual modality as well.
Recall that for Ong, people in a primarily oral culture hear words not as things, as
though they were looking at them, but as sound. Similarly for deaf signers, gestures are

Dwelling
movements to be watched, not objects to be looked at (Armstrong, Stokoe and Wilcox 1
1995: 83–4). There is no holding them still for inspection. Like speech sounds, signed 2
gestures exist only in their passing. The fact that they are seen and not heard makes them 3
no less ﬂeeting, no more thing-like, than spoken sounds. Moreover the movements of the 4
hands in gesture respond to visually perceptible movements in the signer’s surroundings 5
much as, in the oral context, speech sounds resonate to the properties of the acoustic 6
environment, yielding the ‘gestural iconism’ that is such a pronounced feature of the signed 7
language of the deaf – the precise counterpart of the phonological iconism in the speech 8
of supposedly ‘auditory’ cultures such as the Umeda (Gell 1995: 247–8). Taking all these 9
parallels into account, we can only come to the same conclusion as Jonathan Rée, in his 10
study of the history of deaf education. ‘The idea that there is a metaphysical gulf dividing 1
communication by visible gestures from communication by audible words’, he writes, ‘is 2
a fantasy without foundation, a hallucination rather than a theory’ (Rée 1999: 323–4). 3
McLuhan and Ong, of course, were above all concerned to contrast the properties of 4
speech and writing. Their mistake, as should now have become clear, was to imagine that 5
these contrasting properties could be deduced from the differences between hearing and 6
vision. The critical feature of writing, by which it is distinguished from both sign and 7
speech, is that it is inscribed upon a durable surface. Is it, then, their inscription, and not 8
just their visibility, that renders words as things? Not exactly, for the perception of inscrip- 9
tions as objects depends upon a still more limited set of conditions. The trace of a gesture, 20
such as the calligrapher’s brush stroke, may be apprehended as a movement in just the 1
same way as the gesture itself. In this, the reader’s eye follows the trace as it would follow 2
the trajectory of the hand that made it. The written word is perceived as a thing only 3
when it is read not as the trace of a visible gesture but as the representation of a vocal 4
one. Thus, lurking behind the argument that writing leads us to see words as ‘quiescent 5
objects’ (Ong 1982: 91) lies an assumption, still widespread even among linguists, that 6
the only proper languages are spoken languages, and therefore that writing exists for the 7
sole purpose of representing the sounds of speech. This phonocentric assumption betrays 8
a deep-seated and obstinately persistent prejudice to the effect that manual signing is an 9
imperfect form of communication that scarcely qualiﬁes as ‘language’ at all.22 And it is 30
precisely this disqualiﬁcation of gesture from language proper that has given rise to the 1
idea that language can be made visible in no other way than through the representation 2
of speech in writing.
THE INTERCHANGEABILITY OF VISUAL AND AUDITORY PERCEPTION
In conversation with Georges Charbonnier, the painter André Marchand describes his 7
perception of the visible world as one in which he is already submerged, and which opens 8
up to him, as it were, on the inside:
For example, in a forest, I have felt many times that it was not I who was looking at 1
the forest. On some days I have felt that it was the trees that were looking at me, that 2
were speaking to me. For myself, I was there . . . listening.23
(Charbonnier 1959: 143) 4
This experience is surely familiar to anyone who has wandered in the woods. There are 6
two aspects of it to which I want to draw attention. First, it lends compelling support to 7
the idea of the reciprocity of vision, to which I have already alluded in connection with 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 277 •

the ordeals of blindness. Unable to see, the blind person becomes convinced of his own
invisibility, as though his very existence were thrown into question. Conversely, to ‘be
there’, to have a presence in the world, and so to be able to see, is to exist in the sight
of others. Thus we feel that the trees around us have eyes and are looking at us, for if
they were not, where would we be? Secondly, notice how readily Marchand slips from
the language of sight to that of sound. The trees look, but they may as well be speaking;
we watch, but we might as well be listening. It is to this interchangeability of visual and
auditory perception that I now wish to turn.
I begin with a musicological example, which takes us back to Zuckerkandl’s question
of whether it is preferable to listen to music with the eyes open or closed. In his autobiography, the composer Igor Stravinsky argues passionately for the former view. ‘I have
always had a horror’, he writes, ‘of listening to music with my eyes shut, with nothing
for them to do. The sight of the gestures and movements of the various parts of the body
producing the music is fundamentally necessary if it is to be grasped in all its fullness’
(Stravinsky 1936: 72). Watching the movements of the drummer, the violinist or the
trombonist gives shape and direction to our hearing, which would otherwise be empty
and aimless. We hear less well with the eyes closed, according to Stravinsky (and as Hull
also found with the onset of his blindness), since we lose this visual steering of auditory
perception. Cut loose from the bodily movement of its production, musical sound appears
abstract and incorporeal. It has often been remarked of hearing that it is a passive sense,
that all it can do is succumb to imperatives issuing from the outside world. Jonas, for
example, maintains that ‘in hearing, the percipient is at the mercy of environmental action’
(1966: 139), while for Adorno, hearing appears ‘dozy and inert’ (1981: 100). It is just
this kind of passive hearing, as ‘mere supine susceptibility’ (Rée 1999: 53), that Stravinsky
attributes to those who like to listen to music with their eyes shut. Such people, as he
caustically remarks, far from listening to the music itself, prefer to ‘abandon themselves
to the reveries induced by the lullaby of its sounds’ (1936: 73). They allow the sound to
wash over them – or to ‘ﬂoat through experience’, as Ihde (1976: 78) puts it – oblivious
to the fact that it is being produced by players with instruments. Once we open our eyes,
however, we cease to be mere consumers of sound, and join silently in the process of its
production. Hearing is roused from its slumber, and becomes active and engaged.
This leads us to a conclusion of paramount importance. If hearing is a mode of participatory engagement with the environment, it is not because it is opposed in this regard
to vision, but because we ‘hear’ with the eyes as well as the ears. In other words, it is the
very incorporation of vision into the process of auditory perception that transforms passive
hearing into active listening. But the converse also applies: it is the incorporation of audition into the process of visual perception that converts passive spectating into active looking
or watching. That is why Marchand found that in looking at the trees – which were also
looking at him – he was also silently listening to them. He was ‘looking’ with the ears
as well as the eyes. Marchand’s experience would be entirely familiar to the Koyukon
people, who follow a life of hunting, trapping and ﬁshing in the forests of Alaska. They
‘live in a world that watches’, according to their ethnographer Richard Nelson, ‘in a forest
of eyes’ (1983: 14). But it is a forest of ears as well. The principal trees of the forest,
namely spruce and birch, as well as many of its diverse animal inhabitants, are invested
with spirits which, like people, can hear as well as see. That is why, for the Koyukon, it
is always important to be careful in what you say, so as not to cause any offence. They
see because you see; they hear because you hear. But whether on the side of people or
spirits, it is the element of auditory attention that converts vision into watchfulness.

Dwelling
Among the Yup’ik Eskimos, too, there was a similar awareness that people are constantly 1
under the watchful scrutiny of spirits. The cosmos itself (ella) – sentient, knowing and 2
responsive – was conceived as an immense eye, but it was one that could hear as well as 3
see. It could also smell. Thus for their own and everyone else’s safety, mourners and 4
menstruating women were subject to restrictions such that they ‘remained odorless, 5
inaudible, immobile, and invisible to the eye of ella’ (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 248). The 6
knowledge that the eye of ella was watching, and that human activities were visible to the 7
spirit world, controlled every aspect of everyday Yup’ik life. To witness a spirit directly 8
was to see it as a face which, like the cosmos itself, was circular in form and centred on 9
the eyes. However the face was not a mask covering over the persona of the spirit, and 10
through which its voice could be heard. To the contrary, the face would be revealed 1
through a process of unmasking akin to the retraction of a hood – a dissembling of 2
outward appearance as given to ordinary, quotidian vision so as to uncover the being 3
within. To encounter another person ‘face-to-face’ was not, therefore, to be set over against 4
them, as in the image of the vis-à-vis, but to be enveloped in the intense, intersubjective 5
intimacy of eye-to-eye contact. Unmasked, the eyes of the spirit would literally catch the 6
glance of the beholder in their sight. But this implies that as an aspect of being, the face 7
is as much on the ‘inside’ as is the voice. If the voice is the sound of being, then the face 8
is its look.24 And hence, too, to listen to another person, whether human or spirit, is 9
equivalent to looking at them. As one Yup’ik man explained: ‘A speaker will not scold 20
you for looking at him too much. But looking all the time while someone is teaching, 1
that is how one must keep listening’ (Joe Beaver, in Fienup-Riordan 1994: 316). To this, 2
Fienup-Riordan adds that ‘watching a person’s face . . . was particularly revealing’.
Some sort of distinction is nevertheless entailed, here, between two kinds – or levels – 4
of vision: on the one hand, the ordinary sight of pre-existing things that comes from 5
moving around in the environment and detecting patterns in the ambient light reﬂected 6
off its outer surfaces; on the other hand, the revelatory sight experienced at those moments 7
when the world opens up to the perceiver, as though he or she were caught up in the 8
movement of its birth. This distinction is effectively equivalent to the one I introduced 9
earlier, in comparing the theories of visual perception of Gibson and Merleau-Ponty, 30
between vision as a mode of participation and as a mode of being. In neither case can 1
vision be radically separated from hearing. In the former, as I have shown, it is the co- 2
option of hearing by vision that turns merely contemplative seeing into active looking or 3
watching. In the latter, our inquiry into the convergences between what Merleau-Ponty 4
and Zuckerkandl have to say, respectively, about the painterly apprehension of light and 5
the musical apprehension of sound, showed that they were, in principle, all but indistin- 6
guishable. To illustrate the contrast between these two levels of vision, and the different 7
relations with hearing involved in each, I turn brieﬂy to another example.
Earlier, I told of how I know the cuckoo by its sound, and that only through being 9
seen does it come to be perceived as a thing that makes a sound. Among the Ojibwa, 40
indigenous hunters and trappers of the Canadian North, there is said to be a bird whose 1
sound, as it swoops across the sky, is a peal of thunder. Few have seen it, and those who 2
have are credited with exceptional powers of revelatory vision (Hallowell 1960: 32; see 3
Chapter Six, pp. 92–3, 99, for a more detailed account based on Hallowell’s ethnography). 4
What is the difference, then, between seeing a cuckoo and seeing a thunderbird? 5
Birdwatchers would surely be among the ﬁrst to recognise the importance of hearing to 6
active, exploratory vision. Listening out for birdsong and other sounds – the beating of 7
wings, or the rustling of leaves – the watcher’s sight homes in on the source from which 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 279 •

these sounds issue. Thus the organs of hearing constitute an auditory guidance system
that serves to orient vision towards its target. The enigma of the call, cuc-koo, emanating
from somewhere in the trees, is resolved as soon as we spot the bird that is producing it.
Naming the bird by the sound of its call, we regard it as just another individual of a
species, a living thing, whose presence and activity, moreover, are unaffected by the
watcher’s neutralising gaze.
The thunderbird, by contrast, is not a thing of any kind. Like the sound of thunder,
it is a phenomenon of experience. Though it is by thunder that the bird makes its presence heard, this sound is not produced by the thunderbird as the cuckoo produces its call.
For the thunder is the bird, in its sonic incarnation. Therefore to see it is not to resolve
the cosmic mystery of the sound, as though one could take a step back from one’s involvement in the world and say ‘Oh, so that’s where it’s coming from!’ One is rather drawn
further in. The bird presents itself to vision as an experience of light in just the same way
that it presents itself to hearing as an experience of sound. If sound, here, is intrinsic to
sight, this is not because it guides vision towards its object but because hearing is seeing.
As a speciﬁc form of the experience of light, the thunderbird is not set over against the
perceiver as an object of vision, but invades the perceiver’s consciousness, whence it is
generative of his or her own capacity to see. Much the same could be said of the experience of sunlight or moonlight, and indeed the sun and moon are apprehended by the
Ojibwa, along with the thunderbird, as beings of similar kind. They are, in short, not so
much visible things as manifestations of light.
Whereas in Western society such revelatory vision is the province of the painter, in
many non-Western societies it is closely associated with the activities of the shaman. The
metamorphosis of sound into light and vice versa – that is, hearing with the eyes and
seeing with the ears – is peculiarly characteristic of shamanic practice. A fascinating example
of this phenomenon has been documented among the Shipibo-Conibo Indians of eastern
Peru by Angelika Gebhart-Sayer (1985). In a ritual of healing the shaman, suitably
entranced, becomes conscious of an aura of radiant light that seems to ﬂoat towards him,
covering the surfaces on which it falls with elaborately reticulate, geometric designs. Where
they touch his lips, these luminescent designs are at once converted into melodious song.
The shaman sings along with his attendant spirits, and other villagers (who hear only the
shaman’s voice) join in, following his example. As the combined voices are wafted through
the air, they turn once more (though only in the shaman’s sight) into designs that penetrate the patient’s body and settle there, becoming ever clearer as the cure proceeds
(Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 162–4). The shaman’s songs, as Gebhart-Sayer puts it, ‘can be heard
in a visual way, . . . and the geometric designs may be seen acoustically’ (p. 170).
The designs themselves are of extraordinary intricacy, and were once recorded on cotton
fabric sheets bound into ‘books’ – leading to speculation that the Indians in this region
might have possessed a form of hieroglyphic writing. None of these books survive today,
but the villagers among whom Gebhart-Sayer carried out her ﬁeldwork recalled that an
old man from a nearby village, the son-in-law of a shaman, had kept a school exercise
book whose pages were ﬁlled with minute red and black patterns. One woman remembered how, as a child, she had managed secretly to get hold of the book and to copy four
of the designs before being caught and scolded by her grandmother. She claimed never
to have forgotten them, and was able to redraw them from memory (Gebhart-Sayer 1985:
155). One of her drawings is reproduced in Figure 14.2. It is not hard to see why European
observers should have been moved to compare such graphs to writing. It seems, on the
face of it, that the Shipibo-Conibo shaman apprehends the sounds of song in much the

Dwelling
Figure 14.2 One of the designs from the sacred book of a Shipibo-Conibo shaman, drawn from memory 30
by a woman from the village of Caimito in 1981.
Reproduced from A. Gebhart-Sayer, The Geometric Designs of the Shipibo-Conibo in Ritual Context, 2
Journal of Latin American Lore, 11: 2, 1985, p. 158.
same way that people in the literate West are supposed to apprehend the sounds of speech 6
– that is, as if they were looking at them. The geometric design lodged in the shaman’s 7
vision bears an uncanny resemblance to the Saussurian ‘sound-image’. And if the written 8
word is a transcription of the image from the mind onto paper, could not the same be 9
said of the graphic designs in the shaman’s ‘books’?
It is true that in a sense, the Indian shaman ‘sees’ songs, and that in another sense, 1
people raised in the Western tradition of print literacy ‘see’ spoken words. But the senses 2
of seeing adduced in these two instances could not be more different. This difference 3
corresponds, rather precisely, to the way in which Western thinkers have conventionally 4
distinguished vision from hearing. To recall Zuckerkandl’s formulation, it is the differ- 5
ence between the experience of a world ‘out there’, and that of a world coming 6
‘from-out-there-toward-me-and-through-me’ (Zuckerkandl 1956: 368). For the Westerner 7
to see words is to apprehend them as things, exterior objects to be grasped by way of the 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 281 •

images or representations that are formed of them in the mind. The shaman’s vision, by
contrast, is not a seeing of things but an experience of light, which is felt to be streaming
towards him and into him. As it does so it turns to sound. It is at the interface where
inﬂowing light is converted into outﬂowing sound that the designs are generated in his
perception. In the healing ritual, this conversion takes place upon the shaman’s lips. Thus
where the design is inscribed upon a surface, such as cotton fabric or paper, that surface
is transformed into an interface of the same kind as the lips. This immediately makes
sense of native claims to the effect that the surface, with its designs, speaks directly to the
person who ‘reads’ it (Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 154).
If this is indeed reading, then it is more akin to lip-reading than to the reading of the
written word. In the graphic traces on the page of the shaman’s book the voice is rendered
visible, just as it is, for the deaf lip-reader, in the movements of the speaker’s lips and
face. As the eye of the beholder follows the traces, his lips move to pronounce the corresponding sounds. This interpretation is corroborated by Peter Gow, in a study of reading
and writing among another native people of the Peruvian Amazon, the Piro. The study
focuses on the story of one man, Sangama, reputed to be the ‘ﬁrst Piro who could read’.
According to the story, told in the 1940s by his younger cousin Zumaeta, Sangama used
to pick up printed books and newspapers and read them, ‘his eyes following the letters
and his mouth moving’ (Gow 1990: 91). What he saw, however, were not words on
paper. He saw the paper itself as the red painted lips of a woman, speaking to him. And
he was convinced that this was what his European bosses saw when they read their newspapers: ‘When the white, our patron, sees a paper, he holds it up all day long, and she
[the paper] talks to him . . . The white does that every day’ (in Gow 1990: 92–3). If
Europeans were predisposed to treat Indian designs as an instance of writing, what could
be more natural than for the Indian, Sangama, to treat the printed texts of European
books and newspapers as instances of design? Sangama’s claim to be able to read, as Gow
shows, was based on his understanding of shamanic practice. In accord with this understanding, he approached the graphs on the page not as ‘representations’ or ‘symbols’ of
vocal sounds, but as the voice itself, shining forth as a pattern of light. It is probably
along these lines, too, that we should interpret Seeger’s observation that among the Suyá,
another Amazonian people, visual designs such as weaving patterns are seen acoustically.
On learning such a design, they say ‘It is in my ear’ (Seeger 1975: 214).

THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SENSES: A SECOND CRITIQUE
We can now pick up the threads of my critique of the anthropology of the senses, from
where I left off earlier in this chapter. The common ﬂaw, running through all the work
in this ﬁeld that I have reviewed so far, lies in its naturalisation of the properties of seeing,
hearing and other sensory modalities, leading to the mistaken belief that differences between
cultures in the ways people perceive the world around them may be attributed to the relative balance, in each, of a certain sense or senses over others. Thus it is supposed that
where vision predominates, people will apprehend the world in one way, and where hearing
predominates they will apprehend it in another. This approach is exempliﬁed in the work
of David Howes, who formulates the key question in the anthropology of the senses as
follows: ‘What is the world like to a culture that takes actuality in less visual, more auditory or olfactory, gustatory or tactile terms than those to which we are accustomed?’
(Howes 1991a: 6). By ‘we’ he means people of modern Western societies, steeped in a
hyper-visual aesthetic that turns the world into a spectacle laid out before the ‘detached

Dwelling
and observing eye’ (Romanyshyn 1989: 31). As an antidote to this kind of spectacular 1
vision, epitomised by the representational techniques of linear perspective, Howes invites 2
us to consider the graphic designs of the Shipibo-Conibo Indians, such as the one repro- 3
duced in Figure 14.2. Unlike the perspective drawing where everything is geometrically 4
ﬁxed in its proper place, these designs, he says, fairly pulsate (Howes 1991a: 5).
What is the explanation for this contrast? Why should the impact of Shipibo-Conibo 6
shamanic designs be so very different from that of the drawings of Renaissance draftsmen? 7
For Howes the answer lies in the ‘pluri-sensorial’ quality of the Shipibo-Conibo aesthetic, 8
as against the ‘almost exclusively visual’ aesthetic of the West. He seems to think that 9
vision is an inherently objectifying sense, that it naturally sets things off at a distance from 10
the observer, but that these distancing effects can be counteracted by adding liberal doses 1
of non-visual experience to the sensory mix. Thus in shamanic healing, the luminescent 2
designs mingle with songs and fragrances to bring about a cure, whereas in the viewing 3
of Renaissance art sounds and smells are screened out, leading to a stultiﬁcation of the 4
non-visual senses and a corresponding stepping up of ‘the natural power of the eye to 5
survey things from afar’ (Howes 1991a: 5–6). This is hardly a convincing argument, 6
however. For one thing, it is no more in the nature of the eye that it should function as 7
an instrument of detached speculation than that it should open the seer to experiences of 8
the most intimate revelation. Besides, it is simply not the case that people in Western 9
societies exercise their powers of sight in an environment sheltered from acoustic and 20
olfactory stimuli. Certainly, the sight of designs moves the Shipibo-Conibo shaman to 1
song, and the odours of selected plants form an important part of the ambience of the 2
healing ritual (Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 171–2). Yet who would deny the power of fragrance 3
and song, alongside visual images of sacred signiﬁcance, in the Catholic Mass? The aesthetic 4
experience of the Western church-goer is surely just as ‘pluri-sensorial’ as that of the partic- 5
ipant in a Shipibo-Conibo ceremony. Adding more sounds and smells will not make any 6
difference to the way he or she sees.
If the centrality that the Western tradition accords to the eye were due to nothing more 8
than an inattention to hearing, along with touch, taste and smell, then it could be easily 9
corrected. So far as hearing is concerned, we would have only to speak up in praise of sound 30
– which, in itself, would be no bad thing (Ihde 1976: 9). But as Ihde points out, the situation 1
is complicated by the fact that the reduction to vision, in the West, has been accompanied 2
by a second reduction, namely the reduction of vision. One cannot escape this reduction, 3
inherent in the rhetoric of visualism, simply by erecting an antivisualism in its place (Ihde 4
1976: 21, see Feld 1996: 96). For its source lies not in any bias towards the eye over other 5
organs of sense, but in what Johannes Fabian (1983: 123) calls a particular ‘cognitive style’ 6
– one that is likely to prejudice our understanding of all kinds of perceptual experience, 7
whether predominantly visual or not. It is in this style, rather than in anything to do with 8
the ratio of the senses, that we ﬁnd the answer to our question of how Renaissance draw- 9
ing differs in its impact from Shipibo-Conibo design. Incorporated into Western techniques 40
of depiction, it leads us to equate vision with visualisation – that is with the formation, in 1
the mind, of images or representations of the world. Incorporated into techniques of anthro- 2
pological analysis, however, this very same cognitive style is what leads us to regard the 3
process whereby people ‘make sense’ of their world as a cultural construction of reality.
At the heart of this approach is a representationalist theory of knowledge, according to 5
which people draw on the raw material of bodily sensation to build up an internal picture 6
of what the world ‘out there’ is like, on the basis of models or schemata received through 7
their education in a particular tradition. The theory rests on a fundamental distinction 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 283 •

between physical and cultural dimensions of perception, the former having to do with the
registration of sensations by the body and brain, the latter with the construction of representations in the mind. And despite vigorous protestations to the contrary (Howes 1991b:
169–70), the anthropology of the senses remains fully committed to this version of
Cartesian mind/body dualism. It turns out that it is not, after all, concerned with the
varieties of sensory experience, generated in the course of people’s practical, bodily engagement with the world around them, but with how this experience is ordered and made
meaningful within the concepts and categories of their culture. Moreover the same logic
that divides bodily sensation from mental representation, as a physical rather than a cultural
fact, also reiﬁes the senses as aspects of a universal human nature. In its movements and
responses, such as in looking, listening and touching, the body may furnish symbolic
resources for projects of cultural cognition, but it is not from these bodily processes themselves that culture springs. In short, to adopt a useful distinction from Csordas (1990: 40
fn. 2), the body with its various senses is taken to comprise the cognitive rather than the
existential ground of culture (see also Chapter Nine, pp. 169–70).
This position is exempliﬁed by Constance Classen, in her book Worlds of Sense (1993).
Her concern here is quite explicitly with the expressive rather than the practical signiﬁcance of sensory experience – that is, with the ways in which such experience may be
selected, metaphorically, to ‘stand for’ the central concepts and values of a culture. These
values and concepts add up to what she calls the sensory model. Thus Western culture, for
example, has fastened on the experience of vision to signify the value of objective knowledge. In another culture, with a different sensory model, core values might be expressed
through metaphors of hearing, or touch. This is what Classen means by the cultural
‘shaping’, or ‘conditioning’, of perception. ‘Sensory models’, as she insists, ‘are cultural
models, and sensory values are cultural values’. But just because here vision, or there touch
or hearing, have been singled out as vehicles for symbolic elaboration, this does not mean
that people will see, hear or touch any differently in consequence. Whether the mode of
engagement with the environment of greatest practical importance to people is looking,
listening, or touching, or some amalgam of these, is immaterial. What is important, so
far as the ‘cross-cultural exploration of sensory orders’ is concerned, is that the meanings
and understandings of the world gained through perceptual activity are expressed symbolically by way of metaphors drawn from one or another domain of sensory experience
(1993: 135–7, see also Classen 1997).
The same objectiﬁcation of the bodily experiences of looking, listening and touching,
and their conversion into metaphorical resources for the expression of extra-somatic,
cultural values, is also evident in the work of Howes. To his credit, Howes does recognise that human beings are not simply endowed by nature with ready-made powers of
perception, but that these powers are rather cultivated, like any skill, through practice and
training in an environment. For this reason they can vary from one individual to another,
even within a single society. The musician, for example, may develop a ﬁne sense of
hearing, and the chef an equally subtle sense of taste, even though both may belong – as
they do in the West – to a society that is inclined to describe the knowledge and judgement of each through metaphors of sight. We could even expect that these variations of
sensory skill would be manifested neurophysiologically in the differential development of
the cerebral cortex, such that were we to map the surface of the human body on a scale
that varies in proportion to the space that each region takes up in the cortex, the resulting
ﬁgure – known as the ‘sensory homunculus’ (see Figure 14.3) – would differ, say, from
the musician to the chef, reﬂecting their contrasting ‘sensory proﬁles’.25 For Howes,

Dwelling

however, these individual variations in 1
practical, perceptual ability are simply 2
irrelevant. He wants to show how the ‘map 3
of the senses’ differs, not between indi- 4
viduals, but between whole cultures or 5
societies (Howes 1991b: 168–9).
The effect of this move is to uphold a 7
notion of cultures as consisting in systems 8
of collective representations, over and 9
above the conditions and contexts of prac- 10
tical life within which people develop and 1
embody their own skills of action and 2
perception. Howes sets out his position on 3
the matter as follows:
Differences among individuals (by age, 6
Figure 14.3 The sensory homunculus, an illustration of how sex, occupation, or temperament) only 7
the surface of the body is represented in the somatosensory
take on meaning against the background 8
cortex. Larger areas of the cortex are devoted to the more sensiof the culture to which they belong. It is 9
tive parts of the body, such as the ﬁngers and lips.
the sense in which whole societies can be 20
classiﬁed as more tasteful than others, . . . or more aurally than visually minded, . . . 1
that is of primary interest to the ‘anthropology of the senses’.
(1991b: 168, original emphasis) 3
In an ‘aurally minded’ society, for example, people would express their ideas of know- 5
ledge or understanding by drawing on metaphors from the realm of acoustic experience. 6
Where we, in our ‘visually minded’ society, say ‘I see what you mean’, they might say ‘I 7
hear what you mean’. But this implies nothing about the relative development of their 8
powers of hearing or seeing. Thus Howes is fatally confused in supposing that what he 9
envisages as a ‘cultural map of the senses’ is merely a scaled-up version of the sensory 30
homunculus (1991b: 168–9). For as the level of analysis shifts from the individual to 1
society as a whole, so the domain that is ‘mapped’ is no longer of bodily but of concep- 2
tual space. Instead of tracing a set metonymical connections between the sense organs and 3
regions of the brain, the ‘cultural map’ establishes a system of metaphorical correspon- 4
dences between the material realm of sensory experience and the ideal realm of mental 5
representations. To grasp the logic of this, one has only to substitute a ‘plane of sense’ 6
for the ‘plane of sound’ in Saussure’s depiction of language (see Figure 14.1).
Like the earlier anthropology of the body (see Jackson 1989: 123; Chapter Nine, 8
pp. 169–70), the anthropology of the senses – as presented in the work of scholars such as 9
Howes and Classen – seems determined to leave lived, sensory experience behind in the 40
search for what it stands for, namely the incorporeal ‘ideas’ and ‘beliefs’ of a culture. Far 1
from helping us to understand how the whole body perceives, and how meaning 2
is generated within the contexts of its activities of looking, listening and so on, this approach 3
reduces the body to a locus of objectiﬁed and enumerable senses whose one and only role 4
is to carry the semantic load projected onto them by a collective, supersensory subject – 5
namely society – and whose balance or ratio may be calculated according to the proportion 6
of the load borne by each.26 Now in criticising this approach, I do not intend to down- 7
play the importance of examining the ways in which sensory metaphors are mobilised in 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 285 •

discourse. The fact that we say ‘I see what you mean’ is surely signiﬁcant. But in resorting
to this ﬁgure of speech, I am not expressing one thing, a concept of understanding, in terms
of another, a speciﬁc objectiﬁcation of the bodily sensation of sight. I am rather inviting
you to compare the experience of unison arising from our mutual engagement in verbal
dialogue to the experience, with which both you and I are familiar, of unison between
perceiver and perceived in the activity of watching or looking. But what if you were not
familiar with the latter experience? What if you were blind?
For Howes and Classen, whether or not you can actually see, or just how one’s sensory
capacities are practically deployed in activities of perception, is beside the point so far as
the sensory characterisation of a whole society is concerned. These are merely questions
of individual idiosyncrasy. Fieldwork among the ‘aurally minded’, in a society which has
elected to articulate its core values by means of metaphors of hearing, will not tell us
anything about the experience of the blind. But as Hull shows, in a meditation upon the
blind person’s response to the expresssion ‘I see what you mean’, matters are not that
simple. Should he refrain from using the expression? That, Hull remarks, would be absurd.
To opt out of the verbal conventions of one’s society would be to compound one disability
with another. Yet he cannot avoid the fact that the expression, which invites comparison
between his understanding and a form of perceptual experience which he does not share
with his interlocutors, does not have quite the same resonance for him as it has for them.
There is, he says, ‘a subtle shift in the whole character of communication between sighted
and blind people’ (Hull 1997: 26).
The lesson to be learned from this is that the verbal conventions of a society do not come
ready-made, nor are they simply superimposed upon the experience of its members so as to
‘make sense’ of it. Rather, they are continually being forged and reforged in the course
of people’s efforts to make themselves understood – that is to ‘make sense’ of themselves to
others. They do this by drawing comparisons between their own sensory practices and
experiences and those attributable to their fellows. I suppose you are familiar, as I am,
with the sound of thunder and the sight of lightning. I want you to understand what it felt
like when I stood by the railway tracks as the train passed by. ‘It thundered past me’, I say,
‘in a ﬂash’. But in having recourse to this metaphor, it is my experience that I want to convey
to you, not some conceptual prototype of a ‘passing train’ for which the auditory and visual
sensations of thunder and lightning happen to provide apt vehicles of symbolic expression.
Instead of abandoning the lived experience of individuals for the collective sensory
consciousness of society, it is surely to this creative interweaving of experience in discourse,
and to the ways in which the resulting discursive constructions in turn affect people’s perceptions of the world around them, that an anthropology of the senses should primarily
direct its attention. ‘Making sense’, in short, lies not in the subjection of human nature to
social conditioning (Classen 1993: 5), but in the involvement of whole persons with one
another, and with their environment, in the ongoing process of social life.

EPILOGUE
Martin Jay closes his monumental study of attitudes to vision in the recent history of
Western thought, above all in the Francophone tradition of scholarship, with the following
words:
The trip began by acknowledging . . . how ineluctible . . . is the modality of the visible,
not merely as perceptual experience, but also as cultural trope. It thus seemed fruitful

Dwelling
to follow the unfolding of a loose discourse about visuality, rather than to try to docu- 1
ment actual transformations in sensual practices.
(Jay 1993a: 587) 3
If there is one, principal conclusion to be drawn from my critique of the anthropology 5
of the senses, it is that any attempt to separate out the discourse surrounding vision from 6
the actual practices of looking, watching and seeing is unsustainable. The same, indeed, 7
goes for any other sensory modality. For what is discourse, if not a narrative interweaving 8
of experience born of practical, perceptual activity? The meanings to which it gives rise, 9
as I have shown, are not added ‘on top’ of lived, bodily experience, but lie in the ways 10
in which the strands of this experience are woven together. Historians of philosophy are 1
surely deceiving themselves in imagining that what has been thought and written in terms 2
of the senses can be neatly partitioned off from what has been lived and felt through them. 3
As Rée says, ‘the historical development of philosophy will never make much sense if it 4
is treated as a bloodless struggle between great books, with all the local ﬂavours, fragrances, 5
noises, temperatures, and colours of ordinary experience left out’ (1999: 383).
Indeed the conceit of the philosopher who would write a history of vision without regard 7
to how people actually see mirrors that of the physicist who would construct an optics that 8
makes no reference to the eye. Both, in effect, reproduce a dichotomy between mind and 9
nature, within which all knowledge takes the form of representations of reality. It is through 20
its assimilation to this framework that vision has come to be characterised, by admirers and 1
detractors alike, as having a natural propensity to turn whatever it encounters into objec- 2
tive ‘things’, to be grasped dispassionately from a distance (Levin 1988: 98). And having 3
been cast in this role, as either the hero or the villain of the drama of modernity, any ten- 4
dency towards imagining the world as a domain of exterior objects, to be seized by the senses 5
and analysed by the mind, is automatically construed as ‘visualism’ (Fabian 1983: 106–7). 6
It is as though vision had been compelled to take on the mantle of a particular cognitive 7
style, and all the virtues and vices that go with it. Naturally, critics of visualism have 8
concentrated on the vices (Jenks 1995). David Levin, for example, insists that vision is ‘the 9
most reifying of all our perceptual modalities’ (1988: 65),27 whose hegemony in modern 30
society can be linked to a will to power, technoscientiﬁc exploitation and political surveil- 1
lance. And while he admits that vision might have its more open, caring or gentle side, this 2
is to be found only on the margins, in the ‘play of shadows and reﬂections’ which reveal to 3
us that ‘we are, after all, phenomena of light’ (pp. 429, 431).
However, to make the charge against vision stick, as Stephen Houlgate shows, one 5
would have to show that seeing in actual practice, rather than as imagined by philosophers, 6
harboured within itself a tendency towards reiﬁcation (Houlgate 1993: 98–9). One would, 7
in other words, have to breach those artiﬁcial barriers that separate life from discourse, 8
allowing the realities of experience to intrude upon the hallowed turf of intellectual debate. 9
Anthropologists do this all the time, indeed the creative tension between theoretical spec- 40
ulation and lived experience is the very driving force of anthropological inquiry. Historians 1
of philosophy, on the other hand, are loath to mix the two, fearing that any move in that 2
direction would threaten the integrity of their own, essentially literary project. That is 3
why philosophical critics of visualism would never dream of asking the kind of question 4
with which a hard-nosed psychologist like Gibson, for example, begins his study of visual 5
perception: ‘How do we see the environment around us?’ (Gibson 1979: 1). For them, 6
the answer is already presupposed: to see is to reduce the environment to objects that are 7
to be grasped and appropriated as representations in the mind. The irony is that this 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 287 •

answer, which critics of visualism are inclined to take for granted, has its source in the
very Cartesian epistemology that they seek to dethrone. What they offer, then, is not an
account of visual practice, but a critique of modernity dressed up as a critique of the hegemony of vision.
From the arguments and evidence presented in this chapter I hope to have shown that
the case against vision is comprehensively disproven. Indeed it should never have been
brought in the ﬁrst place. It is as unreasonable to blame vision for the ills of modernity
as it is to blame the actor for crimes committed, on stage, by the character whose part
he has the misfortune to be playing. With Houlgate (1993: 106, 111), I believe that the
responsibility for reducing the world to a realm of manipulable objects lies not with the
hegemony of vision but with a ‘certain narrow conception of thought’. And it is this
conception, too, that has led to the reduction of vision – that is, to its construal as a
sensory modality specialised in the appropriation and manipulation of an objectiﬁed world.
Through this reduction, as I have shown, vision came to be opposed to hearing. But there
is nothing natural or pre-ordained about this opposition: as often as it is reasserted
in academic books, it is belied by our own experience. It is my contention that by
exploring the common ground between vision and hearing, rather than by abandoning
the one for the other through a ‘turn to listening’ (Levin 1993: 3–4), we may be guided
not only towards a better appreciation of the richness and depth of visual experience, but
also towards a more generous, open-ended and participatory understanding of thought.

Dwelling

Part III

Skill

INTRODUCTION
In Western society we tend to think of art and technology as separate ﬁelds of endeavour,
and the study of each has been built on different foundations. The chapters in this part
suggest ways in which this separation might be overcome, by taking as a point of departure the skilled practices of socially situated agents. The ﬁrst three chapters represent
successive stages in my attempts to rethink the technical. It was in drafting the essay which
now appears as Chapter Fifteen that it dawned on me that the opposition between intellectual design and mechanical execution, in terms of which discussions of human and
animal toolmaking and tool-using have traditionally been couched, is in fact a phenomenon of Western modernity. Instead of assuming that technical operations are, by their
very nature, mechanical, I argue in this chapter that the machine is an outcome of the
historical development of the forces of production accompanying the growth of industrial
capitalism. In this development the relations between workers, tools and raw material have
been transformed, such as to replace subject-centred skills with objective principles of
mechanical functioning. It is to these principles that the modern concept of technology
refers. I show how the emergence of this concept was bound up with the rise of a mechanistic cosmology that separated design from construction, and reduced skilled making to
‘merely technical’ execution. Thus whereas in the artisan’s handling of his tools, the movements of their working points are guided by his own perception, the motions of the
machine, and any tools attached to it, are predetermined.
I conclude that the transition, in the history of human technicity, from the hand-tool
to the machine, is not from the simple to the complex, but is rather tantamount to the
withdrawal of the producer, in person, from the centre to the periphery of the productive process. It is a history, in other words, not of complexiﬁcation but of externalisation.
In Chapter Sixteen I consider how this conclusion might affect our understanding of the
technical capabilities of hunters and gatherers. Classically portrayed as people with the
simplest of technologies, it would be closer to the mark to say that hunter-gatherers have
no technology at all. That is to say, their lives are not bound, as is so often suggested,
to the operational requirements of a predetermined ‘techno-environmental system’. Rather,
the success of their way of life depends upon their possession of acutely sensitive skills of
perception and action. Yet as properties of persons, developed in the contexts of their
engagement with other persons or person-like agencies in the environment, technical skills
are themselves constituted within the matrix of social relations. Hence, insofar as they
involve the use of tools, these must be understood as links in chains of personal rather
than mechanical causation, serving to draw components of the environment into the sphere

Skill
of social relations rather than to emancipate human society from the constraints of nature. 1
Their purpose, in short, is not to control but to reveal.
Herein lay the second step in my rethinking of the technical. Having ﬁrst recognised 3
that hunting, for example, entails the practice of a skill rather than the operation of a 4
technology, the stage was set for my realisation that technical relations, in pre-industrial 5
societies, are embedded in social relations. It follows that the process of externalisation is 6
also a process of disembedding of the technical from the social, ultimately giving rise to 7
the modern, institutionalised separation of technology and society. Returning, however, 8
to the context of modern industrial society, I began to think that this picture of a progres- 9
sive evolution from skill to technology, in which the craftsman or artisan gradually gives 10
way to the machine operative, is too simple. In Chapter Seventeen I present an alterna- 1
tive to this evolutionary model, while at the same time linking the discussion of tools and 2
technicity to the issues of time and temporality adumbrated in Chapter Eleven. Following 3
a classic article by historian E. P. Thompson, the transition from pre-industrial to indus- 4
trial society has often been depicted as one in which a task-oriented time, grounded in 5
the rhythms of social life, has been replaced by the mechanical regimen of the clock. 6
Drawing on ethnographic studies of locomotive drivers I show, to the contrary, that task- 7
orientation remains central to the experience of work in industrial society, even though 8
the reality of that experience is systematically denied by the Western discourse of freedom 9
and necessity. Indeed, clock time is as alien to people of industrial as it is to those of pre- 20
industrial societies: the only difference is that the former have to deal with it. Likewise 1
the machine operative of industrial society remains a skilled practitioner: his skill, however, 2
lies in coping with machines rather than in their operation, and what it produces is not 3
commodities for the owner of capital but his own personal and social identity.
In Chapter Eighteen I return to a theme already introduced in Chapter Five, concerning 5
the difference between making things and growing things. There I was concerned to show 6
what it means to say that the herdsman’s animals, or the farmer’s crops, are grown rather 7
than made. I now take up the suggestion that artefacts, too, may be grown, and that in 8
this sense they are not so very different from living organisms. To illustrate the argument 9
I consider the weaving of a coiled basket. Conventionally, we regard weaving as a kind 30
of making. Could we not, however, reverse the argument, and regard making as a kind 1
of weaving? The effect of this reversal – which is precisely equivalent to our strategy, in 2
Part II, of regarding building as a kind of dwelling – would be to place the emphasis on 3
the skilled character of the form-generating process rather than upon the ﬁnal form of 4
the object produced. Evidently, a basket is not made through the forcible imposition upon 5
material substance of some pre-existent design, included among the collective representa- 6
tions of a cultural tradition, as the standard notion of artefacts as items of ‘material culture’ 7
would lead us to believe. For in weaving, a surface is built up rather than transformed, 8
and the spiral form of the basket emerges through the rhythmic repetition of movement 9
in the weaving process rather than originating in the maker’s mind. Indeed, despite their 40
different geometrical properties, there is a close parallel between the generation of spirals 1
in artefacts (such as the basket) and in living organisms (such as in the shell of a gastropod). 2
Just as the form of the organism is not preﬁgured genetically but arises through a process 3
of growth within a morphogenetic ﬁeld, so the form of the artefact is not preﬁgured 4
culturally but arises through the unfolding of a ﬁeld of forces that cuts across its devel- 5
oping interface with the environment.
Chapter Nineteen takes us back to the modern dichotomy between art and technology 7
which, I argue, stands in the way of an appreciation of the true nature of technical skill. 118

Introduction to Part III • 291 •

To specify more precisely what I mean by skill, I highlight ﬁve critical dimensions of any
kind of skilled practice. First, intentionality and functionality are immanent in the practice itself, rather than being prior properties, respectively, of an agent and an instrument.
Secondly, skill is not an attribute of the individual body in isolation but of the whole
system of relations constituted by the presence of the artisan in his or her environment.
Thirdly, rather than representing the mere application of mechanical force, skill involves
qualities of care, judgement and dexterity. Fourthly, it is not through the transmission of
formulae that skills are passed from generation to generation, but through practical, ‘handson’ experience. Finally, skilled workmanship serves not to execute a pre-existing design,
but actually to generate the forms of artefacts. Through a comparison of the looping skills
involved in making string bags among Telefolmin people of Central New Guinea and the
nest-building skills of the male weaverbird, I show that these dimensions of skill are equally
evident in both cases. The conventional notion that the birds’ activity is due to instinct
whereas humans are guided by the dictates of culture is therefore inadequate. In both
cases, the pattern of regular movement generates the form. And in both, the ﬂuency and
dexterity of this movement is a function of skills that are developmentally incorporated
into the modus operandi of the body, through practice and experience in an environment.
But this leaves us with a still unanswered question. How do the skills of human beings
differ from those of non-human animals?
In a famous footnote to Capital, Karl Marx compared the history of human technology
to the history of organic adaptation as described by Darwin in The Origin of Species. The
comparison suggests three further questions. First, how – if at all – can we distinguish
the evolution of technology from its history? Secondly, is there anything inherently progressive about technical change? And thirdly, are there grounds for supposing that such change
is governed by a mechanism analogous to that of variation under natural selection? In
Chapter Twenty I address each of these three questions in turn. The ﬁrst takes us back
to the problem of origins, already raised in Chapter Ten. Was there some take-off point
in human evolution beyond which technology acquired a dynamic of its own, and could
go on developing without any further change in human capacities? On the second question, I show that estimations of technological complexity are meaningless unless account
is taken not just of material toolkits but also of the knowledge and skills required to
operate them. Finally, while the analogies between technical change and organic evolution are suggestive, the way in which they are commonly drawn suggests that what changes
is a design for the technical artefact, comparable to the organic genotype, rather than the
form of the object itself. Our conclusion from Chapter Eighteen, however, is that the
forms of artefacts, like those of organisms, arise through processes of growth within ﬁelds
of relationships. To account for change in artefactual forms, therefore, we have to understand how these ﬁelds, and their generative potentials, are constituted and transformed
over time.
Now if the same logic is to be applied to organisms, then we have to think about
organic evolution in general, and human evolution in particular, in a completely new way.
I attempt such a rethinking in Chapter Twenty-one. It is conventional, in palaeoanthropology, to distinguish between the process of evolution, leading from ancestral pongid
and hominid forms to ‘anatomically modern humans’, and the process of history, leading
from the Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer past to modern science and civilisation. I argue that
this distinction is untenable. Comparing walking and cycling, as modes of locomotion,
and speech and writing, as modes of communication, I show that these capacities cannot
be opposed as, respectively, biologically innate and culturally acquired. They are, in every

Skill
case, embodied skills, incorporated into the human organism through a process of devel- 1
opment. Thus the differences we call cultural are themselves biological. The reasons for 2
the separation of biology and culture in orthodox theory lie in the identiﬁcation of the 3
former with a formal genetic ‘endowment’. But form, I argue, is not received by the 4
organism-to-be at the point of conception, but generated within the dynamic functioning 5
of developmental systems. And through contributing to the environmental conditions of 6
development for successor generations, organisms – including human beings – actively 7
participate in their own evolution.
There can, then, be no speciﬁcation of the essential form of humanity independent of 9
the relational contexts in which human beings become. The notion of the ‘anatomically 10
modern human’ is an analytic ﬁction, derived through the retrojection, onto the Palaeo- 1
lithic past, of a concept of recent historical provenance in the West. I suggest an alternative 2
approach to human evolution, starting from the inescapable condition of human beings’ 3
involvement in their diverse environments. This approach is taken one step further in 4
Chapter Twenty-two, which focuses on the controversial issue of language origins. It has 5
been customary, in discussions of this issue, to distinguish speech, as a universal human 6
capacity, from the manifold languages of particular communities. It is supposed that the 7
former is a product of evolution under natural selection, and is transmitted genetically, 8
thereby establishing the cognitive foundations, in successive generations, for the acquisi- 9
tion of the latter through a parallel process of cultural transmission. But this distinction 20
between genetic and cultural transmission, I maintain, is a consequence of the attempt to 1
treat both speech in general, and languages in particular, as formal, rule-governed systems. 2
This, in turn, betrays the scriptist bias of modern linguistic theory: the tendency to 3
assimilate the spoken utterance, in its pure or ideal form, to the sentence of writing.
I propose a different view. Instead of regarding speech and language, respectively, as 5
innate capacity and acquired competence, I maintain that speaking should be treated as 6
a variety of skilled practice, with all the generic properties of skill outlined in Chapter 7
Nineteen. Through a focus on skill as embodied knowledge we are able to dispense with 8
the troublesome dichotomy between innate and acquired characters. But this also has the 9
effect of dissolving the distinction between evolution and history, and with it, the point 30
of origin constituted by their intersection. The notion of ‘language origins’ is thus shown 1
to have itself originated within the current of modern thought, alongside the rationalisa- 2
tion of language associated with print literacy. However this same current has also yielded 3
the three key terms – namely ‘technology’, ‘language’ and ‘intelligence’ – which generally 4
frame contemporary accounts of the evolution of human cognition. Of course, in all soci- 5
eties people use tools and talk to one another, and these and other activities represent 6
creative ways of coping in the world. But to say that everyday tool-using is a behavioural 7
instantiation of technology, or that spoken dialogue is an instantiation of language, or 8
even that creative activity is an instantiation of intelligence, is already to make certain 9
rather problematic assumptions.
I conclude, in Chapter Twenty-three, by spelling out what these assumptions are and 1
by suggesting how we might construct an alternative account that would dispense with 2
them. This we could do by examining the relation, in human evolution, not between 3
technology, language and intelligence, but between craftsmanship, song and imagination. 4
I argue that song, far from being put together from separate linguistic and musical compo- 5
nents, is rather a performative unity that is decomposed into these components through 6
the imposition of a concept of language of modern origin. In just the same way, the 7
modern concept of technology decomposes craftsmanship into the separate components 118

Introduction to Part III • 293 •

of rational-technical operations and expressive art. To focus on song and craftsmanship
rather than language and technology is to foreground the poetic and performative aspects
of speech and tool-use that have been marginalised by rationalism. Neither speech nor
tool-use can be understood as the mechanical output of a mental constructional or problemsolving device, such as a technological or linguistic ‘intelligence’. Both, however, involve
imagination, understood as the activity of a being whose verbal creativity and puzzlesolving is carried on within the context of involvement in a real world of persons, objects
and relations. I am, indeed, such a being, and one of the results of my activity is this
book.

Skill
THE TECHNICAL AND THE MECHANICAL
Do machines make history? In an article that takes this question as its title, Heilbroner 5
(1967) identiﬁes it as ‘the problem of technological determinism’. That technology has 6
to do with the construction and application of machinery may seem obvious to people 7
in industrial societies. But what are we to make of history prior to the machine age? Were 8
there machines about, shaping the course of history, in the days when virtually all tools 9
were operated by hand, and when virtually all the power to operate them came from 20
human muscles? What is the difference between tool use and machine performance, and 1
how does it affect the involvement of the human subject in the act of making? Reﬂecting 2
on these questions, one is bound to inquire into the nature of the machine, and into the 3
broader applicability of the relatively modern concept of technology, particularly in analyses 4
of pre-industrial or non-Western societies. Such an inquiry touches on important issues 5
in the philosophy of technology, and has considerable historical and anthropological impli- 6
cations. In our own age the concept of technology has become such an established part 7
of thinking on humanity and the ‘human condition’ that we are inclined to use it as a 8
window through which to view tool-assisted practices of all kinds, past and present, 9
Western and non-Western, human and animal. Thus we imagine that where tools are 30
being used there must exist a technology. But what, exactly, is entailed in this assumption? 1
How does it affect our understanding of what it means to make things? And how might 2
this understanding be changed if we were to regard the use of tools not as the operation 3
of a technology but as an instance of skilled practice?
Let me begin with a brief etymological prelude. The word ‘technology’ is a compound 5
formed from two words of classical Greek provenance, namely tekhnē, which meant the 6
kind of art or skill that we associate with craftsmanship; and logos, which meant roughly 7
a framework of principles derived from the application of reason. Just occasionally, tekhnē 8
and logos were combined in classical literature to denote the art of reason, or the skill 9
involved in rhetorical debate. But in contemporary usage the meaning of technology is 40
just the reverse: namely, the rational principles that govern the construction of artefacts 1
– or more simply, the reason of art rather than the art of reason. In this sense, the term 2
did not come into regular use until well into the seventeenth century (Mitcham 1979). 3
And it is no accident that its coinage coincided with the radical transformation in Western 4
cosmology ushered in by such ﬁgures as Galileo, Newton and Descartes. For the speciﬁc 5
achievement of these pioneers of modern natural science was to establish the idea that the 6
universe itself is a vast machine, and that through a rational scientiﬁc understanding of 7
its principles of functioning, this machine could be harnessed to serve human interest and 118

Chapter Fifteen

Tools, minds and machines

An excursion in the philosophy of technology

Tools, minds and machines • 295 •

purposes. Thus technology came to be seen as the application of the mechanics of nature,
derived through scientiﬁc inquiry, to the ends of art.
The shift from the classical concept of tekhnē to the modern concept of technology has
brought about a profound change in the way we think about the relation between human
beings and their activity. In its original, Aristotelian conception, tekhnē meant ‘a general
ability to make things intelligently’ (Bruzina 1982: 167), an ability that depends upon
the craftsman’s or artisan’s capacity to envision particular forms, and to bring his manual
skills and perceptual acuity into the service of their implementation. But with the adoption of a mechanistic view of nature, the activity of making began to take on a quite
different aspect. The image of the artisan, immersed with the whole of his being in a
sensuous engagement with the material, was gradually supplanted by that of the operative whose job it is to set in motion an exterior system of productive forces, according to
principles of mechanical functioning that are entirely indifferent to particular human aptitudes and sensibilities.
The artisan, of course, knows what he is making, and works to clear standards of perfection. He may be less than clear, however, about the methods by which his results are
achieved, and is often quite unable to specify these methods with any precision. The operative, on the other hand, is guided in his activity by formal and explicit rules of procedure
whose validity is independent of the speciﬁc ends to which they are applied. These rules,
grounded in the general principles of mechanics, furnish the logos of tekhnē, the rationalisation of the process of production that was lacking from the craftsman’s art (Mitcham
1979: 182). The effect of this rationalisation, however, is to remove the creative part of
making from the context of physical engagement between workman and material, and to
place it antecedent to this engagement in the form of an intellectual process of design. A
thoroughgoing distinction is thus introduced between the design of things and their
construction. The thing, we say, is virtually ‘conceived’ in advance of its realisation in
practice. According to one view, these phases of design and construction correspond to
the separate provinces of engineering and technology respectively (Mitcham 1978: 230).
The engineer, in Mitcham’s words, ‘is not so much one who actually makes or constructs
an artifact, as one who directs, plans or designs’, whereas the technician or technologist
has the knowledge and proﬁciency to execute designs rather than to conceive them.
This dichotomy between conception and execution is institutionalised, however, in many
other domains of modern society. It is apparent, for example, in the opposition between
architecture and the building industry: the architect, classically a ‘master-builder’, is now
a creator of structures that are left to the industry to put up. The architect designs the
house, the builder implements the architect’s design. One creates but does not implement;
the other implements but does not create (Coleman 1988: 15–16). An identical logic,
incidentally, underwrites the distinction in natural science between theoretical conjecture
and experimental observation. And signiﬁcantly, the process by which the architect or
theoretical scientist arrives at novel ideas, as distinct from their subsequent implementation or testing, is often described as more akin to art – a term once synonymous with
practical skill but now opposed to technology as the spontaneous work of the human
imagination to the mechanical execution of predetermined operational sequences. Where
excellence in the one ﬁeld is attributed to genius, in the other it is attributed to expertise. Thus, constituted by its opposition to design, technique is reduced to the ‘merely
technical’, and ultimately to the mechanical.
Now in the classical conception, tekhnē and mēkhanē were opposed as skills to the
various mechanical devices which assist their application. In the modern view, by contrast,

Skill
Design
: Architecture
Engineering
vs.
Tekhne¯ = skilled making
Execution : Construction
Technology
(‘purely technical’
or ‘mechanical’)
Mekhane¯ = manual devices
¯
Figure 15.1 A comparison of classical and modern conceptions of the
technical.
the technical has joined the mechanical, meaning ‘an instrumentality of a particular sort, 8
namely, that which can be separated from the speciﬁc context of human experience and 9
sensibility as operative in making’ (Bruzina 1982: 167). To borrow, with some modi- 20
ﬁcation, a diagram from Bruzina, classical and modern understandings of the technical 1
may be compared as shown in Figure 15.1. With this reduction of skilled making, tekhnē, 2
to ‘purely technical’ execution, the performance is no longer seen to issue from the hand 3
and eye of the concrete, experiencing human subject, and acquires a kind of objectivity 4
and independence from human agency. For whereas the work of making originates with 5
the craftsman or artisan, the operative is merely accessory to processes whose speciﬁcation 6
has been laid down in advance. It is this separability of constructive work from the context 7
of sensory experience that gives it the quality of being mechanical. With the machine, as 8
Bruzina puts it, ‘the entire work-action becomes something that can be dealt with inde- 9
pendently of human being in its properties and principles of function’ (1982: 170). 30
Whether or not the work is actually powered by human muscles is beside the point. 1
Whatever the motive force, where the movements of an instrumental apparatus in the 2
execution of a given design are independently prescribed in its initial conditions, and 3
follow a set course, we are dealing with a machine performance. And the prescriptions 4
embodied in the machine, derived through the application of scientiﬁc law, are of course 5
technological.
THE DEFINITION OF TECHNOLOGY
A cursory review of the literature in the history and philosophy of technology reveals a 40
plethora of approaches to the deﬁnition of its subject matter, not unlike that in anthro- 1
pology surrounding the deﬁnition of culture. Both disciplines have faced an uphill task 2
in their search for a concept, whether of technology or culture, whose meaning transcends 3
the very historical and ethnological variation they aim to document, and of which their 4
own inquiries are a part. Thus deﬁnitions of technology differ widely, depending on 5
whether the intent is to embrace the totality of human works, in all societies and during 6
all epochs, or to mark the speciﬁc historical transformations that gave rise to the concept 7
in the ﬁrst place. Bruzina exempliﬁes the latter approach, in advancing his thesis that ‘only 118
CLASSICAL

MODERN

Tools, minds and machines • 297 •

when making by way of the instrumental device becomes principally a machine performance, and the minding of it principally science, does tekhnē/ars become technology in the
proper sense of the word’ (1982: 171). He is subsequently still more explicit about the
term’s historical speciﬁcity: ‘technology is the action of making when the knowledge
that guides it is explicit science as that has developed since the time of Galileo’ (1982:
178). Cardwell is likewise careful to distinguish ‘technology’, as a neologism of the seventeenth century, from the previous, and more elementary ‘technics’. He associates the
emergence of technology with a mechanistic ontology that led to the practice of technics
‘becoming self-conscious and at the same time increasingly science-based’ (Cardwell 1973:
360).
This approach to the deﬁnition of technology leads inevitably to the problem of its
relation with science. I do not intend to dwell at any length on this controversial issue.
It sufﬁces to draw a broad distinction between those who would not credit technology
with any autonomous knowledge base of its own but rather regard it as the practical application of knowledge that belongs essentially to science, and those for whom technology
exists as a knowledge system in its own right, alongside science but no more dependent
on it than is science on technology. An instance of the former position is the deﬁnition
with which Singer, Hall and Holmyard preface their massive History of Technology. It is
a history, they claim, of ‘how things are commonly done or made’ and ‘what things are
done or made’ (1954–8, I: vii). The knowledge that underlies both the ‘how’ and the
‘what’ is conspicuously absent from their deﬁnition. It is assumed that such knowledge
pertains to science, not to technology. And yet the deﬁnition is intended to be applicable
to the entire sweep of human history, beginning with the origins of language and the ﬁrst
man-made tools. If technology is all toolmaking and tool-using, guided only during the
modern era by scientiﬁc knowledge, we are left wondering – with Layton (1974) – what
kind of knowledge could have informed the making activities of pre-modern societies.
Layton’s own position accords with the second of the two approaches outlined above: he
deﬁnes technology as ‘systematic knowledge of the industrial arts’ (1974: 3), both distinct
from and complementary to science. More recently, Adams (1996) has taken a similar
view, arguing that at no point in its history has technology ever been the mere implementation of scientiﬁc knowledge. Rather, Adams claims, scientists and technologists have
distinctive ways of knowing and thinking, and have coexisted in a relationship that, though
tense and awkward, has always been two-way.
For other writers, technology is effectively equivalent to the ﬁeld of operation of human
labour, together with the products to which it gives rise. Drucker, for example, deﬁnes
technology ‘as human action on physical objects or as a set of physical objects characterised by serving human purposes. Either way the realm and subject matter of the study
of technology would be human work’ (1970: 39). But to equate technology with work is
to render it redundant as a conceptual category. It might make more sense to say
that human work is the context for the study of technology. Mitcham’s suggestion that
‘the term [technology] be stipulated to refer to the human making and using of material
artefacts in all forms and aspects’ (1978: 232) suffers from the same problem of overgenerality, and the same unnecessary conﬂation of technology with the labour-process.
There seems to be no way to prevent the concept of technology from spilling over from
a narrow focus on tools and techniques to embrace the entire ﬁeld of human endeavour.
Is there anything, the sceptic might ask, about human life and activity that is not technological? If not, what need have we for the concept of technology at all? Beyond stating
the obvious, how does it help us to know that everything is technological?

Skill
Another family of deﬁnitions focus explicitly on the idea of technology as a corpus of 1
knowledge, as distinct both from the productive activities in which it is put to use, and 2
from the artiﬁcial products of such activity. Burns recognises that there is a major discrep- 3
ancy between historical and sociological usages that link technology to the rise of science 4
and mechanised industry in the modern Western world, and the much broader usage of 5
anthropologists and archaeologists who would apply the concept to peoples of all times and 6
places. In the former usage, technology is ‘the body of knowledge about (a) scientiﬁc 7
principles and discoveries and (b) existing and previous industrial processes’; in the latter it 8
is ‘the body of knowledge available for the fashioning of implements of all kinds, for the 9
practice of crafts and manual skills . . ., and for the extraction and collection of materials 10
of all kinds’ (Burns 1964: 716). In a classic anthropological statement, Firth deﬁnes the 1
technological system as the ‘material equipment, and body of knowledge at command 2
of the participants in the economy’ (1939: 78). And according to Merrill, technologies are 3
‘bodies of skills, knowledge, and procedures for making, using and doing useful things’, or 4
more broadly, ‘technology . . . connotes the practical arts’ (1968: 576).
Now skills, knowledge and procedures could all be regarded as parts of human culture, 6
leading Margolis to observe that ‘culture is both the context of technology and the genus 7
of which the technological cannot be more than a determinate species’ (1978: 27). Non- 8
human animals, of course, may be credited with both perceptual knowledge and practical 9
intelligence; however it is widely believed that they lack the symbolic intelligence 20
which is a prerequisite for the intentional design of novel forms (invention) and for their 1
transmission by teaching rather than imitative learning. At the root of this capacity for 2
symbolically mediated thought and instruction, according to Margolis, is language: thus 3
for him, technology is ‘the practical capacity of a creature that has mastered language and 4
that can consider alternative ways of acting and making’ (1978: 28). In this sense, far 5
from being limited to certain societies and periods, technology might be considered a 6
human universal, ‘roughly characterized as the intersection of practical knowledge and 7
ideology’ (Margolis 1978: 34). I have myself argued, along rather similar lines, that while 8
technology consists of knowledge encoded in symbols, it is knowledge only in a certain 9
aspect, as models for rather than of (Geertz 1973: 93–4), and that knowledge becomes 30
technology by virtue of a ‘practical orientation to the material world’ that simultaneously 1
converts neutral objects into useful equipment (Ingold 1986a: 43).
Perhaps the most comprehensive characterisation of technology in recent literature comes 3
from McGinn: ‘it is’, he writes, ‘a form of activity that is fabricative, material product- 4
Society
Nature
Man
intellect (knowledge)
making
activity
or
artifacts or
process
objects
use
will (volition)
Figure 15.2 Modes of technology
After C. Mitcham, Types of technology, Research in Philosophy and Technology 1, 1978, p. 234.

Tools, minds and machines • 299 •

making or object-transforming, purposive (with the general purpose of expanding the
realm of the humanly possible), knowledge-based, resource-employing, methodical,
embedded in a sociocultural-environmental inﬂuence ﬁeld, and informed by its practitioners’ mental sets’ (1978: 190). As a deﬁnition this is hopelessly cumbersome; it does
however have the advantage of providing a convenient checklist of factors that need to
be considered in any complete account of the human labour-process as it is involved
in the production of things. In order to resolve the deﬁnitional turmoil revealed in the
foregoing discussion, a necessary ﬁrst-step is surely to separate out the components
of purpose, knowledge, activity and artefacts that are implicated in productive work.
Mitcham distinguishes between technology-as-objects, technology-as-process, technologyas-knowledge and technology-as-volition, linking them together in the form of a diagram
reproduced here as Figure 15.2 (Mitcham 1978: 233–4). I ﬁnd this a helpful place from
which to start.

OBJECT, PROCESS, KNOWLEDGE AND VOLITION
‘Technology-as-objects’ encompasses the entire range of fabricated items intended for some
use or other, including – in Mumford’s classiﬁcation (1946: 11) – tools, utensils, utilities,
apparatus and machines. Mumford brings all of these under his notion of ‘technics’, a term
which we could well retain to denote the area of overlap between instruments and artefacts.
An instrument, or ‘tool’ in the broadest possible sense, is any object that can be turned to
account by an animal (not necessarily human) in the realisation of its project (Ingold 1986a:
47). Many instruments, even human ones, are in no sense constructed for a purpose: I have
one such beside me as I write, a stone recovered from a pebble beach which I use as a paperweight. The stone is a tool but not a technic. Likewise the earth is not a technic, even
though Marx referred to it (not without a hint of absurdity) as ‘the most general instrument of labour . . . since it provides the worker with a platform for all his operations’ (1930:
173). On the other hand there are artefacts which, though fabricated in accordance with
an already existing design, are not designed to be used in any further project of fabrication.
A piece of sculpture is an artefact, so is a cake, but neither of them is a technic.
The second mode of technology in Mitcham’s scheme, ‘technology-as-process’, includes
most importantly the activities we commonly denote as making and using. Of course in
making one thing we commonly use another, though the reverse does not hold (Mitcham
1978: 253, Ingold 1986a: 58). The key element here is that of skill, deﬁned by Feibleman
as ‘proﬁciency in the use of artefacts’ (1966: 318). It is this element that makes tailoring
and weaving, to use Marx’s example, ‘qualitatively different productive activities’, although
both involve the expenditure of physical and mental effort, and ‘in this sense are both of
them human labour’ (Marx 1930: 13). Note however that skilled activity does not necessarily result in the production of objects, nor need it involve their manipulation: the
violinist performs on her instrument, but the dancer performs with her own body. Clearly,
therefore, technique must be conceptually disengaged from technics. But we face a more
difﬁcult problem when we come to the distinction – if one can be made – between skill
and intelligence, or between technique and technology in the third of Mitcham’s modes,
as knowledge.
One possible formulation of this distinction is suggested by David Pye (1964: 55). He
regards skill simply as a ‘particular application of dexterity’, in contrast to what he calls
‘know-how’, which refers to the capacity of the craftsman to envision forms in advance
of their implementation. I have suggested elsewhere that the priority of know-how over

Skill
skill could mark a critical threshold in the evolution of human constructive abilities, 1
making possible the design of new forms and thus greatly speeding up the tempo of 2
cultural change (Ingold 1986a: 31). Edwin Layton makes a rather similar distinction 3
between skill and knowledge, while insisting that you cannot have one without the other: 4
‘Technique means detailed procedures and skill and their application. But complex proce- 5
dures can only come into being through knowledge. Skill is the “ability to use one’s 6
knowledge effectively”. A common synonym for technology is “know-how”. But how can 7
there be “know-how” without knowledge?’ (1974: 33–4). Layton identiﬁes the ‘central 8
purpose of technology’ as design, ‘an adaptation of means to some preconceived end’. 9
Originating as a conception in the designer’s mind, it is converted by degrees into detailed 10
blueprints, which in turn are translated into tools and artefacts. Technology, Layton 1
suggests, may be viewed as the entire spectrum from ideas, through blueprints and tech- 2
niques, to things (1974: 37–8).
The fourth of Mitcham’s ‘modes of technology’, as volition, is the least developed and 4
most problematic. It expresses the crucial fact that human labour is, by and large, purpo- 5
sive activity (Marx 1930: 170). Yet as we shall see, the will that instigates production is 6
not necessarily the will of the producer. The craftsman of capitalist manufacture certainly 7
knows what he is making, and handles his tools accordingly. In that sense he is person- 8
ally involved in his work in a way that the machine operative is not (Feibleman 1966: 9
321). But that capacity to envision and implement, depending as it does on acquired skills 20
of perception and action, is not his to command, for along with his bodily energy it forms 1
part of the labour power contracted to the employer. Thus the alienation of labour 2
power under capitalist relations of production did not, at least prior to the introduction 3
of industrial machinofacture, entail any split between the capacities of mind and body. 4
Rather, the line of division lies between the capacities of the whole person, inseparably 5
mind and body, and the agency that puts these capacities to work. In short, to say that 6
a man works from his own knowledge is not the same as saying that he works of his own 7
volition. This is a point to which I shall return, in the context of a comparison between 8
the ‘subjective’ labour organisation of manufacture and the ‘objective’ organisation of 9
machinofacture. But ﬁrst we have to look more closely at the distinction between machines 30
and ordinary tools.
ON THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MACHINES AND TOOLS
To deﬁne the machine is no simple matter, since the term has undergone important 5
changes in its meaning from antiquity to the present day. Originally connoting an ‘instru- 6
ment for lifting heavy weights’, using the principles of wheel and axle, lever and inclined 7
plane, but empowered by the human body through the hand, in its modern sense the 8
machine is often distinguished from the tool on the grounds that it draws on a source of 9
power outside the body, and is not manually operated (Mitcham 1978: 235–6, 271–2 40
fn. 16). Thus the notion of the tool has come to be reserved for that aspect of a device 1
that is activated by human agency, whereas ‘machine’, in Mitcham’s words, commonly 2
‘denotes an instrument in its human independence, or at least that aspect of the device 3
which is not dependent on man’ (1978: 236). This view is not far removed from 4
Mumford’s earlier contention that ‘the essential distinction between a machine and a tool 5
lies in the degree of independence in the operation from the skill and motive power of 6
the operator: the tool lends itself to manipulation, the machine to automatic action’ 7
(Mumford 1946: 10).

Tools, minds and machines • 301 •

Taking the ‘degree of independence’ as a variable, we could envisage a continuum whose
poles are on the one hand the human body, performing operations unassisted by any
extra-somatic aids whatever, and on the other hand the automaton, in which not only
the motive power but also the operational constraints are packaged within the same artiﬁcial system. Just such a continuum was envisaged by André Leroi-Gourhan in his
monumental work on Gesture and Speech. He divided the continuum into ﬁve stages,
arranged in an evolutionary sequence, beginning with that of manipulative action, in which
the practitioner works with bare hands. This is followed by the hand’s exerting a direct
motor function, by moving the tool in its grasp. In the third stage the hand exercises an
indirect motor function, by applying force to a device, such as a spring, crank, lever or
pulley cable, that in turn moves the tool. In the fourth the hand works to harness the
energy of a non-human power source, which in turn directly or indirectly moves the tool,
as with animal traction, water-driven mills, and so on. Finally, in fully automatic action,
there is nothing for the hand to do but to set off a programmed process by pushing a
button or throwing a switch (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 242–9). The whole process may be
seen as a gradual displacement of technical operations from the human organism onto the
artiﬁcial machine, a displacement that Leroi-Gourhan calls ‘exteriorisation’. For LeroiGourhan, however, the exteriorisation of technical operations did not fundamentally alter
their nature. In the routine manipulation of hand tools, he believed, the body functions
to all intents and purposes like a machine; or to put it the other way around, the workings of the machine effectively mimic those of the living body, of which it is but an
‘improved artiﬁcial copy’ (1993: 269).
Writing a century before Leroi-Gourhan, Karl Marx had also embarked upon a comparison between the human handling of tools and machine performance. But he had come
to precisely the opposite conclusion. Crucial to handling, in Marx’s terms, is that the
worker does not just apply motor force but actually guides the movement of the tool,
watching as he works, and making continual adjustments in response both to environmental perturbations and to his perceptual monitoring of the developing form. In the
machine, by contrast, responsibility for the movements of the tool – or what has now
become the device’s ‘working point’ – is transferred from dextrous hands to a mechanism
that is indifferent to its surroundings and answerable only to instructions that have been
fed into it in advance. Once the guidance of the working point is relinquished to the
machine, Marx argued, it is more or less incidental whether the motive power comes from
human muscles, from non-human animals such as horses (whose substitution for humans
in this capacity gave rise to the notion of ‘horse-power’), or from wind, water, steam,
electricity or whatever (Marx 1930: 396–7). Thus a machine may still be hand-operated,
but when the hand delivers only muscle-power and not skilled constraint – that is, when
the technically effective gesture ceases to be coupled to immediate sensory perception –
the tool or working point is no longer ‘handled’ in Marx’s sense. The essential distinction, as he put it, lies ‘between a man as a simple motor force and as a worker who
actually handles tools’ (1930: 395).
Bearing this distinction in mind, we may observe that the transition from hand tool
to automatic machine can take two alternative courses, as shown schematically in Figure
15.3. The diagram is constructed from three binary oppositions, between (1) human (–)
and non-human (+) power; (2) skilled (–) and mechanical (+) constraint; and (3) somatic
(–) and extra-somatic (+) working points. With the hand tool (a), the working point is
a detached instrument, but the hand that holds it not only delivers a bodily power but
also guides the motion of the tool. With the automaton (d), these human functions have

Skill

been entirely supplanted by the apparatus. Of 1
the two intermediate cases, (b) and (c), the ﬁrst 2
+
comprises what are often called ‘machine tools’, 3
–
(a)
(d)
which, though driven from an external power- 4
source, still call for skilled manipulation by an 5
+
(1) –
+
operator. An example is the power-drill. But in 6
(2) –
+
the second case, of ‘man-powered machines’, 7
(3) +
+
–
the opposite situation obtains, for the constraint 8
+
is mechanical, while human beings merely 9
supply the motive power, for example by 10
+
working a treadle, turning a crank, or operating 1
(c)
a pump-handle. The line of distinction between 2
manpower and skilled constraint thus places (c) 3
on the side of the machine, but leaves (b) on 4
Figure 15.3 Routes of transition from hand tool to
the side of the tool.
automaton.
There are, it is true, certain devices that appear 6
at ﬁrst glance to resist classiﬁcation in these 7
terms. Consider for example the pedal-powered potter’s wheel. Not only does the potter 8
provide the motive force, but he also shapes the pot using his ﬁngers, unaided 9
by any other instruments whatever. The wheel is surely a detached device, yet the power, 20
the skill and the working point are all supplied by the human operator. The paradox 1
presented by this instance is resolved by recognising that in operating his wheel, the potter 2
is really working two systems simultaneously. One, driven by the body via the feet, gener- 3
ates the rotary motion of the pot, and requires no skill (barring perhaps a speed control). 4
The other is a skilled system comprised by the intimate co-ordination of manual, visual 5
and tactile functions. Technically, therefore, the wheel is a machine, operated in conjunc- 6
tion with a somatic tool, the hand. The situation with regard to the woodworker’s lathe 7
is similar, except that since wood is not pliable as is clay, the hand operates through the 8
medium of a chiseling tool. It is important to recognise such compound systems for what 9
they are, since even the total automation of one component need not in any way reduce 30
the element of human ‘handling’ of the other component. This is a point to which I shall 1
return.
MOTORS, TRANSMITTERS AND WORKING PARTS
A complete machine, according to Marx, ‘consists of three essentially distinct parts, the 6
motor machine, the transmitting mechanism, and the mechanical tool or working machine’ 7
(1930: 393). This was no new idea: when Marx was writing it was already part of the 8
orthodoxy of French mechanical instruction, supported by the authority of the geometer- 9
engineer, Jean-Victor Poncelet (1788–1867). ‘The science of machines’, as Poncelet had 40
written, ‘consists of the science of tools, the science of motors, and the science of commu- 1
nicators or modiﬁers of movement’ (Poncelet 1844, III 11, my translation). Besides noting 2
the interchangeability of manpower and machine-power, Marx devoted some attention to 3
the functional equivalence of manually-operated and machine-operated tools or working 4
parts. The spindles of the spinning machine, the knives of the chopping machine and the 5
saws of the sawing machine are all immediately recognisable as the counterparts of tools 6
once manipulated by hand, albeit much modiﬁed to ﬁt in with the requirements of the 7
apparatus. But emancipated from the bodily restrictions of manual operation, such tools 118
(b)

Tools, minds and machines • 303 •

could increase in number or scale by several orders of magnitude. The spinner can operate
only one wheel at a time, whereas the spinning jenny has up to eighteen spindles going
simultaneously; the steam-hammer has a head just like the hammer of the blacksmith,
but as Marx observed, ‘such a heavy one that Thor himself could not wield it’ (Marx
1930: 408). Nevertheless, despite their gargantuan proportions, mechanised tools carry
out ‘the same operations which the manual worker of former days carried out with tools
of a like kind’ (1930: 394).
Thus with regard to both motive power and working parts, the difference between tools
and machines is one of degree rather than kind. For Marx the essential, qualitative difference, as we have seen, lies in the substitution of a mechanically determining system for
a skilled system of constraint (on this distinction, see Pye 1964: 53–4). Curiously, however,
the latter criterion does not enter into Marx’s initial speciﬁcation of the components of
the complete machine, whereas the ‘transmitting mechanism’, which does appear as the
third term of his speciﬁcation – alongside motive power and working parts – receives no
further mention at all. This mechanism, corresponding to the ‘communicators’ and ‘modiﬁers’ of Poncelet, consists of pulleys, cog-wheels, belts, gears, etc., all of which impart
motion to the tool. In the case of manually operated tools, the transmission function is
of course performed by the links and joints of the human skeleton. Empowered by the
muscles, its characteristic movements are of a reciprocating, back-and-forth nature, and
these are transmitted directly – via the handle of the tool – to its working point. But
machines, unlike tools, ‘typically achieve their effect by means of rotary rather than reciprocating motions’ (Mitcham 1978: 239, cf. Mumford 1946: 80). Now rotary movement
does not come naturally to the body: it is acquired only with difﬁculty and is always
discontinuous. As Lynn White observed: ‘continuous rotary motion is typical of inorganic
matter, whereas reciprocating motion is the sole form of movement found in living things’
(1962: 115). Hence a necessary step in the transition from hand tools to man-powered
machines – from (a) to (c) in Figure 15.3 – was the incorporation of an artiﬁcial mechanism that would convert reciprocating to rotary motion. Such a mechanism is the crank,
and its discovery represents one of the most important moments in the early development
of machinery (White 1962: 103–17).
Is there, then, any connection between the substitution – by means of a transmitting
mechanism – of rotary for reciprocating motion, and the substitution of mechanical determination for skilled constraint? Or to put the question another way: can a tool or working
point be handled if its motion is fundamentally distinct from the motion of the hand as
an empowering agency (Bruzina 1982: 170)? The potter, working with bare hands, can
feel the clay as he shapes it, but this is no less true of the woodcarver who – though he
perforce must use a tool such as a knife or chisel – feels the wood through its contact
with the tool more than he does the tool through its contact with the hand. It is not
difﬁcult, moreover, to think of examples where the technically effective gesture remains
closely coupled to sensory perception, even though the application of force is indirect.
The sailor, hauling a rope through a pulley block, still feels the wind in the sails. But the
hurdy-gurdy player differs from the violinist in that, whereas the latter feels the resistance
offered to the bow by the vibrating string (rather than that offered to his hand by the
chock of the bow), the former feels only the resistance of the handle of the wooden wheel
that, as it is turned, rubs against the strings and causes them to vibrate.
It is perhaps no accident, then, that most examples of devices in which a man acts, in
Marx’s words, only as ‘a simple motor force’, work by rotary motion. It would seem that,
in operating a crank, the intimate link between hand and tool – by virtue of which the

Skill
latter is experienced by the operator as an extension of the former – is severed. More 1
generally, the conversion of reciprocating to rotary motion through a transmitting mech- 2
anism decouples action from perception, divorcing technically effective operations from 3
their context in the immediate sensory experience of practitioners. It is no longer possible, 4
as the exercise of skilled constraint requires, to feel or to respond to the work of the tool 5
upon the material. Indeed the device may be operated just as well, if not better, by foot 6
as by hand, as in the the case of the aforementioned potter’s wheel. For while it lacks the 7
dominant hand’s dexterity, the foot is probably a more efﬁcient deliverer of sustained 8
muscle-power.
That the transition from hand-tools to man-powered machines generally involved a 10
conversion of reciprocating to rotary motion is also indicated by the modiﬁcations entailed 1
in their working parts. For example, oars give way to rotating paddles, the straight saw 2
becomes circular, and the rectangular surface of the whetstone gives way to the cylindrical 3
surface of the grinding stone. Where, on the other hand, mechanisation involves the substi- 4
tution of machine power for manpower, as in the development of so-called machine tools, 5
the mechanism of transmission often has quite the opposite function: not of converting 6
the reciprocating movement of the body into the rotary movement of the working part, 7
but of converting the rotary movement of the mechanical motor into a reciprocating move- 8
ment that imitates the original movement of the body in its operation of a working part 9
which remains unchanged in form (if not in scale). One example is the mechanised pile- 20
driver; another is the electric toothbrush.
THE COMPLETE MACHINE
Up to now we have kept within Poncelet’s conception, endorsed by Marx, of the complete 5
machine as a combination of motor, transmitter and working parts or tools. Though at 6
ﬁrst glance this makes a good deal of sense, it will not withstand closer scrutiny, as was 7
shown by Reuleaux in his classic work of 1876, The Kinematics of Machinery. Considering 8
ﬁrst the nature of the tool, Reuleaux observes that there is a large class of machines from 9
which the tool is completely absent, namely those used for altering the positions of things, 30
or ‘place-changing machines’. An example is the crane. It might be supposed that the rope 1
is the transmitter and the hook the tool. But we could, if need be, reject the hook and 2
lift a load by tying a loop in the rope. Do we say, then, that the loop has become the 3
tool? What if the load is discarded and we wish to wind up the empty rope? The tool 4
has apparently disappeared, while what we had thought to be the transmitter of motion 5
(the rope) has now become the object moved. Yet the crane functions entirely as before. 6
If the functioning of the machine is indifferent to the presence or absence of the tool, 7
the latter cannot be essential to its completeness.
Those machines that are equipped with tools, Reuleaux argued, have as their common 9
object the alteration in form of some material: they are ‘form-changing machines’. Looking 40
more closely at the relation, in such machines, between the tool and the object worked 1
upon (the work-piece), Reuleaux comes to a rather remarkable conclusion: that the work- 2
piece is in fact an integral part of the machine, regarded as a ‘closed kinematic chain’. 3
The interface between tool and work-piece is just one of any number of points through 4
which the chain continues without interruption. Indeed it is not always possible to draw 5
the line at all between work-piece, tool and transmitter. In a spinning machine, for example, 6
the thread is not only what is worked upon but also a transmitter of force, while every 7
ﬁbre of the thread acts as a tool for twisting each and every other. This same observation 118

Tools, minds and machines • 305 •

resolves the paradox of the crane, where the rope may be regarded interchangeably as a
transmitter, a lifting device and an object lifted. In all these capacities both the rope and
anything that may be attached to it are simply parts of the whole machine.
If the machine ‘ends’ in the work-piece rather than the tool, it likewise begins with the
‘prime-mover’ rather than with the receptor of that motion. The prime-mover, or driver,
could be a machine such as a steam-engine, or a living agent (human or animal). Reuleaux’s
discussion of the mechanical employment of human muscle-power is especially revealing.
Reproduced in Figure 15.4 is his diagram of a man operating a treadle grindstone. It
shows that in operation, ‘the body of the worker becomes kinematically chained with the
machine’ (1876: 500) – in other words the worker is as much a part of the machine as
is the work-piece. Now if we disregard what the man is doing with his hands and arms,
and the object he holds, the stone itself could be treated as the work-piece, and the whole
machine as a place-changer designed to secure the rotation of the stone. From the diagram
it can be seen that the machine operates through the kinematic conjunction of two lever
cranks. One crank is formed by the links a, b and c, secured at points 1 and 4 by the
ﬁxed frame d. The other crank, which drives the ﬁrst, is formed by the links a′, b′ and
c′, secured at points 1′ and 4 by the ﬁxed frame d′. There is no difference, in principle,
between the artiﬁcal coupler b and the shinbone b′, nor between the frame d, built into
the structure of the device, and the frame d′, formed through the posture of the man. As
this example demonstrates, the machine is not external to the worker, ‘receiving’ from
him its motive force, for in reality ‘the worker makes a portion of his own body into a
mechanism, which he brings into
combination, that is chains kinematically, with the mechanism to be driven’
(1876: 501).
The deﬁnition of the machine that
Reuleaux proposes (having discussed a
whole catalogue of contemporary alternatives, see his footnote 7, pp. 587–90)
runs as follows: ‘A machine is a combination of resistant bodies so arranged
that by their means the mechanical
forces of nature can be compelled to do
work accompanied by certain determinate motions’ (1876: 35, 503).
Mumford’s criticism (1946: 9) that
this deﬁnition ‘leaves out the large class
of machines operated by manpower’ is
quite unfounded, since as we have
seen, Reuleaux devotes some attention
to the consideration of such machines,
concluding that – insofar as the body
delivers a purely physical effort – it is
a ‘force of nature’ like any other, that
can be harnessed to drive a kinematic
chain. ‘So far . . . as machines driven Figure 15.4 Man working a treadle grindstone
by muscular power are themselves From F. Reuleaux, The kinematics of machinery, published by
closed kinematic chains, they may be Macmillan, 1876, p. 501.

Skill
SKILLED
constraint
SYSTEM
vision
OPERATOR
WORK-PIECE
muscle
power
motive force
DETERMINING
FOOT
WHEEL
crank
(reciprocating
(rotary motion)
SYSTEM
motion)
Figure 15.5 Skilled and determining systems.
regarded as complete machines, and do not themselves differ from machines driven by any 9
other than muscular force’ (Reuleaux 1876: 508). However, Reuleaux does recognise that 20
the employment of humans and animals to drive machinery introduces a ‘special compli- 1
cation’ in that the movements of links in the organic part of the kinematic chain are nec- 2
essarily constrained ‘by the action of forces commanded by the will’ (1876: 508). Returning 3
to the man in the diagram (Figure 15.4), to the extent that the work performed by the 4
lower part of his body is ‘purely physical . . . and not intellectual’, this complication may 5
be safely ignored. But if we consider the upper part of the body, then it is apparent that he 6
is linked into the machine in a quite different way: holding the work-piece in skilled hands, 7
he is constantly adjusting its position and pressure against the stone, under a close and 8
watchful gaze.
Like the potter in our earlier example, we may say of the grinder – with Reuleaux – 30
that he ‘is doubly connected to the machine at which he works’, or that ‘human agency 1
has a twofold action in it’ (1876: 509). In both machines, potter’s wheel and grindstone, 2
the work-piece stands at the point of intersection between the two systems: the one 3
imparting ‘determinate motions’, the other skilled constraint. The fact that in the one 4
case the work-piece is afﬁxed to the rotating wheel while worked upon by the hand, 5
whereas in the other it is held in the hand while worked upon by the rotating stone, is 6
immaterial. The important point is that by the twofold action of the human operator, 7
skill has been dissociated from motive force, even though both are delivered by the same 8
agent. In Figure 15.5 this point is illustrated diagrammatically. In the determining system, 9
operated through the foot, all possible motions are ﬁxed in advance by the structure of 40
the machine; in the skilled system, operating through the hand, motions may be varied 1
at will, and the intended result is achieved through a continuous process of modiﬁcation 2
and adjustment, requiring constant visual attention (cf. Pye 1964: 54).
MACHINES AND ANIMALS
Before pursuing further the implications of this distinction between skilled and deter- 7
mining systems, I should like to make a brief detour to consider the human employment 118
HAND

Tools, minds and machines • 307 •

of domestic animals. I have noted in passing that human muscle power may be replaced
by the power not only of inanimate machines, but also of non-human animals. How,
then, does the use of domestic animals differ from the use of tools and machinery? And
to what extent can the relation between the animal and its human master (or mistress)
be compared to man’s mastery over the machine?
Marx, at one point, is quite prepared to treat domestic animals as ‘instruments of labour’,
taking their place alongside the established repertoire of simple hand tools: ‘From the dawn
of human history, man, in addition to making use of elaborated stones, pieces of wood,
bones and shells, turned to account the services of domesticated animals as instruments of
labour – these beasts, tamed, modiﬁed, bred by human labour, being among the chief
of the primitive instruments of labour’ (1930: 171–2). But to regard the animal as a mere
tool is to deny its capacity for autonomous movement (Reed 1988a); tools cannot ‘act back’
or literally interact with their users, they only conduct the users’ action on the environment
(Cohen 1978: 43–4). Evidently, therefore, the human ‘handling’ of animals is quite different from the handling of tools. If anything, it can be compared to the craftsman’s handling
of raw material; but whereas the craftsman’s aim is to realise a particular form, the trainer
aims to establish a particular pattern of skilled behavioural responses.
In fact, animal domestication very often does involve the use of manual tools, but of
a kind we have not so far encountered. They are tools of coercion, such as the whip
or spur, designed to inﬂict physical force and very often acute pain (see Chapter Four,
p. 73). Another class of tools consists of those attached to the animals themselves and
operated as part of their performance. Thus the ‘handling’ of animals is really a two-stage
operation in which the human master, through the use of the instruments of coercion,
aims to control the skilled tool-using performance of his charges. Indeed there is an immediate and obvious parallel here with slave-driving: like human slaves, similarly compelled
to work through the inﬂiction of pain, animals constitute labour itself rather than its
instruments (Ingold 1980: 88). Both humans and animals can, however, be virtually

Figure 15.6 Gin-horses.
From F. Reuleaux, The kinematics of machinery, published by Macmillan, 1876, p. 501.

Skill
reduced to a machine existence through the systematic repression of their powers of 1
autonomous action. Thus, Mumford dates the ‘ﬁrst complex, high-powered machines’ to 2
some ﬁve thousand years ago; they were composed of thousands of human bodies regi- 3
mented in ‘corpselike obedience’ to an absolute despotic authority. Such was the 4
‘megamachine’ that constructed the Egyptian pyramids (Mumford 1966: 312). Moreover, 5
there is little difference in principle between the oarsmen of the Roman slave-galley, 6
chained to their benches so that they have no other possibility of movement, and the 7
gin-horses depicted in Figure 15.6 (from Reuleaux 1876: 509).
Reuleaux writes: ‘the locomotive has often been called a steam-horse – we may reverse 9
the comparison and call the gin-horse . . . the locomotive of the machine which it drives’ 10
(1876: 508). Perhaps in no other employment has an animal come closer to being 1
converted into a pure machine, functioning simply as a prime-mover. Harnessed to the 2
apparatus, the horses have become parts of a closed kinematic chain, whose motions – 3
just like those of the grindstone in Figure 15.4 – are precisely predetermined. Yet if the 4
beasts really were machines as Cartesian philosophy would have us believe, converting oats 5
into tractive effort, it would not be necessary to shield them from extraneous sensory 6
inputs, for example by covering their eyes with blinkers. After all, the difference between 7
the horse and the locomotive is that, barring mechanical failure, locomotives do not bolt, 8
take fright, or simply decide to stop. As Marx shrewdly notes, the great disadvantage of 9
horses as a motive force for industry, quite apart from the high costs of maintenance, lies 20
in the fact that ‘a horse has a head of its own’ (1930: 397). In short, the essential differ- 1
ence between the human mastery over animals and over machines is that although both 2
– in terms of Reuleaux’s deﬁnition – ‘can be compelled to do work’, the machine is 3
compelled by the very nature of its construction whereas the animal is compelled by the 4
external imposition of coercive force. The Cartesian equation of animals and machines 5
may have served to justify their use as mechanical prime movers, but is belied by the 6
repressive techniques that had to be applied in ﬁtting them to this role.
MANUFACTURE AND MACHINOFACTURE
We have seen how, in man- or animal-powered machines, the living body becomes an 1
integral part of a complete determining system. Turning now to systems in which the 2
prime-mover is an artiﬁcial motor mechanism, such as a steam-engine, what role is left 3
to the human operator? Does he become, in Marx’s phrase (1930: 408,451), no more 4
than a ‘living appendage’ of the machine? Not quite, for it is a fact that the best-constructed 5
system of automatic machinofacture, even if provided with a continuous supply of fuel 6
and raw materials, would soon grind to a standstill without human attention. This is 7
simply because machines, unlike living organisms, are not self-maintaining systems, and 8
are incapable of making up themselves for the effects of wear and tear. As Marx himself 9
admits, machine repair and maintenance call for skilled craftsmanship, but the mechanics 40
and engineers who ply this craft ‘comprise a superior class of workmen’, having a higher 1
status (and higher pay) than the mass of the factory workforce whose principal task is to 2
keep the machines supplied. Considering the latter alone Marx notes how – at the time 3
he was writing, in the middle of the nineteenth century – machinofacture had led both 4
to a prolongation of the working day and to the homogenisation of the workforce. The 5
former was possible because, excepting breakdowns, machine power can be kept going 6
indeﬁnitely, whereas man must have his food and rest. The latter was a result of the 7
replacement of human skills by the determining motions of the machine. Moreover, once 118

Tools, minds and machines • 309 •

human motive force was dispensable, women and children – whose muscle power and
endurance were deemed inferior to men’s – became equally employable.
With regard to the relation between machines and their operators, it is vital to distinguish the inﬂuence of capitalist relations of production from the effects of mechanisation
and automisation. Consider the following statements, which appear on the same page of
Capital and which – on the face of it – seem directly contradictory:
1 In manufacture and in handicrafts, the worker uses a tool; in the factory he serves
a machine;
2 In [all kinds of capitalist production] the worker does not use the instruments of
labour, but the instruments of labour use the worker. However, it is only in machine
production that this inversion acquires a technical and palpable reality.
(Marx 1930: 451)
By ‘manufacture’ Marx is referring to the largely pre-industrial phase of capitalist production, stretching roughly from the middle of the sixteenth century to the end of the
eighteenth. The characteristic feature of such manufacture was the assembly, within a
single workshop, of a large number of highly specialised, skilled artisans performing
complementary tasks within a rigidly prescribed division of labour. These artisans, however,
did not co-operate of their own accord, for their association was a result not of relations
among themselves but of each having contracted to the same employer who commanded
the sum total of their labour-power. In effect it was he who ‘co-operated’ the working
capacities of his employees, much as in a later period, the factory-owner would ‘co-operate’
the working machines that eventually took over each of the functions originally performed
by hand (Marx 1930: 400–1).
In this sense of co-operation, which appears equally applicable to both labour-power
and machinery, we also ﬁnd the sense in which, according to statement 2 above, instruments ‘use’ their operators. What is meant is that the will or purpose that the instrument
serves to realise is not that of the worker but that of the employer. The worker who operates the instrument acts under a form of compulsion, ultimately backed by the threat of
withdrawal of the means of subsistence. From the employer’s point of view, tools are not
made to be used by workers, rather workers are made to use tools. Moreover this ‘making’
does not only exist in the element of compulsion. For unlike the craftsmen of earlier ages,
who might apply their skills to a range of tasks or commissions, the detail worker of
capitalist manufacture is rigidly trained to the performance of one limited operation within
the overall production system. Through its endless repetition, he ‘converts his whole body
into the automatic specialized instrument of that operation’ (Marx 1930: 356). Given that
these bodily aptitudes are largely acquired by long and enforced training on the job, it
might reasonably be said that instruments not only use their operators, but make them
as well. Combined together on the workshop ﬂoor, the aggregate of technically specialised
bodies constitutes what Marx calls ‘the living mechanism’ of manufacture. Naturally, it
invites comparison with the ‘lifeless mechanism’ of machinofacture, constituted by the
assemblage of machines in the industrial factory (1930: 356, 451).
In this comparison, presented schematically in Figure 15.7, we regain the sense in which
– according to the ﬁrst of the two statements cited above – the detail worker nevertheless uses his tool. In the employment of hand tools, ‘the movements of the instrument of
labour proceed from the worker’ (Marx 1930: 451); the tool does not itself prescribe the
envelope of it movement. Yet it is this envelope that determines the form of the product

Skill
raw
products
W 1 T1
W 2 T2
W3 T3
W n Tn
material
MACHINOFACTURE
W
raw
M1
M2
M3
Mn
products
material
PRIME
MOVER
Figure 15.7 The organisations of manufacture and machinofacture.
W1 – Wn detail workers
manual tools
T1 – Tn
M1 – Mn detail machines
that will be passed on, as material, to the next worker down the line. Thus the worker 7
must already have some conscious idea of the form he sets out to reproduce, and must 8
be able to translate that idea – through acquired sensorimotor skills – into the movements 9
of hand and tool. In machinofacture, however, the situation is quite otherwise, for the 30
shape of the product is already ‘written in’ to the machine, the movements of which are 1
predetermined. The consciousness of the machine operative is, so to speak, short-circuited. 2
Though the worker probably knows, if only from prior observation, what the product 3
will look like, he does not actually need to know, and the product’s materialisation is not 4
at all dependent on such knowledge.
The organisation of the labour-process in manufacture is thus an organisation at once 6
of specialised bodies and of trained minds, and rests on technical knowledge and skills 7
possessed by the workers themselves. As this knowledge and these skills are replaced by 8
the machine, the co-operation of workers – no longer differentiated in their tasks and 9
therefore freely interchangeable among successive stages of production – is reduced from 40
a complex to a simple form. In ‘serving’ the machine, factory workers are made to feel 1
their subordination to capital in a way that the detail worker of the manufacturing period 2
did not. For whereas the productive organism in manufacture, composed of sentient and 3
intelligent human beings, has an essential subjective component, this ‘no longer exists in 4
the case of machine production. Here the whole process becomes objective, is considered 5
in and by itself, analysed into its constituent phases; and the problem of carrying out each 6
detail process, and of combining the various partial processes, is solved by the technical 7
application of mechanics, chemistry, etc.’ (Marx 1930: 402). That is to say, technique has 118
MANUFACTURE

Tools, minds and machines • 311 •

been replaced by technology, ‘rule-of-thumb methods by the purposive application of
natural science’ (1930: 408).
Marx’s point that mechanisation transforms the organisation of production from the
‘purely subjective’ to the ‘purely objective’, thereby transferring human agency from the
centre to the periphery of the fabricative process, brings us back to the question with
which I began. Do machines make history?

CONCLUSION
The answer must surely be that they do not. The suggestion that they might derives from
a particular reading of Marx’s theory of history, encapsulated in his summary statement
that ‘in the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into deﬁnite relations, which are independent of their will, namely relations of production appropriate to
a given stage in the development of their material forces of production’ (1970: 20).
Whether he actually meant by this, and other similar statements, ‘that the basic trajectory of human history is explained by the advance of the productive forces’ (Shaw 1979:
171) is a moot point, but let us suppose for the sake of argument that this was his intention. What he certainly did not intend was the equation of productive forces with
machinery, even allowing for the inclusion within the complete machine of human motive
force and the raw material on which it operates. As Shaw points out, ‘the forces of production are, for Marx, thoroughly human’ (1979: 158), in the sense that they include not
just muscle-power but every aspect of man’s capacity to work. In handicrafts and manufacture this capacity is founded, as we have seen, in the knowledge, skill and experience
of human subjects. Thus, the forces of production, as Marx himself wrote, may be ‘subjective, appearing as qualities of individuals, as well as objective’ (1973: 495). And later he
refers to the ‘degree of development of the material (and hence also the intellectual) forces
of production’ (1973: 502). It is unlikely that he meant to exclude ‘intellectual’ forces
from ‘material’ ones’, since his concept of the material was constituted by its opposition
to the social rather than to the mental (Cohen 1978: 47).
Once human consciousness is admitted as a force of production, we have to conclude
that ‘people, as much as or more than the machine . . . make history’ (MacKenzie 1984:
477). Indeed the burden of Marx’s argument is that this history has involved a progressive objectiﬁcation and externalisation of the productive forces, reaching its apotheosis in
the industrial automaton. As the outcome of this process, machines have not so much
made as been made by history, one in which human beings, to an ever increasing extent,
have become the authors of their own dehumanisation.

Skill
INTRODUCTION: TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY
For many centuries, Western thought has been dominated by the idea that the mission 5
of mankind is to achieve mastery over nature. The world of nature is commonly charac- 6
terised by its opposition to the essential condition of humanity, whose purest expression 7
is taken to be civil society. My starting point in this chapter is the observation that the 8
meaning of ‘technology’, as currently understood in the West, is ﬁrmly ﬁxed within this 9
polarity of society and nature. It is important to recognise from the outset, however, that 20
terms such as society, nature and technology are far from mere labels, in themselves 1
harbouring no moral, political or evaluative commitment. Of the concept of society, it 2
has been observed that to use it is not to denote a thing but to make a claim (Wolf 1988: 3
757). Similarly, if we want to know what words like nature and technology mean, then 4
rather than seeking some delimited set of phenomena in the world – as though one could 5
point to them and say ‘There, that’s nature!’ or ‘that’s technology!’ – we should be trying 6
to discover what sorts of claims are being made with these words, and whether they are 7
justiﬁed. In the history of modern thought these claims have been concerned, above all, 8
with the ultimate supremacy of human reason. Thus society is considered to be the mode 9
of association of rational beings, nature the external world of things as it appears to the 30
reasoning subject, and technology the means by which a rational understanding of that 1
external world is turned to account for the beneﬁt of society.
Now to the evolutionary anthropologists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it 3
appeared self-evident that societies differed in the degree of cultivation of their powers of 4
reason, in the scope of their understanding of the natural world, and hence also in the 5
extent to which they were able to bend the forces of nature to their own will. The more 6
‘civilised’ the society, and the more complex its technology, the more complete was thought 7
to be its mastery or control over nature; conversely in ‘primitive’ societies, with simple 8
technologies, control over nature was thought to be weak or non-existent. The most prim- 9
itive societies of all, of course, were those of so-called ‘savages’, hunter-gatherers who had 40
yet to achieve that basic level of control marked by the domestication of animals and 1
plants. Such people were supposed to live wholly at the mercy of the vicissitudes of nature, 2
and thus to represent the absolute antithesis of Western industrial man who, through the 3
rational application of scientiﬁc knowledge, had at last subjugated nature to his sovereign 4
will. And for those who saw technology as the driving force of social development, the 5
simplicity of technology among primitive hunter-gatherers accounted for the rudimentary 6
nature of their social organisation, just as the advanced industrial technology of the West 7
was supposed to underwrite a complex social structure.

Chapter Sixteen

Society, nature and the concept
of technology

Society, nature and the concept of technology • 313 •

In contemporary anthropology, we have become used to treating such arguments with
suspicion. We cite examples of societies in which an apparently simple technology is found
side by side with systems of kinship and ritual of the utmost complexity. There is, we
say, no single measure of social advancement; a society may score highly on one criterion
but low on another. Technology is a Western preoccupation, but Australian Aborigines
are preoccupied with kinship: neither kinship nor technology furnishes a universal scale
of complexity. If Westerners belittle Aborigines on account of the simplicity of their technology, Aborigines are equally entitled to belittle Westerners on account of their primitive
notions of kinship. As Franz Boas wrote long ago, ‘we have simple industries and complex
organisation’, as well as ‘diverse industries and simple organisation’ (1940: 266–7). This
denial of any necessary link between technology and society or culture has since become
enshrined in the dominant relativistic credo of modern cultural anthropology (Pfaffenberger
1988: 243).
Yet despite the anthropological critique of the evolutionist doctrine of technologicallydriven progress, no-one seems to doubt that there is a sphere of capability in every human
society that can be identiﬁed by the concept of technology, and that in primitive societies (and above all in societies of hunters and gatherers) it may be characterised by its
relative simplicity. Indeed in their self-conscious and often contrived attempts to avoid
the derogatory connotations of the notion of primitiveness, anthropologists are inclined
to qualify their references to ‘simple societies’ with the rider that ‘simple’ denotes technological simplicity, and carries no immediate implications as regards social organisation and
culture. Thus we are told that hunting and gathering is essentially a technological regime,
and that we are not entitled to draw conclusions from the rudimentary nature of this
technology about the form or elaboration of the social relations in which its practitioners
are engaged. It is meaningless, it is said, even to speak of ‘hunting and gathering societies’ as a class, since these societies have nothing more in common than the purely
contingent fact that their members hunt and gather for their subsistence, possessing neither
domestic herds nor crops.
Two views that are diametrically opposed often turn out to be so because they are
based on common premises, and this is certainly the case with the opposition between
evolutionism and relativism that I have sketched out above. On one side, in brief, are those
who claim that the essential institutional forms of society are dictated by the requirements
of operating a technological system of some given degree of complexity, and therefore that
social change is driven by – and depends upon – technological change.1 On the other
side are those who hold that technology exerts no inﬂuence upon the form of a society,
beyond setting outer limits on the scope of human action. Within those limits, society and
culture are said to follow their own historical course, irrespective of the nature or complexity
of the technological system. Not only, however, do both sides suppose that technology can
be scaled in terms of degrees of complexity; they also share the assumption that technology
comprises an objective system of relations among things, that is wholly exterior to the social
domain of relations among persons. The impact of technology on society may be afﬁrmative or neutral, its formulae prescriptive or permissive, but in itself technology has no part
in society: it is simply given as an independent, external factor.
Having thus been placed outside of society and culture, technology could – so far as
most anthropologists were concerned – be safely ignored. It was considered to be just one
of those things, like climate or ecology, that may or may not be a determining factor in
human affairs, but whose study can be safely left to others. As climate is for meteorologists and ecology for ecologists, so technology is for engineers. The study of technological

Skill
processes was not seen as an integral part of the study of social relations, or of the study 1
of those systems of meaning that go by the name of culture, and indeed anthropology 2
lacked any framework of concepts or theoretical ideas in which to handle such processes. 3
The result is that until very recently, insofar as technology appeared in anthropological 4
accounts at all, it generally did so in the form of lists or inventories, catalogues of tools 5
and techniques which – however valuable in themselves as documentary records – bore a 6
purely descriptive purpose. Even today, and despite an upsurge of interest fuelled by the 7
revolution in computing and telecommunications, the study of technology remains one 8
of the least developed aspects of anthropological scholarship (a view shared, inter alia, by 9
Lemmonier 1986, Pfaffenberger 1988, 1992, and Hornborg 1992).
Now it is precisely the notion that society and technology are external to one another 1
that I wish to challenge. In my view, far from being a timeless datum of the human 2
condition, this externality is a product of history, and a relatively recent one at that. It 3
has emerged in the West, in the last few centuries, hand in hand with what could be 4
called a ‘machine-theoretical’ cosmology. We cannot, I think, retroject into history or 5
prehistory the modern separation of society and technology, nor can we impose it on non- 6
Western societies, without seriously distorting our understanding of them. My thesis, in 7
a nutshell, is that in the societies we study – perhaps even including our own – technical 8
relations are embedded in social relations, and can only be understood within this rela- 9
tional matrix, as one aspect of human sociality. Two further claims follow: ﬁrst, that what 20
is usually represented as a process of complexiﬁcation, a development of technology from 1
the simple to the complex, would be better seen as a process of externalisation or of disem- 2
bedding – that is, a progressive cutting out of technical from social relations. Secondly, 3
the modern concept of technology, set up as it is in opposition to society, is a product 4
of this historical process. If that is so, we cannot expect to ﬁnd a separate sphere of human 5
endeavour corresponding to ‘technology’ wherever we choose to look.
To put my case in the strongest possible terms: there is no such thing as technology in 7
pre-modern societies. Let me add at once that I do not mean that people in such societies 8
lack tools or technical skills. My point is that the concept of technology, at least in its 9
contemporary Western usage, sets out to establish the epistemological conditions for 30
society’s control over nature by maximising the distance between them. Focusing in partic- 1
ular on societies of hunters and gatherers, I shall show that through their tools and 2
techniques hunter-gatherers strive to minimise this distance, drawing nature into the nexus 3
of social relations, or ‘humanising’ it. This ‘drawing in’ has as its object to establish the 4
conditions not of control but of a kind of mutualism. In this, the tool delivers a force 5
that is personal rather than mechanical. Hence technical relations, far from being set apart 6
from social relations, are embedded in them.
Before proceeding further, I should perhaps add that the critical strategy I am adopting 8
is a well-tried one in anthropology. Substitute the term ‘economy’ for ‘technology’, and 9
everything I have said would be well in tune with most recent thinking in economic anthro- 40
pology. Over the last two or three decades, anthropologists have been at pains to show how 1
‘economy’ and ‘society’ became institutionally separated in the history of Western capital- 2
ism, how the category of the economic is itself a product of this history, how in pre- 3
capitalist societies economic relations are embedded in social relations, and how – with the 4
development of market-oriented capitalism – economic life was progressively disembedded 5
from social life (Polanyi 1957, Sahlins 1969, Godelier 1972: 92–103, Dumont 1986: 6
104–12). All that I am doing is to extend the same kind of argument to the concept of 7
technology, which up to now has escaped the critical attention that has been devoted to the 118

Society, nature and the concept of technology • 315 •

concept of economy. I believe this critical work is an essential ﬁrst step in building a coherent and theoretically informed anthropology of technology, one that takes us beyond the
mere cataloguing of tools and techniques from cultures around the world.

TOOLS, TECHNIQUES AND TECHNOLOGY
In the last chapter, I distinguished between technique and technology in terms of whether
human powers of perception and action are either immanent in, or detached from, the
processes by which things get made. In line with this distinction, in what follows I shall
take technique to refer to skills, regarded as the capabilities of particular human subjects
(see Layton 1974:3–4), and technology to mean a corpus of generalised, objective knowledge, insofar as it is capable of practical application. Both technique and technology must,
of course, be distinguished from tools. A tool, in the most general sense, is an object that
extends the capacity of an agent to operate within a given environment. But you do not
necessarily have to use a tool to implement a technique. It is a fundamental mistake, as
Marcel Mauss (1979; 104) recognised, to think that ‘there is technique only when there
is an instrument’. In the hands of a hunter or warrior the spear may be a tool for bringing
down game or wounding an adversary, but in the hands of the athlete the ﬂight of the
javelin becomes an end in itself. He uses no instrument to augment his throw, yet he still
has his technique.
Why is it, then, that in both specialised anthropological and popular Western discourse,
it tends to be assumed that technical activity is ipso facto tool-using activity? Consider,
for example, Roy Ellen’s deﬁnition of subsistence technique: ‘a combination of material
artefacts (tools and machines) and the knowledge required to make and use them’ (1982:
128). Here, technique is regarded not as a property of skilled subjects, but as an inventory
of instrumental objects together with their operational requirements. This view, I believe,
results from a conﬂation of the technical with the mechanical, a conﬂation that lies at
the very core of the modern concept of technology. For as we saw in the last chapter,
what this concept does, in effect, is to treat the workman as an operative, putting into
effect a set of mechanical principles that are both embodied in the construction of the
instruments he uses, and entirely indifferent to his own subjective aptitudes and sensibilities. In other words, productive work is divorced from human agency and assigned to
the functioning of a device. Thus, technique appears to be ‘given’ in the operational principles of the tools themselves, quite independently of the experience of their users. If all
technical activity is tool-using activity, it is because the technique is seen to reside, outside
the user, in the tool, and to come ‘packaged’ – like the instruction manual for a piece of
modern machinery – along with the tool itself.
My contention, to the contrary, is that technique is embedded in, and inseparable from,
the experience of particular subjects in the shaping of particular things. In this respect it
stands in sharp contrast to technology, which consists in a knowledge of objective principles of mechanical functioning, whose validity is completely independent both of the
subjective identity of its human carriers and of the speciﬁc contexts of its application.
Technique thus places the subject at the centre of activity, whereas technology afﬁrms the
independence of production from human subjectivity. Drawing out the contrast, Carl
Mitcham notes that
. . . tools or hand instruments tend to engender techniques, machines technologies . . .
Technique is more involved with the training of the human body and mind . . . , whereas

Skill
technology is concerned with exterior things and their rational manipulation . . . 1
Techniques rely a lot on intuition, not so much on discursive thought. Technologies, on 2
the other hand, are more tightly associated with the conscious articulation of rules and 3
principles . . . At the core of technology there seems to be a desire to transform the heuris- 4
tics of technique into algorithms of practice.
(1978: 252) 6
Now it is commonly supposed that where there are techniques there must be tech- 8
nology, for if skill lies in the effective application of knowledge, there must be knowledge 9
to apply (Layton 1974). I believe this view to be mistaken. For acting in the world is the 10
skilled practitioner’s way of knowing it. It is in the direct contact with materials, whether 1
or not mediated by tools – in the attentive touching, feeling, handling, looking and 2
listening that is entailed in the very process of creative work – that technical knowledge 3
is gained as well as applied. No separate corpus of rules and representations is required 4
to organise perceptual data or to formulate instructions for action. Thus, skill is at once 5
a form of knowledge and a form of practice, or – if you will – it is both practical know- 6
ledge and knowledgeable practice. Moreover as a form of knowledge, skill (or technique) 7
is different in kind from technology. The former is tacit, subjective, context-dependent, 8
practical ‘knowledge how’, typically acquired through observation and imitation rather 9
than formal verbal instruction. It does not therefore have to be articulated in systems of 20
rules and symbols. Technological knowledge, by contrast, is explicit rather than tacit, 1
objective rather than subjective, context-independent rather than context-dependent, 2
discursive rather than practical, ‘knowledge that’ rather than ‘knowledge how’. It is, besides, 3
encoded in words or artiﬁcial symbols, and can be transmitted by teaching in contexts 4
outside those of its practical application.
Historically, as the skilled manipulation of tools has given way to the operation of 6
mechanically determined systems, knowledge of the ﬁrst kind has been gradually devalued, 7
whilst knowledge of the second kind has come to be regarded as increasingly indispens- 8
able. Far from complementing technique by providing it with a foundation in knowledge, 9
technology has forced a division between knowledge and practice, elevating the former 30
from the practical to the discursive, and reducing the latter from creative doing or making 1
to mere execution. To see this, one has only to compare the classical, Aristotelian notion 2
of tekhnē, with its connotation of skilled craftsmanship, with the modern idiom in which 3
to say of practice that it is ‘purely technical’ is to intimate that it is merely mechanical. 4
In the dichotomy between discursive knowledge and executive practice, no space remains 5
for the practical knowledge (or knowledgeable practice) of the craftsman. Technology, in 6
short, appears to erase technique, rather than to back it up.
Moreover the transition from technique to technology, on the level of knowledge, has its 8
precise counterpart, on the level of material instruments, in the transition from the tool to 9
the machine. Recall that in the classical conception, tekhnē referred to the skilled making 40
of the craftsman, while mēkhanē referred to the manually operated devices that assisted its 1
application. But now, just as technology has been removed from the sphere of practitioners’ 2
personal knowledge and experience, so the machine has come to signify the independence 3
of technical operations from human sensibility. Overall, then, the evolution from the 4
classical dualism of tekhnē/mēkhanē to the modern dualism of technology/machine has been 5
one in which the human subject – both as an agent and as a repository of experience – has 6
been drawn from the centre to the periphery of the labour process. In other words, as I have 7
tried to show schematically in Figure 16.1, it has been a movement from the personal to 118

Society, nature and the concept of technology • 317 •

the impersonal. I now intend to demonstrate
that this movement is tantamount to a disembedding of technical relations from their
matrix in human sociality, leading to the
modern opposition between technology and
society.

KNOWLEDGE: Tekhne¯ (skill)

Technology

DEVICES:

Machines

Mekhane¯ (tools)
¯

THE TECHNICAL AND THE SOCIAL
It is commonplace in anthropology to draw
Subject-central
Subject-peripheral
an absolute distinction between the domains
of technical and social phenomena. This
doubtless owes much to the inﬂuence of Figure 16.1 The transition in knowledge and devices from
Emile Durkheim. The earliest anthropolog- the personal to the impersonal, associated with the substituical reference to the distinction that I know tion of the modern dichotomy of technology/machine for the
classical dichotomy of tekhnē/mēkhanē.
is to be found in a tantalising footnote to
the conclusion of Durkheim and Mauss’s
essay of 1903 on Primitive Classiﬁcation,
where they write of what they call ‘technological classiﬁcations’ as vague and unsystematic constellations of ideas, quite unlike the systematically interconnected categories of
scientiﬁc classiﬁcation which are grounded in the structure of social groups. Scientiﬁc classiﬁcations, Durkheim and Mauss write,
are very clearly distinguished from what might be called technological classiﬁcations. It
is probable that man has always classiﬁed, more or less clearly, the things on which he
lived, according to the means he used to get them: for example animals living in the
water, or in the air or on the ground. But at ﬁrst such groups were not connected with
each other or systematized. They were divisions, distinctions of ideas, not schemes of
classiﬁcation. Moreover, it is evident that these distinctions are closely linked to practical concerns, of which they merely express certain aspects.
(1963: 81–2, fn. 1)2
What is important for my present argument is the way technological classiﬁcation is linked
here to the experience of individuals in practical activity, as opposed to the structuring
force of society. From the start, technology was placed ﬁrmly on the individual side of a
pervasive dichotomy between individual and society, while science was set apart on the
social side.
In the subsequent elaboration of the Durkheimian paradigm, the distinction between
technology and science was referred back to that between magic and religion, the former
issuing from the individual and pragmatic in intent, the latter issuing from society and
fundamentally expressive. The same distinction was later taken up by Edmund Leach, in
a series of attempts to force a division between technical and ritual types or aspects of
behaviour. Leach deﬁnes technical behaviour in purely pragmatic, means–ends terms: it
‘produces observable results in a strictly mechanical way’. Ritual behaviour, by contrast,
is essentially communicative, and serves to convey information, in a symbolic code, about
group membership or social identity (Leach 1966: 403: cf. 1954: 12, 1976: 9). The division, then, is between a mechanics of technical systems and a semiotics of social systems.
All practical action is ‘fully mechanical’ in the sense that its effects are entirely predictable

Skill
from its initial conditions (1976: 23), whereas all social action, since it is designed to 1
communicate a state of affairs but not to change it, is inherently non-practical.
To illustrate the effects of applying this conceptual framework across the board of 3
human societies, let me return to the case of hunters and gatherers. It comes as no surprise 4
that the usual anthropological characterisation of the activities of hunting and gathering 5
as ‘purely technical’ carries the implications that they are not only ‘fully mechanical’ but 6
also residually non-social. Thus the work of subsistence production is effectively removed 7
from the sphere of social action, becoming merely a ‘need-satisfying process of individual 8
behaviour’ (Sahlins 1972: 186 fn. 1). When human beings hunt and gather, even when 9
they do so in co-operation, they can act only in their ‘natural’ capacity as individuals, 10
rather than as social persons. ‘Given such a distinction’, as Gísli Pálsson has shown, 1
‘production must take place in nature. The appropriation of nature only becomes social 2
when the resources extracted from nature enter relations of sharing or exchange among 3
groups’ (Palsson 1991: 8). If, as Durkheim maintained, there are two parts to a man, the 4
individual and the social being, it is apparently the individual who hunts and gathers, and 5
the social being (as a member of a more inclusive group) who shares (Ingold 1988a: 275, 6
cf. Durkheim 1976: 16). In Leach’s terms, every act of hunting and gathering would be 7
a mechanical event, and every act of sharing a communicative or semiotic event.
This view of the separation of production and distribution has been reinforced by a 9
peculiarly Durkheimian reading of the distinction, taken from Marx, between social rela- 20
tions and technical forces of production, according to which these constitute mutually 1
exclusive domains. Representing a widely held position in Marxist anthropology, Jonathan 2
Friedman has written that ‘the social relations of production are not, nor can they be, 3
technical relations’ (1974: 447). Included in the latter are the forces mechanically exerted 4
by human bodies, when set to work, whether singly or in conjunction. Relations of co- 5
operation in the tasks of hunting and gathering are thus built into the operation of the 6
technical system – they are technical relations, part of the organisation of work, as distinct 7
from the social relations activated in the distributive practices of sharing. Yet as Marx 8
surely recognised, the externalisation of the forces of production was a historical conse- 9
quence of the development of the machine. Where, as in hunting and gathering, food 30
production depends on the skilled handling of tools, and indeed of one’s own person, the 1
productive forces appear as the embodied qualities of human subjects – as their technical 2
skills. Such qualities cannot be generalised: whereas a technology is indifferent to the 3
personhood of its operators, techniques are active ingredients of personal and social iden- 4
tity. Thus the very practice of a technique is itself a statement about identity; there can 5
be no separation of communicative from technical behaviour.
Our conclusion must be that in hunting and gathering societies, the forces of produc- 7
tion are deeply embedded in the matrix of social relations. That is to say, the 8
‘correspondence’ between technical forces and social relations is not external but internal, 9
or in other words, the technical is one aspect of the social. The modern semantic shift 40
from technique to technology, associated with the ascendance of the machine, is itself 1
symptomatic of the disembedding of the forces of production from their social matrix, 2
transforming the correspondence between forces and relations of production from the 3
internal to the external, and setting up the now familiar opposition between technology 4
and society. For as I have already shown, the concept of technology signiﬁes the with- 5
drawal of the person from production, which is consequently reduced to the operation of 6
a quasi-mechanical system comprising human bodies, instruments and raw materials. If 7
persons, human subjects, are external to production, then the sphere of social relations 118

Society, nature and the concept of technology • 319 •

(between persons) must be external to the sphere of technical relations which, if they
involve human beings at all, involve them as the bearers of natural and not personal
powers (on this distinction, see Shotter 1974: 225).
The danger is that we are inclined to read back into history the modern separation of
technology and society, identifying the forces of production with all that is external to
the human subject. Hence we imagine the primitive precursors of the machine to have
been such items of material culture as the hand-axe, spear and digging-stick. And this, in
turn, leads us to view technical evolution as a process of complexiﬁcation, accompanied
perhaps by a simpliﬁcation in the social spheres of kinship and ritual. However the machine
is not simply a more advanced substitute for a tool, nor were hand-tools the original forces
of production. For the development of the forces has transformed the entire system of
relations between worker, tool and raw material, replacing subject-centred knowledge and
skills with objective principles of mechanical functioning. In short, and to reiterate the
conclusion of my argument from the last chapter, technical evolution describes a process
not of complexiﬁcation but of objectiﬁcation of the productive forces.
This result suggests a radical recasting of the relation between technology and kinship.
Instead of seeing an evolution in parallel, in which the former becomes ever more dominant and elaborate as the latter declines in signiﬁcance, the view I have proposed suggests
that the technical forces of production were originally consubstantial with the social relations
of kinship. Only subsequently, as kinship was disengaged from the organisation of production, did the forces ‘split off ’ and acquire separate institutional identity as a technology.
At the same time the objectives of production were themselves transformed from the
constitution of persons to the manufacture of things. In short, to ﬁnd the antecedents of
technology, we should look to the sphere of artiﬁce, contained in social relations, rather
than to the artefacts of material culture (Ridington 1982: 470).

WHAT TOOLS ARE FOR
The next step in my argument is to show how this view of the embeddedness of technical
in social relations affects our understanding of the nature and use of the tool. In itself, of
course, the tool is nothing (Sigaut 1993: 383). ‘Being a tool’ is not at all the same as,
say, ‘being a stone’ or ‘being a piece of wood’. For whereas the latter refers to intrinsic
properties of the object itself, the former refers to what it affords for a user. An object – it
could be a stone or a piece of wood – becomes a tool through becoming conjoined to a technique, and techniques, as we have seen, are the properties of skilled subjects. The presence
of such a subject is already presupposed in our description of the object as a tool of a certain
kind. Thus the tool is not a mere mechanical adjunct to the body, serving to deliver a set
of commands issued to it by the mind; rather it extends the whole person. Indeed there is
a certain parallel between the use of tools in production and the giving and receiving of
gifts in exchange. The tool has an impact on raw material, as the gift has an impact on
its recipient, only so long as it is animated by an intention that issues from the person of
the user or donor. Divorced from the context of production, the tool reverts to its original
condition as an inert object; likewise the gift is inert outside the social context of exchange
(Mauss 1954[1925]: 10). Both tool and gift mediate an active, purposive engagement
between persons and their environments.
Returning to hunters and gatherers, we can ask how this mediation is effected in the
context of their relations with their environments. As Robin Ridington (1982: 471) has
pointed out, hunter-gatherers ‘typically view their world as imbued with human qualities

Skill
of will and purpose’. From their perspective, tools are like words: they mediate relations 1
between human subjects and the equally purposive non-human agencies with which they 2
perceive themselves to be surrounded. Thus the tool, as I showed in Chapter Four 3
(p. 72), is a link in a chain of personal rather than mechanical causation, which serves to 4
deliver intentional action and not merely physical or bodily force. Moreover, unlike 5
herdsmen and farmers, whose tools are used to establish some degree of domination over 6
their environments, hunters and gatherers do not regard their tools as instruments of 7
control. Thus in hunting, it is commonly supposed that the animal gives itself to be killed 8
by the hunter who, as a recipient, occupies the subordinate position in the transaction. 9
The spear, arrow or trap serves here as a vehicle for opening or consummating a relation- 10
ship. If the arrow misses its mark, or if the trap remains empty, it is inferred that the 1
animal does not as yet intend to enter into a relationship with the hunter by allowing 2
itself to be taken. In that way, the instruments of hunting serve a similar purpose to the 3
tools of divination, revealing the otherwise hidden intentions of non-human agents in a 4
world saturated with personal powers of one kind and another. In short, whereas for 5
farmers and herdsmen, the tool is an instrument of control, for hunters and gatherers it 6
would better be regarded as an instrument of revelation.
This understanding that hunters and gatherers have of their relations with non-human 8
components of their environments is fundamentally at odds with that basic premise of 9
Western thought with which I began, that the destiny of humankind is to achieve domi- 20
nation over nature. ‘In our traditional ways of thinking’, as Winner writes, ‘the concept of 1
mastery and the master–slave metaphor are the dominant ways of describing man’s relation- 2
ship to nature, as well as to the implements of technology’ (1977: 20). Viewed from this 3
perspective, hunters and gatherers appear to be engaged in a struggle for existence which, 4
on account of the simplicity of their material equipment, is not yet won. For them, nature 5
remains untamed. Yet herein lies a paradox. For if technology implies the human control 6
over nature, and if the condition of hunter-gatherers – or more generally of ‘primitive man’ 7
– is the absence of such control, how can there be such a thing as ‘primitive technology’? 8
Though the paradox is never stated so explicitly in the literature, the solution comes 9
through clearly enough. It is to assume that hunter-gatherers are engaged in the operation 30
of a system of forces which is none other than nature herself, viewed – characteristically, 1
in Western eyes – as a vast, all-encompassing mechanism. Tied to the workings of this 2
mechanism, they are regarded as subservient to nature in much the same way that, in 3
the modern era, industrial workers are subservient to the artiﬁcially engineered machines 4
of the factory. It follows that hunter-gatherer technology is seen to be grounded in the 5
properties of the natural world just as Western technology is embodied in the artiﬁcial 6
machine. Both delimit a set of production possibilities that are given prior to, and inde- 7
pendently of, the persons of the producers. It is for this reason that the forces the 8
hunter-gatherer operates are commonly denoted by the hybrid ‘techno-environmental’. 9
Where for everyone else, technology is supposed to be on the side of Man against Nature, 40
for hunters and gatherers it appears to be on the side of Nature against Man, revealing 1
in its application the hegemony of natural law rather than the dominance of human society 2
and its interests. This, incidentally, is a view shared equally by both advocates and oppo- 3
nents of so-called ‘techno-environmental determinism’. Advocates argue that technology 4
and environment together determine social form, opponents argue that social form is 5
independent of techno-environmental constraint, but both take it for granted that ‘techno’ 6
is something that is intrinsically linked to environmental conditions, rather than an 7
imposition of society.

Society, nature and the concept of technology • 321 •

My solution to the problem of whether technology lies on the side of nature or human
society is simply to dispense with the dichotomy, and with it the concept of technology
that is predicated on this dichotomy. The paradox then promptly disappears. What we
have in reality are human beings, living and working in environments that include other
humans as well as a variety of non-human agencies and entities. Through their experiences of dealing with these various components of the environment, persons develop with
speciﬁc aptitudes and sensibilities, that is as bearers of techniques. Reciprocally, through
the deployment of their technical skills, people actively constitute their environments. But
in this mutually constitutive interrelation between persons and environment there is no
absolute dichotomy between human and non-human components. There are techniques
for engaging with fellow humans just as there are techniques for engaging with the animals
and plants on which life depends, or with materials such as wood, clay or stone in the
making of equipment. Any or all of these techniques may involve the use of tools. However
these tools, as I have shown, are intended not to control but to reveal. And they are used
not in a failed attempt to achieve emancipation from an alien world of nature, but in a
successful attempt to draw the inhabitants of that world into an unbounded sphere of
intimate sociality.

CONCLUSION
Hunters and gatherers have secured their place in Western thought as the bearers of a
simple technology, as representatives of the original baseline from which a gradual process
of complexiﬁcation eventually culminated in the advanced technologies of the modern
world. I have argued, to the contrary, that the concept of technology is itself a product
of a modern machine-theoretical cosmology. One is inclined to see, in its indiscriminate
extension to society at large, a particular instance of the more general anthropological
fetishisation of culture, another Western concept which we have turned upon others as a
mirror of our own superiority. People in ‘primitive’ or ‘traditional’ societies are made to
appear as though their practical activities were entirely bound to the operation of technology, as their thought to the precepts of their culture, the one providing material support
for the other. Technology and culture, twin pillars of the modern ideals of progress and
enlightenment, conﬁne the rest of humanity to the monotonous execution of determining
systems: as technology determines practice, so culture determines thought.
Once the concept of technology is unpacked it is evident that its application distorts
our understanding – above all of hunting and gathering societies – in the following ways:

Technique is detached from the practical experience of human subjects and ascribed
to the properties of an instrumental apparatus, of which people are but mechanical
operators.
Technical activity is partitioned off from social activity, and likewise production is
separated from distribution as issuing from individuals and social persons respectively.
Technical forces are grounded in an environment conceived as ‘nature’, an alien and
dehumanised presence that seems to dictate the terms of accommodation.

The principal conclusions of my argument are really two-fold. The ﬁrst, reinforcing my
thesis in Chapter Fifteen, is that technical evolution has to be seen as a process not of
complexiﬁcation but of objectiﬁcation and externalisation of the forces of production. The
second, related conclusion is that in the course of this evolution, technical relations have

Skill
become progressively disembedded from social relations, leading eventually to the modern 1
institutional separation of technology and society. The implications for anthropology are 2
that we can no longer follow the Durkheimian precedent of taking this separation for 3
granted, nor can the concept of technology remain immune from critical scrutiny. It is 4
high time to restore technique to its rightful place alongside economy, politics, religion 5
and kinship as a proper object of social anthropological inquiry.

Tools, minds and machines • 323 •

Chapter Seventeen

Work, time and industry

Much anthropological discussion is couched in terms of a pervasive opposition between
‘Westerners’ and other, ‘non-Western’ people. Amongst other things, it is argued that
Westerners have a speciﬁc attitude to time and work that is not shared by people in nonWestern societies. I want to propose here that while the concepts of time and work have
indeed acquired speciﬁc meanings through their implication in such key historical transitions as the rise of capitalism and the growth of industrial manufacture, there is nevertheless
a sense in which none of us are Westerners, and that the challenge that non-Western
perspectives present to Western modes of apprehension exists at the very heart of our
own society, in the mismatch between our shared experience of dwelling in the lived-in
world and the demands placed on us by external structures of production and control
that seem to leave only a residual space, divorced from culture and social life, where we
can truly be ourselves.
I shall proceed as follows. First, I consider the attitudes to work and time of people in
‘traditional’ or pre-industrial societies who still retain a large measure of control over the
rhythms of their working lives. For such people, I suggest, time is intrinsic to the array
of speciﬁc tasks that make up the pattern of quotidian activity of a community. I go on
to show how the formal logic of capitalist production undermines this task-orientation by
establishing an absolute division, in principle, between the domains of work and social
life. This division, however, does not naturally conform to experience but is rather enforced,
to varying degrees, against a resistance founded in the inevitability of people’s mutual
involvement in the concrete settings of practical activity. The very instruments – above
all the industrial machine and the clock – that in theory serve to disengage the time and
work of production from the current of social life, are in practice reappropriated by their
operators in the process of production, not of commodities for the market, but of their
own personal and social identities. To exemplify this point, I shall draw on some studies
of one particular category of industrial workers, namely locomotive drivers. In conclusion,
I argue that if we ﬁnd the time-awareness of people in societies other than our own hard
to grasp, this is not because it is strange to our experience, but rather because the political, economic and ideological apparatus of the ‘West’, with its peculiar conjunction of
individual freedom and clockwork necessity, has made us, in a sense, strangers to ourselves.

TASK-ORIENTATION
Speaking of people in so-called primitive societies, Cato Wadel has observed that what is
characteristic of these societies ‘is not that activities we term as work are not conceptualised, but that these activities are conceptualised in association with social relations’ (Wadel

Skill
1979: 380). Or as Sahlins puts it, ‘a man works, produces, in his capacity as a social 1
person, as a husband and father, brother and lineage mate, member of a clan, a village’ 2
(1968: 80). To see an activity as thus embedded in a social relation is to regard it as what 3
I shall call a task. And of all the manifold tasks that make up the total current of activity 4
in a community, there are none that can be set aside as belonging to a separate category 5
of ‘work’, nor is there any separate status of being a ‘worker’. For work is life, and any 6
distinctions one might make within the course of life would be not between work and 7
non-work, but between different ﬁelds of activity, such as farming, cooking, child-minding, 8
weaving, and so on.
The same point applies quite generally in the pre-industrial world (Godelier 1980). In 10
Ancient Greece, for example, ‘we do not ﬁnd the idea of one great human function, work, 1
encompassing all the trades, but rather that of a plurality of different ones, each consti- 2
tuting a particular type of action with its own particular product’ (Vernant 1983: 272). 3
Every artisan trade – with its speciﬁc instruments, raw materials and products, its tech- 4
nical operations and the qualities required of its practitioners – was a separate system 5
rather than part of an all-embracing division of labour. If there was any overarching divi- 6
sion, it was not between work and leisure, but rather between the spheres of making and 7
doing, poiesis and praxis, a division that subordinated the crafts of manufacture to the 8
activities – including farming and warfare – of those who used the implements made.
What holds for the generalised category of work holds also for that of time. It is 20
commonly observed, in ethnographic accounts of non-industrial societies, that the people 1
described lack any concept that would correspond exactly to the idea of time current in 2
the West. Here, for example, is Evans-Pritchard, writing in a justly celebrated passage 3
about Nuer pastoralists of southern Sudan:
The Nuer have no expression equivalent to ‘time’ in our language, and they cannot, 6
therefore, speak of time as though it were something which passes, can be wasted, saved, 7
and so forth. I do not think that they ever experience the same feeling of ﬁghting 8
against time or of having to co-ordinate activities with an abstract passage of time, 9
because their points of reference are mainly the activities themselves, which are of a 30
leisurely character. Events follow a logical order, but they are not controlled by an 1
abstract system, there being no autonomous points of reference to which activities have 2
to conform with precision. Nuer are fortunate.
(Evans-Pritchard 1940: 103) 4
Among the Nuer, then, as much more generally in the pre-industrial world, time is insep- 6
arable from the everyday round of activities. It is not something objective and external, 7
against which tasks may be measured or on which they can be located, since it has no 8
existence apart from the tasks themselves. Thus for the Nuer, ‘the daily timepiece is the 9
cattle clock, the round of pastoral tasks, and the time of day and the passage of time 40
through a day are to a Nuer primarily the succession of these tasks and their relation to 1
one another’ (pp. 101–2).
We may speak, then, of a task-orientation in such societies, an orientation in which 3
both work and time are intrinsic to the conduct of life itself, and cannot be separated or 4
abstracted from it. If you want to say when something happened, you do so by relating 5
it to another regular activity that took place concurrently – for example, ‘so-and-so arrived 6
in the camp at milking time’. And if you want to say how long it took for something to 7
happen, you do so by comparing it with how long something else takes. In a pioneering 118

Work, time and industry • 325 •

though now rather dated work on primitive time-reckoning, the Swedish anthropologist
Martin Nilsson wrote that
To indicate the duration of time, primitive peoples make use of other means, derived
from their daily business, . . . in Madagascar, ‘rice-cooking’ often means half an hour,
‘the frying of a locust’, a moment. The Cross River natives say: ‘The man died in less
than the time in which maize is not yet completely roasted’, i.e. less than about ﬁfteen
minutes; ‘the time in which one can cook a handful of vegetables’.
(Nilsson 1920: 42)
Likewise in a classic paper about which I shall have more to say presently, the historian
E. P. Thompson notes that in Medieval England, duration could be expressed by how
long it took to cook an egg, say a prayer, or (apparently) to have a pee – though this
latter time-span, known as ‘pissing while’, does seem ‘a somewhat arbitrary measurement’
(Thompson 1967: 58).
I have spoken of tasks as socially embedded activities, but should pause to explain more
precisely what I mean. First and foremost, tasks are activities carried out by persons, calling
for greater or lesser degrees of technical skill. Machines do not perform tasks, but people
do. Thus with a task-orientation the human subject, equipped with a competence acquired
through practising alongside more experienced hands, is situated right at the centre of
productive activity. Secondly, tasks are deﬁned primarily in terms of their objectives,
without necessarily entailing any explicit codiﬁcation of the rules and procedures to be
followed in realising them. And these objectives, far from being independently prescribed
in the form of exercises in problem-solving (as in the entirely artiﬁcial tasks of ‘testing’
in the school or psychological laboratory), themselves arise through the agent’s involvement within the current of social life. Thirdly, the particular kinds of tasks that a person
performs are an index of his or her personal and social identity: the tasks you do depend
on who you are, and in a sense the performance of certain tasks makes you the person
who you are. And ﬁnally, tasks are never accomplished in isolation, but always within a
setting that is itself constituted by the co-presence of others whose own performances
necessarily have a bearing on one’s own. In other words, every task exists as part of what
I have called a taskscape, understood as the totality of tasks making up the pattern of
activity of a community (for an elaboration of this concept, see Chapter Eleven).
Now if, in traditional societies, time is intrinsic to tasks, and if tasks are the technically skilled activities of particular persons with particular social identities, then it must
follow that there can be no real distinction between work and social life, and moreover
that time is the movement or ﬂow that inheres equally in both. What kind of time is
this, that is thus inherent in the taskscape? Sociologists Pitrim Sorokin and Robert K.
Merton, in a landmark paper dating from 1937, called it social time. I have already introduced this concept in Chapter Eleven (pp. 195–7), and will not elaborate further here
save to stress again its inherent rhythmicity and its embeddedness in activities that are
indexical of a person’s belonging to locality and community (Sorokin and Merton 1937:
628). It is important to emphasise, too, that the rhythmic structure of social time emerges
not only from the interweaving and mutual responsiveness of human movements, but also
from the way these movements resonate to the cycles of the non-human environment.
Traditionally, people had to fall in with the rhythms of their environment: with the winds,
the tides, the needs of domestic animals, the alternations of day and night, of the seasons,
and so on, in accordance with what the environment afforded for the conduct of their

Skill
daily tasks. As a song of the Kabyle peasant farmers of Algeria puts it: ‘It is useless to 1
pursue the world, no-one ever overtakes it’ (Bourdieu 1963). Similarly in Ancient Greece, 2
the work of farming was regarded as a form of participation in an order at once natural 3
and divine, and the artisan who supplied the farmer with his tools worked to a design 4
that was inscribed within this order, and that was revealed in the raw material rather than 5
artiﬁcially superimposed upon it (Vernant 1983: 248–63). In short, the world opens itself 6
out to the traditional artisan or farmer, in both its form and its temporal rhythms, through 7
his or her action in it.
The idea that human industry can run ahead of nature, and in so doing, transform it, 9
belongs to the modern era of Western thought (Godelier 1980: 834). For the goal of 10
modern technology has been to override the constraints of the natural world, to bring its 1
forces under control, so that the rhythms of society can be brought into conformity with 2
an imposed, artiﬁcially contrived schedule. Activities can now go on – as we say – ‘around 3
the clock’. Developments in the ﬁelds of transport and communications have had a deci- 4
sive impact in this regard, though probably no single innovation has been of greater 5
consequence than the electric light. The effect was to instal a new kind of time as the 6
dominant regulator of human activity. Corresponding to what Sorokin and Merton (1937: 7
621) called astronomical or sidereal time, it is the time spun by the orbital motions of 8
the planets, or by a perfectly functioning mechanical clock. As I shall now show, there is 9
an intimate logical connection between this form of time and the estimation of work in 20
terms of the generalised concept of labour.
THE TEMPORAL LOGIC OF CAPITALIST PRODUCTION
In 1967, E. P. Thompson published what has become a classic study of the effects of 5
industrial capitalism on people’s attitudes to time and work. After reviewing a great deal 6
of evidence, he concluded that ‘Mature industrial societies of all varieties are marked . . . 7
by a clear demarcation between “work” and “life”’ (1967: 93). Of course he does not 8
mean that workers are not alive when they work. The distinction being drawn here between 9
living and working is really one between what we do, and what we are caused to do; 30
between action that issues from ourselves as responsible social agents, and action that stems 1
from the pressing of various trained capacities into the service of a project that is not ours 2
but is subject to the dictates of an alien will. It is a corollary of this view that life in an 3
industrial society is lived in the activities of consumption rather than production, in the 4
ways in which people take possession of, and use, the goods acquired with the money 5
they earn. This implies that to understand the processes of social life in such a society we 6
have to focus above all on what people are doing in those periods of each day when they 7
are not under contract to an employer – that is, ‘after business hours’ (Sahlins 1968: 80). 8
The separation between the domains of ‘work’ and ‘social life’ is, in fact, a formal 9
entailment of the logic of capitalist production. The deﬁning principle of capitalism is the 40
alienation of labour-power – the need for a certain class of people, lacking direct access 1
to the means to procure a livelihood, to sell or rent out their very capacity to work to 2
an employer, who owns the means of production, in return for a money wage with which 3
they can purchase the wherewithal for their subsistence. People who have thus sold their 4
capacity to work, their labour-power, are conventionally identiﬁed (within this context of 5
capitalist class relations) as ‘workers’, and the activities in which they engage during that 6
period when their labour-power is under the command of an employer who has appro- 7
priated it are likewise identiﬁed as ‘work’. In this situation, labour-power has become a 118

Work, time and industry • 327 •

commodity that, like other commodities, can be bought and sold. Moreover the worker,
in person, is in principle divorced from the activity of production, since in that very
activity his capacity to work is under the command not of himself but of an employer.
It follows that the domain of work relations, in which the labour-powers of several workers
are combined in the factory or on the shop ﬂoor, is quite distinct from the domain of
social life, in which workers may relate to one another as persons: as members of communities and as occupants of social roles. This is not to say that there are no social relations
in the workplace, or to deny that they may exist side by side with co-operation in the
labour process. It is to claim, however, that social relations are not themselves constituted
by such co-operation.
How, following this formal logic, are we to understand the meanings of work and time
in the context of industrial capitalism? Following the example of Marx (1930: 10–11),
we might compare the work of the tailor with that of the weaver. Not only do they
produce qualitatively different things (coats and linen), but also tailoring and weaving are
activities of quite unlike kinds, calling for different skills, tools and materials. Yet as
exchangeable commodities, we might neverthless ﬁnd that one coat is ‘worth’, say, twenty
yards of linen. The value in which this worth consists cannot be in any way particular to
coats, linen or anything else. It is rather value-in-general, a kind of worth that is common
to all commodities but peculiar to none. Conventionally such value is expressed in terms
of money, for money is a special kind of commodity that has no other use than as a
medium of exchange. But by the same token, it should in principle be possible to compare
tailoring and weaving, not as qualitatively different kinds of activity, but as varying amounts
of ‘activity-in-general’. So what is this activity: the lowest common denominator of all
productive tasks that is nevertheless particular to none?
Marx, rather misleadingly, called it ‘abstract social labour’. That labour is an abstraction, of the same order as value-in-general, is not in doubt. Yet what are relegated in the
abstraction are precisely those situationally speciﬁc features of the practical contexts of
engagement, with persons and materials, in which skills are acquired and deployed. The
work of the tailor can be considered substitutable for that of the weaver only by cutting
it out from the matrix of social relations within which it takes on its speciﬁc form. That
speciﬁc, socially embedded form is what I have called a task. Now I have already observed
that tasks do not exist in isolation but only as part of an interlocking array, a taskscape.
Like the array of useful things (or use-values) that ordinarily clutter any inhabited environment, the taskscape is qualitative and heterogeneous (see Chapter Eleven, pp. 194–5).
Labour, by contrast, like value-in-general, is quantitative and homogeneous. And in the
reduction of the one to the other, effected by the logic of capitalist relations, the sociality
of work is dissolved.
What, then, is the common measure by which different tasks may be reckoned to represent equivalent amounts of labour? The answer, of course, is time; but it is time of a
particular sort – sidereal rather than social, to recall Sorokin and Merton’s (1937) distinction. Now a certain task, say in weaving, will lead to the production of a particular object
or use-value, say a length of linen. But if the work of the weaver is regarded not as a
speciﬁc kind of task but as a determinate amount of labour, it will be represented in
hours. And likewise, if the linen is regarded not as a speciﬁc kind of object but as a determinate amount of value, it will be represented in currency. Consequently, a certain time
of labour has produced a certain moneysworth of goods. Or in short, time is money.
The phrase ‘time is money’, with its implication that time is something that can be
spent or saved, used proﬁtably or wastefully, hoarded or squandered, is a product, then,

Skill
of the commodiﬁcation of labour that accompanied the rise of industrial capitalism (for 1
some of its metaphorical ramiﬁcations, see Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 7–9). Among the 2
ﬁrst to use the phrase was Benjamin Franklin, himself one of the major architects of the 3
view of man as Homo faber, or nature-transformer. In 1751 he related the following story: 4
Since our Time is reduced to a Standard, and the Bullion of the Day is minted out 6
into Hours, the Industrious know how to employ every piece of Time to a real Advantage 7
in their different Professions. And he that is prodigal of his Hours, is, in effect, a squan- 8
derer of Money. I remember a notable Woman, who was fully sensible of the intrinsic 9
Value of Time. Her husband was a shoemaker, and an excellent Craftsman, but never 10
minded how the Minutes passed. In vain did she inculcate to him, That Time is Money. 1
He had too much Wit to apprehend her, and it prov’d his ruin. When in the Alehouse 2
among his idle Companions, if one remark’d that the Clock struck Eleven, What is 3
that, says he, among us all? If she sent him Word by the Boy, that it had struck Twelve; 4
Tell her to be easy, it can never be more. If, that it had struck One, Bid her be comforted, 5
for it can never be less.
(cited in Thompson 1967: 89) 7
Let me recapitulate the argument in brief. With industrial capitalism, labour becomes 9
a commodity measured out in units of time, goods become commodities measured out 20
in units of money; since labour produces goods, so much time yields so much money, 1
and time spent in idleness is equivalent to so much money lost. The result is not only a 2
demarcation between work (time that yields money) and leisure (time that uses it up), 3
but also a characteristic attitude to time as something to be husbanded. Thompson calls 4
this attitude ‘time-thrift’ (1967: 83–4).
TASKS, LABOUR AND LEISURE
Thompson’s thesis is that with the rise and maturation of industrial capitalist society, the 9
task-oriented time of pre-industrial rural and urban life was gradually replaced by a regu- 30
lation of production governed by the clock. In Sorokin and Merton’s terms, this represents 1
a transition from ‘social time’ (equivalent to Thompson’s task-oriented time) to ‘sidereal 2
time’ (equivalent to Thompson’s clock time).
Task-orientation, as I have already mentioned, is person-centred, so that the experience 4
of time is intrinsic to the performance of skilled activity. But with the rise of capitalist 5
industry, so the theory goes, the person is withdrawn from the core to the margins of the 6
labour process, and hence also the time inherent in personal experience and social life is 7
disembedded from the time of work or production. This latter kind of time thus appears 8
objective and impersonal, extrinsic to social relations, and governed by laws of mechan- 9
ical functioning that have no regard for human feeling. It is, of course, the time of 40
the clock. For just that reason, Lewis Mumford famously claimed that the clock was the 1
archetypal machine, and that it was the clock rather than the steam engine that heralded 2
the birth of the machine age (Mumford 1967: 286). For the aim of the industrial 3
employer, having appropriated the labour-power or capacities to work of his employees 4
(for a given number of hours each day), is to put together these capacities – on the factory 5
ﬂoor or assembly line – into an efﬁcient, working mechanism. And he does so by subjecting 6
their operations to a precise and impersonal clockwork regimen. In many industries, such 7
regimens of work were in place long before the advent of machine automation.

Work, time and industry • 329 •

But the identiﬁcation of the sphere
‘Free time’
of production with the ascendancy of
clock time generates the expectation
TIME:
Task-oriented
vs.
that the alternate sphere of consumptime (social)
tion should be identiﬁed with a quite
different kind of time, precisely
Clock time
(sidereal)
opposed to clock time as individual
freedom is opposed to mechanical conLeisure
straint. This is what is colloquially
(private)
called ‘free time’, and it is the time
associated with what we call ‘leisure’
ACTIVITY:
Tasks
vs.
(work = life)
when this is deﬁned by its contrast to
work. Free time is the time we experiWork
ence (or rather, think we experience)
(public)
when we turn inwards on ourselves in
the hedonistic pursuit of purely indiArt (individual
creativity)
vidual satisfactions: it is the time of that
archetypal creature of neoclassical eco¯
PRODUCTION: Tekhne/Ars
vs.
nomics, the isolated consumer. In real(art = skilled
practice)
ity, of course, this creature is a ﬁgment
Technology
of the imagination, for no-one con(mass production)
sumes in isolation. For the same reason,
free time is not so much something we
‘Pure gift’
actually experience as a category by
which our experience is discursively
EXCHANGE:
Prestation
vs.
represented, in contexts where we wish
to draw attention to the space of our
Market mechanism
own private and subjective selfhood as
against the regulative structures of
DWELLING
COMMODITY
public life whose temporality is epitoPERSPECTIVE
PERSPECTIVE
mised by the clock.
The individual, in this discourse, is
supposedly caught in a perpetual oscil- Figure 17.1 The opposition between the dwelling perspective and
lation between work in the public the commodity perspective in the spheres of time, activity, producdomain of production and leisure in tion and exchange.
the private domain of consumption.
Regulated by clock time in the former,
he or she retreats into the sanctuary of free time in the latter. In a society dominated by
the impersonal structures of the machine and the market, the sphere of leisure seems to
offer a residual space for the spontaneous and purely individual expression of selfhood.
Moreover the oppositions between work and leisure, and between clock time and free
time, have exact homologues in other ﬁelds. There is a close connection, for example,
between the ideally spontaneous expression of selfhood and the modern Western notion
of artistic creativity, which is likewise opposed to the industrial technology of mass production as novelty is opposed to replication. And in the ﬁeld of exchange, the privacy and
spontaneity of the self is closely linked to the ideology of the ‘pure gift’, as an expression
of individual feeling, by contrast to the impersonal ‘market mechanism’ regulating the
exchange of commodities. Thus gifts are to commodities as art is to technology, as leisure

Skill
is to work, as free time is to clock time. This series of oppositions is depicted in the right 1
hand column of Figure 17.1.
What, then, has been the fate of task-oriented time in industrial society? Has it given 3
way to an exhaustive division between free time and clock time? Before beginning to 4
answer this question, we should note that the task-orientation of traditional societies also 5
has its homologues in other ﬁelds. Thus in the ﬁeld of production, the traditional notion 6
of art as socially situated skilled practice, epitomised by the classical Greek tekhnē, and by 7
its Latin equivalent ars, preceded the subsequent bifurcation into the opposed notions of 8
art and technology, just as the classiﬁcation of activities by task preceded the division 9
between leisure and work. And the prestations of traditional societies, about which Mauss 10
wrote so eloquently in his Essay on the Gift (1990[1950]), are neither spontaneous expres- 1
sions of individual generosity nor market-regulated contracts but have as their objective 2
the production of social relations in community. It is possible, therefore, to argue for an 3
evolutionary progression, from a traditional state of affairs in which work is inseparable 4
from life, and characterised by task-orientation with its attendant socially situated skills 5
and prestations, to a modern condition in which every aspect of human life is split by a 6
master dichotomy between freedom and necessity, to yield the series of oppositions spelled 7
out above. Figure 17.1 summarises this argument.
I propose here to argue to the contrary. I do not believe that task-orientation has dis- 9
appeared with the transition to industry: it persists, perhaps especially in those contexts 20
in which we claim to be ‘at home’. Indeed, one way of delineating the meaning of ‘home’ 1
in our society might be as a domain in which activities are thought of primarily in terms 2
of tasks. But the very ambiguity of this concept suggests two possible approaches to the 3
continuing signiﬁcance of task-orientation in industrial society. On the one hand, home 4
may be thought of as a domain of activity that has remained relatively impervious to capi- 5
talist relations of production – a relic of the householding economy of the pre-industrial 6
era kept alive by capitalism for the purposes of reproducing the labour force. On the 7
other hand, home may represent a certain perspective on the world, which I have called 8
the perspective of dwelling. Its focus is on the process whereby features of the environ- 9
ment take on speciﬁc local meanings through their incorporation into the pattern of 30
everyday activity of its inhabitants. Home, in this sense, is that zone of familiarity which 1
people know intimately, and in which they, too, are intimately known. As such, it encom- 2
passes all the settings of everyday life: whether the house, street, neighbourhood, or place 3
of work.
Of the two approaches suggested by these alternative meanings of ‘home’, one entails 5
a qualiﬁcation of the evolutionary argument, the other a more radical critique. I shall start 6
with the ﬁrst and then move on to the second, with which I identify my own position. 7
TIME AND EXPERIENCE IN THE HOUSEHOLD AND THE WORKPLACE
The domain of householding, although by no means conﬁned within the four walls of 1
the house or dwelling, was until quite recently (though less so today) centred upon the 2
ﬁgure of the housewife, who certainly used to enjoy no division between work and leisure. 3
For her, work was indeed life, and consisted in a multitude of tasks of child-rearing and 4
domestic maintenance. Moreover unlike the industrial worker, the housewife remained 5
formally in command of her own working capacity: although her work was necessary 6
and unavoidable, often punishing in its demands of energy and endurance, it was not 7
done under external imposition. Thus the housewife and her sense of time, as Thompson 118

Work, time and industry • 331 •

recognises, hold out as exceptions to his general thesis, which correlates the rise of industrial capitalism with a one-way transition from task-oriented to clock time:
Despite schooltimes and television times, the rhythms of women’s work in the home
are not wholly attuned to the measurement of the clock. The mother of young children has an imperfect sense of time and attends to other human tides. She has not yet
altogether moved out of the conventions of ‘pre-industrial’ society.
(1967: 79)
Here, then, is the qualiﬁcation: notwithstanding industrialisation, task-orientation continues to thrive in the domestic domain, as a kind of survival from the pre-industrial age,
albeit one that is destined to disappear in due course.
If this qualiﬁcation is accepted, then so long as the household continues to be a focus
for social reproduction, we need to consider the dialectical interplay between the taskoriented time of the home and the clock time of activities in the workplace. There are
two points about this that we can note immediately. First, the distinction falls – or at
least used to fall – to some extent along lines of gender and generation, with women and
children more committed to task-oriented time and men more committed to clock time.
In the past, an obvious indication of this was that men, and not women and children,
carried clocks or watches. If a woman or child wanted to know what the time was by
the clock, they had to ask a man. Secondly, there can be scheduling conﬂicts between the
two kinds of time which can cause quite severe disruptions within the household. The
routine of domestic and community tasks has to fall in with local environmental conditions, whereas industries and bureaucracies run to a universal clock time which can
co-ordinate production, transport and commerce on a national or even international scale,
but only at the expense of riding roughshod over local variations. Below, I shall present
an example of the problems that can arise in this connection, concerning the family life
of locomotive drivers.
Is the incongruence between task-oriented and clock time, as the qualiﬁed evolutionary
argument outlined above suggests, conﬁned to the household – or, more broadly, to the
local community? Has task-orientation been banished by the inexorable logic of the capitalist mode of production from the workplace? Is it really so, as theory dictates, that
workers lose touch with the rhythms of their own bodies as soon as their physical powers,
placed in the service of capital, are subordinated to the imposed, mechanical regimen of
the production line? In his discussion of the alienation of labour under capitalism, included
in the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, Marx protested with all the rhetorical force he could muster that this is indeed the case. Having surrendered his capacity
to work to an employer, the worker ‘only feels himself outside his work, and in his work
feels outside himself. He is at home when he is not working, and when he is working he
is not at home’ (1964: 110). Now by ‘home’, Marx clearly meant something more than
a person’s place of abode. Setting off to work in the morning, a man not only leaves his
dwelling but also, in a much stronger sense, ceases to dwell. He is not himself: as his
activity no longer belongs to him, so too he is a stranger to the world whose forms and
meanings are created through this activity.
Viewed from the perspective of the factory owner, workers may indeed appear as no
more than extensions of the total apparatus of production, and their activity as the mere
operation of a set of mechanical principles – that is, a technology – embodied in the
construction of the machinery employed. This, as we saw in Chapter Fifteen, was the

Skill
image that Marx invoked when he spoke of operatives as being treated like ‘living 1
appendages’ of the ‘lifeless mechanism’ of the factory (Marx 1930: 451). The experience 2
of the workers themselves, however, is a different one. For in their concrete presence, 3
machines are substantial components of the immediate environment, and engaging with 4
them is an inevitable part of the business of everyday coping in the world. Thus rather 5
than simply operating a technology, the activity of industrial workers consists in coping 6
with machines. And viewed in this light, such activity not only belongs to them, but also 7
calls for a good measure of skill, of a kind that can only be acquired through experience 8
on the job. Moreover it is through the development of skills of coping that workers are 9
able to resist the impositions of a regime of command and control that would seek to 10
reduce their activity to nothing more than the operation of an external system of produc- 1
tive forces. It is true that the machinery that workers are required to operate may – on 2
account of its noise, heat, vibration or whatever – strain the human body to its limits 3
of tolerance. However, despite Marx’s claim to the contrary, the worker does not cease 4
to dwell in the workplace. He is ‘at home’ there. But home is often a profoundly uncom- 5
fortable place to be.
I have already observed that machines do not perform tasks; only people do. The oper- 7
ation of technology, with or without inputs of human labour-power, is a machine 8
performance. Coping with machines, on the other hand, entails a multitude of tasks, 9
calling for speciﬁc aptitudes and sensibilities, which occupy the attention of workers on 20
the shop ﬂoor. It is as persons, not as units of labour-power, that they engage with the 1
industrial equipment around them, and the meanings that this equipment holds for them 2
arise within the context of that engagement. Here, then, we rediscover task-orientation at 3
the very heart of industrial production, in the workplace. For this discovery, I am indebted 4
to François Sigaut, who has pointed out that as fast as machines have been contrived to 5
do what had previously been done by skilled hands, different skills have sprung up for 6
handling the machines themselves. He calls this the ‘law of the irreducibility of skills’, in 7
the light of which ‘the entire history of technics . . . might be interpreted as a constantly 8
renewed attempt to build skills into machines by means of algorithms, an attempt 9
constantly foiled because other skills always tend to develop around the new machines’ 30
(Sigaut 1994: 446). For precisely the same reason, task-orientation is indestructible. And 1
everything I have said about tasks in general applies more speciﬁcally to the skilled handling 2
of industrial machines in the process of coping. It is person-centred, it follows implicit 3
‘rules of thumb’ rather than explicitly codiﬁed procedures, its objectives are set within the 4
current of activity among all those involved in the work situation rather than following 5
directives laid down from above, it is continually responsive to the other activities that 6
are going on around it, and – most importantly – it is constitutive of personal and social 7
identity.
In short, whereas the operation of technology produces commodities for the owner of 9
capital, coping with machines is part of the process of producing the worker as a skilled 40
social agent. The same activity may be viewed from both perspectives, but it is the latter, 1
grounded in the lived experience of engagement with the material paraphernalia of industry, 2
that is the perspective of dwelling. And in the incongruence between these perspectives, 3
of dwelling and commodity production, lies also the tension between the time of tasks 4
and of the clock. We are inclined to speak of workers on an assembly line as being 5
subjected to the regimen of clock time, while forgetting that the mechanism of the clock 6
drives only the hands on its face, not the hands of the workers whose routine it allegedly 7
controls. The ability to co-ordinate one’s movements with the passage of time as measured 118

Work, time and industry • 333 •

by the clock is an acquired skill, and the co-ordination is itself a task that is carried on
alongside all the other tasks of social life. Clocks are a ubiquitous feature of the environment of people in industrial society, who have to learn to cope with them, just as they
must cope with other kinds of machines. But the time intrinsic to the experience of coping
with clocks is not itself clock time. We may seek to attune our activity so that it resonates
with the repetitions of the clock, or to gain an intuitive ‘feel’ for hours, minutes and
seconds, but that does not turn our bodies into pieces of clockwork.
Having recognised that task-orientation is no mere survival from the pre-industrial age,
but that it ﬂourishes at the core of industrial production in workers’ activities of coping
with machines, the way is open for an analysis of industrial society couched in terms of
the concepts listed in the left hand column of Figure 17.1. In particular, we can note
that exchanges in the workplace, involving mutual assistance or co-operation in the tasks
of coping, are conducted between persons, and that as such – like the customary prestations of traditional societies – they are constitutive of social relations instead of distinct
from them. One might even argue, following the lead of Mauss rather than Marx, that
the relations among factory workers resemble those of gift exchange:
When such employees transact with one another as part of their work, they are morally
obligated to do so and are transacting not as individuals but as parts of a social web
that identiﬁes them and their relationships and obligations to one another. Furthermore,
the objects and services that employees transact with one another remain linked with
the employees, because workers and what they transact have identities based on their
places within the encompassing ﬁrm.
(Carrier 1992: 202–3)
The implication of my argument, however, is that the dynamic of industrial society can
be understood neither from the dwelling perspective represented by the left-hand column
of Figure 17.1, nor from the commodity perspective represented by the right-hand column.
It lies instead in the dialectical relation between these two perspectives.
In terms of the geometry of the ﬁgure, people in industrial society are caught in a ‘horizontal’ oscillation, not in a ‘vertical’ one, but it is an oscillation that incorporates the
whole series of dichotomies in the right-hand column as one of its poles. From one
perspective there is free time and clock time, from the other all time is task-oriented.
From one perspective there is work and leisure, from the other all life consists of tasks.
From one there is creative art and the operation of technology, from the other, skilled
practices. And from one there are pure gifts and market contracts, from the other, socially
situated prestations. But the move from left to right does not represent an evolutionary
transition from tradition to modernity. The dwelling perspective has not been replaced by
the commodity perspective. Indeed the whole thrust of my argument is to the contrary
– namely that task orientation, with its attendant socially situated skills and prestations,
is the primary condition of our being at home in the world. As such, it constitutes the
baseline of sociality upon which the order of modernity has been built, and from which
we have now to come to terms with it.

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF LOCOMOTIVE DRIVERS
I should like to exemplify some of the points made above by referring brieﬂy to studies
of one particular category of industrial workers – namely, locomotive drivers. They were

Skill
the subject of a classic paper by the American sociologist W. F. Cottrell, published in 1
1939 under the title ‘Of time and the railroader’. Cottrell paints a vivid picture of how 2
the railroader is a slave to time. The railway system is, in effect, an extension of the 3
assembly line of the factory; for example in automobile manufacture the various compo- 4
nents may have to be brought from widely dispersed parts of the country, and if any one 5
of these supply lines breaks down the entire operation founders. The stakes, then, are 6
high, and everything depends on precise timing. Though at the time when Cottrell was 7
writing, United States law stipulated that every engineer should have 8 hours’ rest out of 8
every 24, for the remaining 16 hours of each day he was constantly on call. Wherever he 9
went he carried a watch, which was required to be checked for accuracy twice a year. The 10
result, Cottrell writes, was an ‘intense time-consciousness that marks the railroader in all 1
his social relationships’ (1939: 195).
But this very commitment made it difﬁcult for the railroader to engage in any social 3
relationships beyond those of the immediate family. Being constantly on call, he could 4
not time-plan for other relationships. Frederick Gamst, in a more recent study of American 5
railroad engineers (‘hogheads’) that conﬁrms many of Cottrell’s ﬁndings, vividly depicts 6
the uncertainties of one of his informants, Slim Rogers, about participation even in family 7
events. Would he be able to watch his son in a crucial baseball game?
As usual, the hoghead promised nothing but said he would have to see how close he 20
would be to his call, if he were not already on the road . . . Regrettably he had already 1
missed his oldest son’s graduation from junior high; maybe he would be able to make 2
it for the graduation of the younger one. The only thing Slim could depend on was 3
attending his own funeral, as he was once told by an old hoghead at the top of the 4
seniority list. ‘Then you’ll have all the time in the world, Sonny,’ the old head remarked. 5
(Gamst 1980: 113) 6
By and large, then, the railroader’s leisure activities were limited to solitary, individual 8
recreations that called for no collaboration with others. But precisely because the ﬁeld of 9
his social relations was perforce so limited, the signiﬁcance of close family ties was for 30
him exceptionally great, so that his home life – when he was at home – was lived with 1
a peculiar intensity.
Relations with the local community, partially mediated by the children of the family, 3
were conducted almost entirely by the railroader’s wife. For her, the family represented 4
not a domain of retreat into privacy and solitude, but a point of entry into a wider 5
network of community ties. But she would frequently experience scheduling conﬂicts 6
between the demands of the children and of community affairs on the one hand, and her 7
obligations towards her husband on the other. They might, for example, call for quite 8
different mealtimes.
It would seem, in this example, that the railroader is oscillating between work and 40
leisure, between the public clock time which regulates the railway system and the free 1
time experienced in the privacy of his home or in the solitude of individual recreation. 2
The housewife, on the other hand, perceives time as task-oriented and founded in the 3
social relations of household and community. And the demands of the community do 4
not necessarily coincide with those of the clock. All of this conforms rather neatly with 5
the qualiﬁed evolutionary model, as elaborated in the previous section. The reality, 6
however, may not be that simple. Two more recent studies of railway workers offer some 7
clues as to why this should be so.

Work, time and industry • 335 •

The ﬁrst is by L. S. Kemnitzer, who speaks from his own experience as a railroad
conductor in the mid-sixties, some 35 years after Cottrell was writing. He found that, by
then, railroad workers no longer identiﬁed so closely with the temporal values of the work.
That is, the importance of time-keeping for the operation of the railroad system was not
matched by an ‘intense time-consciousness’ of the kind Cottrell had described. The reason
for this lay in a general loss of identiﬁcation with the job, resulting from rationalisation
and automation – including the use of diesel engines, computer programming and radio
communication. Thus while the accuracy of timing continued to be as important as ever,
most personnel were no longer required to carry watches, and these were less regularly
checked. However Kemnitzer goes on to emphasise the continuing importance of quite
another sense of time, one tied closely to speciﬁc tasks and the embodied skills necessary
to carry them out. This, so-called ‘switching time’ lies in the ‘ability to integrate time,
distance, and subjective estimates about weight, slope and speed in making decisions about
the movement of cars and engines in switching’ (Kemnitzer 1977: 27). Birgitta Edelman’s
study of shunters in a Swedish railway yard similarly stresses the importance of skilful
estimations and perfect timing in allowing the work to ‘ﬂow’ without accident (Edelman
1993). But here, rationalisation had proceeded still further. According to a new and controversial regime, the engines themselves were to be operated by remote control by a shunter
standing beside the tracks!
Now the kind of timing to which Kemnitzer and Edelman refer is clearly integral to
the railway workers’ acquired skill of coping with heavy and potentially dangerous vehicles. Indeed ‘switching time’ sounds surprisingly similar to the Ancient Greek concept of
kairos, the moment that must be seized, in the skilled work of the artisan, when ‘human
action meets a natural process developing according to its own rhythm’ (Vernant 1983:
291). According to Vernant:
In intervening with his tools, the artisan must recognize and wait for the moment when
the time is ripe and be able to adapt himself entirely to circumstances. He must never
desert his post, . . . for if he does the kairos might pass and the work be spoiled.
(1983: 291–2)
Thus switching time, like the kairos, belongs to a task-orientation – we could almost say
that it is part of the tekhnē of shunting. And as Edelman’s study reveals, it is threatened
by the relentless march of automation. Yet according to Kemnitzer, the process of automation had already brought about the demise of the ‘intense time consciousness’ described
by Cottrell. Was not this time consciousness, too, part of a task-orientation, part of the
railroader’s ability to cope with the demands of his work?
I believe we misunderstand the railroader’s sense of time if we equate it with the subjection of his movements, while on the job, to the mechanical determination of the clock.
Were they so determined, he would have no need to carry a watch. What distinguished
the experienced railroader was his practised ability to co-ordinate his movements with the
indications of his timepiece. He had to be able to catch the right moment to accelerate
or apply the brakes, or to judge his speed on a stretch of track, so as to arrive or depart
safely and precisely on schedule. This was an acquired skill, and one moreover that was
highly valued. The railroader’s peculiar capacity to ‘keep time’ with a precision unmatched
by practitioners of other trades conferred on him an identity that, as Cottrell notes, singled
him out in all his relationships, both within and beyond the ﬁeld of his employment.
And the watch, as the symbol of this identity, was an object of lavish care and attention

Skill
(Cottrell 1939: 190). In the eyes of management, to be sure, the railroad system was 1
conceived as a total technology which, in principle, should run with the predictability of 2
clockwork, and employees were treated merely as means towards that end. But in the 3
experience of the railroader, the watch and its temporal intervals were incorporated and 4
accorded signiﬁcance within an essentially task-oriented approach to the practical business 5
of driving trains. Time consciousness belonged to the railroader’s tekhnē.
TIME AND THE OTHER IN INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
There exists, in the Western anthropological imagination, a speciﬁc category which is 10
reserved for people whose form of life is considered to be most perfectly opposed to that 1
of the inhabitants of modern industrial societies. This is the category of ‘hunter-gatherers’. 2
According to one rather Arcadian vision of hunter-gatherer society, recently introduced 3
into anthropology under the rubric of ‘the original afﬂuent society’ (Sahlins 1972: 1–39), 4
their wants are few, and can be satisﬁed with little work, leaving ample time for leisure, 5
rest and sleep. People work erratically, and on average for no more than three or four 6
hours each day. Lacking foresight or any care for the future, hunters and gatherers consume 7
whatever they have to hand, without trying to ration, save or store. They have, it would 8
appear, made an institution out of indolence.
Now Sahlins’s account of hunters and gatherers echoes, almost word for word, the senti- 20
ments of the English gentry, in the early days of capitalism, towards the labouring classes 1
– likewise notorious for their alleged indolence and proﬂigacy, their irregular hours, and 2
their propensity to spend whatever they had on instant merriment, gambling or drunk- 3
enness. What these two cases have in common – the twentieth-century American 4
anthropologist regarding the hunter-gatherer and the eighteenth-century English gentleman 5
regarding the labourer – is that in both, a way of life is being evaluated in terms of a 6
standard that measures work in hours, and that imposes a clearcut division between work 7
and leisure. On these criteria it is found to be wanting. Indeed to people who are accus- 8
tomed, as many of us are, to labour timed by the clock, the attitudes to work and time 9
of allegedly traditional or ‘primitive’ folk, who are not, are almost bound to appear ‘wasteful 30
and lacking in urgency’ (Thompson 1967: 60).
Yet contemporary captains of industry are still inclined to make surprisingly similar allega- 2
tions about the incorrigible laziness and inefﬁciency of working people. To give just one 3
illustration, I return to the ethnography of railway workers, in this case from Britain. I refer 4
to Ken Starkey’s (1988) analysis of an industrial dispute between British Rail and ASLEF 5
(the Association of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen). The dispute, which concerned 6
ﬂexible rostering, was not about the duration of the working day – for in this regard there 7
was no further scope for reduction – but about the intensity of work while on the job. The 8
problem was that the Union was committed, by a time-honoured agreement, to the idea of 9
a ﬁxed eight-hour day. British Rail, however, wanted to introduce some ﬂexibility in the 40
length of the working day so that a man might be working more than eight hours on some 1
days, less than eight on others – though with no more and probably fewer hours overall. 2
The rationale for the proposed change was to try to reduce the ‘porosity’ of the working 3
day, that is, the length of time during which a man might not, in fact, be doing anything 4
but waiting around for the next train. Thus under existing arrangements, the average actual 5
working time for an 8-hour shift was only 3 hours 20 minutes. Flexible rostering would 6
increase the proportion of working time to waiting time within a shift, and by thus reduc- 7
ing the porosity of the working day would raise productivity. Why, then, did ASLEF object? 118

Work, time and industry • 337 •

Quite apart from the fact that it would increase the intensity of work, ASLEF’s main
objection was that ﬂexible rostering would leave men with much less control than before
over the scheduling of their personal and social lives. Like the drivers described by Cottrell,
who worked to a 16-hour limit but were liable to be called up at any time, ASLEF feared
that ﬂexible rostering would undermine railwaymen’s ability to time-plan their own relationships outside work, and so would make their social life intolerable. At issue, then, was
not the amount of time outside work, but control over the timing of this time.
In effect, the dispute focused on two ways of looking at time which are by now familiar
from my previous discussion. These are the dwelling and commodity perspectives. In the
commodity perspective, epitomised by the phrase ‘time is money’ and represented by the
right-hand column of Figure 17.1, time is seen as a quantity to be budgeted, with a
clearcut demarcation between work and leisure. Not only did British Rail management
hold to this view themselves, they also attributed it to their Union opponents, assuming
that their strategy was devised to produce a deal which would give them either more
leisure for the same pay, or more pay for the same number of hours of work. For ASLEF,
to the contrary, what mattered was the qualitative aspect of time and its signiﬁcance for
social life. Thus ASLEF’s objections to the intensiﬁcation of time use rested more on
moral than on economic criteria. On the one hand they perceived the attempt to increase
the intensity of time use during the working day as a threat to the traditional conception
of locomotive driving as a skilled, almost craft-like activity which, by its very nature,
involves a quality of time that is not uniform or homogeneous. On the other hand, they
saw the attempt to introduce ﬂexible rostering as a threat to their own social and community lives. In short, theirs was an approach ﬁrmly located in the dwelling perspective,
represented by the left-hand column of Figure 17.1.
It would perhaps be a little far-fetched to conclude that ASLEF demonstrated a typically hunter-gatherer approach to work and time. Nevertheless, there is more than a passing
similarity between Sahlins’s portrayal of the intermittent, stop-go pattern of work in
hunter-gatherer communities, and British Rail’s view of its drivers, as spending the greater
part of the working day waiting (chatting, resting, playing cards, drinking cups of tea)
between trains. In terms of the actual number of hours worked – if any meaning can be
given to such measurements – there is not much difference. It would seem, then, that
the opposition between the ‘West’ and the ‘Other’ has its source rather closer to home
than we might have imagined, and that we do not even have to leave the bounds of our
own society in order to discover the challenge presented by supposedly non-Western
perspectives to the dominant categories of Western thought. It would be fair to identify
these latter categories – including the dichotomies between freedom and necessity, leisure
and work, art and technology, the pure gift and the market mechanism, and free time
and clock time – with the commodity perspective. However it would be quite wrong, as
I have already shown, to conclude that life in modern industrial societies is conﬁned to
an oscillation between the poles of these dichotomies – that is, to the right-hand column
of Figure 17.1.
An indication of this lies in our response to Evans-Pritchard’s depiction of Nuer time,
which I cited at the outset. When he tells us that for Nuer, time inheres in the round of
daily tasks and their relations to one another, we do not ﬁnd this strange or exotic. To
the contrary, I am sure his words strike in most readers a deep chord of familiarity. We
know exactly what he is talking about, because we have all experienced it ourselves,
embedded in our memories of childhood, family, home and community. It is not only
the basis of our sense of belonging, but also something we value very highly. ‘Nuer are

Skill
fortunate’, says Evans-Pritchard, and we are quick to agree, wishing that we, too, were 1
not harried by the regimen of the clock. In a sense, clock time is as alien to us as it is 2
to the Nuer; the only difference is that we have to contend with it. If we differ from the 3
Nuer, then, it is not because they have a task-orientation and we do not. The difference 4
is rather that we are forced to accommodate this orientation – so fundamental to our 5
personal and social identity, to our knowledge of place and people, and to the practice 6
of our everyday skills – within the straitjacket of a ‘Western’ or commodity-based insti- 7
tutional and ideological framework that seeks at every turn to deny the reality of situated 8
social experience. We are not Westerners, nor are we really non-Westerners; rather, we 9
are human beings whose lives are caught up in the painful process of negotiation between 10
these extremes, between the dwelling and commodity perspectives. In this process lies the 1
temporal dynamic of industrial society, a dynamic which we – including anthropologists, 2
in their writings – have merely displaced onto the relation between our society and the 3
rest of the world.

Tools, minds and machines • 339 •

Chapter Eighteen

On weaving a basket

Artefacts are made, organisms grow: at ﬁrst glance the distinction seems obvious enough.
But behind the distinction, as I aim to show in this chapter, lie a series of highly problematic assumptions concerning mind and nature, interiority and exteriority, and the
genesis of form. We have only to consider the artefactual status of such an everyday object
as a basket to realise that the difference between making and growing is by no means as
obvious as we might have thought. I shall begin this chapter by showing that the reasons
why the basket confounds our expectations of the nature of the artefact stem from the
fact that it is woven. If the basket is an artefact, and if artefacts are made, then weaving
must be a modality of making. I want to suggest, to the contrary, that we should understand making as a modality of weaving. This switch of emphasis, I believe, could open
up a new perspective not just on basketry in particular, but on all kinds of skilled, formgenerating practices. But it would also have the effect of softening the distinction between
artefacts and living things which, as it turns out, are not so very different after all.

MAKING AND GROWING
What is implied about artefacts by their characterisation as things that are made rather
than things that grow? First of all, a division is assumed between form and substance,
that is between the design speciﬁcations of the object and the raw materials of which it
is composed. In the case of living things, it is supposed that the information specifying
the design of an organism is carried in the materials of heredity, the genes, and thus that
every new life-cycle is inaugurated with the injection of this speciﬁcation into a physical
medium. But with artefacts, this relation between form and substance is inverted. Form
is said to be applied from without, rather than unveiled from within. The very distinction between a within and a without of things, however, implies the existence of a surface,
where solid substance meets the space of action of those forces that impinge upon it. Thus
the world of substance – of brute matter – must present itself to the maker of artefacts
as a surface to be transformed.
In commonsense, practical terms, this is not hard to imagine. Many of our most familiar
artefacts are (or were, before the days of synthetic materials) made of more or less solid
stuff such as stone, metal, wood or clay. The very usefulness of these objects depends on
their being relatively resistant to deformation. We ourselves, however, inhabit a gaseous
medium – air – which, offering no such resistance, not only allows complete freedom of
movement, but also transmits both light and sound. Quite apart from the obvious fact
that we need air to breathe, and thus simply to stay alive, the possibilities of movement
and perception (visual and aural) that air affords are crucial for any artefact-producing

Skill
activity. There is, then, a pretty clear distinction between the gaseous medium that 1
surrounds us and the solid objects that clutter our environment; moreover the patterns of 2
reﬂected light off the surfaces of these objects enable us to see them for what they are 3
(Gibson 1979: 16–22).
These practical considerations, however, all too easily become confused in our thinking 5
with speculations of a more metaphysical kind. To show why this is so, consider the case 6
of the beehive. Is this an artefact or not? Surely, hives don’t grow. Insofar as it results 7
from the application of exterior force to raw material, the hive would appear to be as 8
much ‘bee-made’ as the human house is ‘man-made’. Or is it? Musing on this question, 9
Karl Marx famously came to the conclusion that ‘what from the very ﬁrst distinguishes 10
the most incompetent architect from the best of bees, is that the architect has built a cell 1
in his head before he constructs it in wax’. In other words, the criterion by which the 2
house is truly artiﬁcial – and by comparison the beehive only ﬁguratively so – is that it 3
issues from a representation or ‘mental model’ which has been fashioned in the imagina- 4
tion of the practitioner prior to its execution in the material. We may assume that bees, 5
by contrast, lack the powers of imagination, and have no more conception of their hives 6
than they do of their own bodies, both of which are formed under genetic control (Ingold 7
1983, cf. Marx 1930: 169–70)
Here, the exteriority of the forces that shape artefacts is understood in quite another 9
sense, in terms not of the physical separation of gaseous medium and solid substance but 20
of the metaphysical separation of mind and nature. Unlike the forms of animals and plants, 1
established through the evolutionary mechanism of natural selection and installed genet- 2
ically at the heart of the organisms themselves (in the nucleus of every cell), the forms of 3
artefacts are supposed to have their source within the human mind, as preconceived, intel- 4
lectual solutions to particular design problems. And whereas organic growth is envisaged 5
as a process that goes on within nature, and that serves to reveal its inbuilt architecture, 6
in the making of artefacts the mind is understood to place its ideal forms upon nature. 7
If making thus means the imposition of conceptual form on inert matter, then the surface 8
of the artefact comes to represent much more than an interface between solid substance 9
and gaseous medium; rather it becomes the very surface of the material world of nature 30
as it confronts the creative human mind.
This is precisely the kind of view that lies at the back of the minds of anthropologists 2
and archaeologists when they speak of artefacts as items of so-called ‘material culture’. 3
The last thing they mean to suggest, in resorting to this phrase, is that in the manufac- 4
tured object the domains of culture and materiality somehow overlap or intermingle. For 5
nothing about their substantive composition per se qualiﬁes artefacts for inclusion within 6
culture. The materials from which they are made – wood, stone, clay or whatever – are 7
in any case generally available in nature. Even with objects manufactured from synthetic 8
materials for which no naturally occurring counterparts exist, their status as items of mate- 9
rial culture is in no way conditional upon their ‘unnatural’ composition. A child’s toy 40
made of plastic is no more cultural, on that account, than its wooden equivalent. It is 1
the form of the artefact, not its substance, that is attributed to culture. This is why, in 2
the extensive archaeological and anthropological literature on material culture, so little 3
attention is paid to actual materials and their properties. The emphasis is almost entirely 4
on issues of meaning and form – that is, on culture as opposed to materiality. Understood 5
as a realm of discourse, meaning and value inhabiting the collective consciousness, culture 6
is conceived to hover over the material world but not to permeate it. In this view, in 7
short, culture and materials do not mix; rather, culture wraps itself around the universe 118

On weaving a basket • 341 •

of material things, shaping and transforming their outward surfaces without ever penetrating their interiority. Thus the particular surface of every artefact participates in the
impenetrable surface of materiality itself as it is enveloped by the cultural imagination.

SURFACE, FORCE AND THE GENERATION OF FORM
Let us consider the most ordinary of everyday objects, one that crops up in a surprising
range and variety of cultural settings around the world: a coiled basket. Has the basket
been created through working on the surface of some raw material? Have the forces
impacting on this surface been applied from without? Did they serve to impress onto the
material a pre-existent, conceptual design? In every case, as I show below, the answer is
‘Not exactly’. Thus the basket is not ‘made’ in the sense in which we normally understand the term. Nor, evidently, has it grown of its own accord. Thus neither of the
available alternatives seem to work for the basket. It does not ﬁt our stereotype of the
artefact, and it is not a life-form. Let us start instead from the simple observation that
constructing a basket is a process of weaving. In what follows, I shall consider what weaving
entails, respectively, with regard to the topology of surface, the application of force and
the generation of form.
We have seen that making, in what for convenience I shall henceforth call the ‘standard
view’, implies the prior presence of a surface to be transformed. Thus the ﬂint knapper chips
away at the surface of stone, the carpenter carves and chisels the surface of wood, the blacksmith hammers on the surface of molten metal, and the potter applies manual pressure to
the surface of clay. But once it has been cut and prepared for weaving, the basket-maker
does nothing to the surface of her
ﬁbrous material. In the process of
weaving, the surface of the basket
is not so much transformed as
built up. Moreover, there is no
simple or straightforward correspondence between the surface of
the basket and the surfaces of its
constituent ﬁbres. For example,
the two outer surfaces of the transverse wrapping ﬁbres that stitch
successive loops of the coil are
alternately ‘outside’ and ‘inside’ so
far as the surface of the basket
is concerned (see Figure 18.1).
Indeed it is in the nature of weaving, as a technique, that it produces a peculiar kind of surface
that does not, strictly speaking,
have an inside and an outside at
all.
Figure 18.1 Patterns of wrapping in coiled basketry: (1) plain; (2) ﬁgureIn the special case of coiled bas- of-eight (‘Navajo’); (3) long and short (‘lazy squaw’); (4) Peruvian coil;
ketry, there is a limited parallel (5) sewn coil.
with the technique of coil-building From H. Hodges, Artifacts: an introduction to early materials and techin pottery. Here the clay is ﬁrst nology, published by Duckworth, 1964, p. 131.

Skill
rolled out into long, thin, worm-like strips, rather analogous to the lengths of bundled ﬁbres 1
making up the basketry coil. These strips are then wound around and around to form the 2
base and sides of the vessel. In this case too, a surface is built up. In the process, however, 3
the original surfaces of the coiled strips congeal into a single mass, and the ﬁnal smoothing 4
leaves no trace of the original mode of construction. But there is another difference, equally 5
critical, which brings me to the issue of force. The potter may have to contend with the 6
force of gravity (his material, being both heavy and pliable, is inclined to sag). But the clay 7
does not exert any independent force. This is not the case with basketry, however, which 8
involves the bending and interweaving of ﬁbres that may exert a considerable resistance of 9
their own. Indeed the basket holds together, and assumes a rigid form, precisely because of 10
its tensile structure.1 In short, the form of the basket is the result of a play of forces, both 1
internal and external to the material that makes it up. One could say that the form unfolds 2
within a kind of force ﬁeld, in which the weaver is caught up in a reciprocal and quite mus- 3
cular dialogue with the material.
This point leads me to the ﬁnal question concerning the generation of form. According 5
to the standard view, the form pre-exists in the maker’s mind, and is simply impressed 6
upon the material. Now I do not deny that the basket-maker may begin work with a 7
pretty clear idea of the form she wishes to create. The actual, concrete form of the basket, 8
however, does not issue from the idea. It rather comes into being through the gradual 9
unfolding of that ﬁeld of forces set up through the active and sensuous engagement of 20
practitioner and material. This ﬁeld is neither internal to the material nor internal to the 1
practitioner (hence external to the material); rather, it cuts across the emergent interface 2
between them. Effectively, the form of the basket emerges through a pattern of skilled 3
movement, and it is the rhythmic repetition of that movement that gives rise to the 4
regularity of form. This point was made long ago by Franz Boas, in his classic work on 5
Primitive Art.
The basketmaker who manufactures a coiled basket, handles the ﬁbres composing the 8
coil in such a way that the greatest evenness of coil diameter results . . . In making her 9
stitches the automatic control of the left hand that lays down the coil, and of the right 30
that pulls the binding stitches over the coil brings it about that the distances between 1
the stitches and the strength of the pull are absolutely even so that the surface will be 2
smooth and evenly rounded and that the stitches show a perfectly regular pattern.
(Boas 1955 [1927]: 20) 4
SPIRALS IN NATURE AND ART
Boas illustrates the point with a drawing, which I reproduce here (Figure 18.2A). Opposite, 8
I have placed another drawing, this time taken from the work of the great biologist 9
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, On Growth and Form (Figure 18.2B). It depicts the 40
shell of a certain kind of gastropod. Although both the coiled basket and the shell have 1
a characteristic spiral form, they are spirals of different kinds: the ﬁrst is an equable spiral, 2
the second logarithmic (that is, the radius of each successive whorl increases arithmeti- 3
cally in the one instance, and geometrically in the other). The equable spiral, as Thompson 4
explains, is characteristic of artiﬁcial forms that have been produced by mechanically 5
bending, coiling or rolling up a given length of material, whereas the logarithmic spiral 6
is commonly produced in nature as a result of growth by deposition, where the material 7
is cumulatively laid down at one end whilst maintaining an overall constancy of proportion 118

On weaving a basket • 343 •

(Thompson 1961 [1917]: 178–9).
Either way, however, the form
appears to emerge with a certain
logical inevitability from the process
itself, of rolling up in the former case
and laying down in the latter.
Now it is very often assumed, in the
study of both organisms and artefacts,
that to ask about the form of things is,
in itself, to pose a question about
design, as though the design contained
a complete speciﬁcation that has only
to be ‘written out’ in the material.
This assumption is central to the stan- Figure 18.2 Artefactual and natural spirals: (A) Coiled basketry.
dard view which, as we have already
From F. Boas, Primitive art, published by Dover Publications, 1955
seen, distinguishes between living and [1927], p. 20.
artiﬁcial things on the criterion of the
interiority or exteriority of the design (B) Gastropod shell. The angle ␣ is known as the ‘spiral angle’, which
speciﬁcation governing their produc- in this case is large.
tion without questioning the premise From D. W. Thompson, On growth and form, published by
that the resultant forms are indeed Cambridge University Press, 1961 [1917], p. 192.
speciﬁed independently and in advance of the processes of growth or
manufacture wherein they are realised. Thus it is supposed that the basic architecture of the
organism is already established, as a genetic ‘blueprint’, from the very moment of conception; likewise the artefact is supposed to pre-exist, fully represented as a ‘virtual object’ in
the mind, even before a ﬁnger has been lifted in its construction. In both cases the actualisation of the form is reduced to a simple matter of mechanical transcription: all the creative work has already been done in advance, whether by natural selection or human reason.2
How then, starting from this premise, might we set about accounting for the formation of spirals in nature and in art, in the shell of the gastropod and the coil of the basket?
The account would likely run along the following lines: the form of the shell is internally
speciﬁed in the gastropod’s genetic inheritance, and revealed in its growth; the form of
the basket is externally speciﬁed in the mind of the weaver, as part of a received cultural
heritage, and revealed in its manufacture. Now natural selection, according to Darwinian
orthodoxy, designs organisms to be adapted to their particular conditions of life, and as
many scholars have suggested, a somewhat analogous process of blind variation and selective retention, operating in the arena of cultural ideas, could do likewise in designing
artefacts that are well suited to their purpose. The fact that we come across spirals in the
growth of living things (as in gastropods) as well as in the making of artefacts (as in
basketry) may be purely fortuitous, or it may be the outcome of some kind of adaptive
convergence – of natural selection and the human intellect, operating quite independently,
arriving at parallel solutions to what might be, in essence, a rather similar problem of
engineering design. If, to be more precise, the solution calls for a spiral of the equable
type, or alternatively of the logarithmic type, then this is what we will ﬁnd in the resultant forms, regardless of whether the design itself is encoded genetically or culturally.
Hence by this account, the distinction between equable and logarithmic spirals would not,
in itself, be relevant as an index of the organic or artefactual status of the objects concerned.

Skill
According to the standard view, as outlined above, form is fully explicable in terms of 3
the design that gives rise to it. Once you have accounted for the genesis of the design 4
you have, to all intents and purposes, explained the form. Or have you? Would it be 5
possible, even in theory, for any design to specify the form of an organism or artefact 6
completely? In his fascinating study of the design principles embodied in the construction 7
of living organisms and manufactured artefacts, originally written as a textbook for students 8
of engineering, Michael French (1988: 266–7) speculates on the question of just how 9
much information would be needed to specify every aspect of the form of an organism. 10
His conclusion is that the amount would be unimaginably large, far beyond what could 1
be coded in the DNA of any known life-form. Nor is the situation any different with 2
artefacts. True, even the greatest achievements of human engineering are no match for 3
the most commonplace of organisms: thus the steam locomotive, as French wryly observes, 4
‘is simplicity itself compared with the intricacies of the buttercup’ (1988: 1). But then, 5
no human design could approach the DNA of the genome in its informational content. 6
Once again, a complete speciﬁcation would apparently lie beyond the realms of possi- 7
bility. In short, the forms of both organisms and artefacts seem to be signiﬁcantly 8
underdetermined by their underlying blueprints. That being the case, French suggests, we 9
may have to recognise that a great many features of organisms and artefacts are merely 20
accidental, due to chance, revealing not the designs themselves but their limitations.
Though intended to shore up the argument from design against the objection that no 2
speciﬁcation can be exhaustive, this appeal to chance is a reductio ad absurdum that does 3
more to highlight the poverty of the argument itself. To show why, let me turn to another 4
example of spiral formation: the vortex of bathwater as it runs out of the plug-hole. Is 5
the form of the vortex a matter of chance? It is certainly not dictated by the speciﬁca- 6
tions of any design. You can determine whether the spiral runs clockwise or anticlockwise 7
by setting up a current through the water with your hand; beyond that, however, the 8
spiral appears to form of its own accord. But its formation is anything but an accident. 9
It can, in fact, be explained in terms of well-established principles of ﬂuid dynamics.
The example of the vortex is not my own; it is taken from the work of the biologist 1
Brian Goodwin (1982), who uses it to say something very important about the genera- 2
tion of spiral forms in living organisms. In a certain species of snail, the majority of 3
individuals have shells with a right-handed, logarithmic spiral, but in some the spiral is 4
left-handed. It has been shown that the direction of the spiral is controlled by the prod- 5
ucts of a particular gene, just as the direction of the spiral vortex in bathwater is controlled 6
by the intentional movement of your hand. But – and this is the crucial point – the form 7
of the shell is no more the product of a genetic programme than is the form of the vortex 8
the product of a design in your mind. There is, in short, no design for the spiral of the 9
gastropod shell. Rather, the form arises through a process of growth within what is known 40
technically as the ‘morphogenetic ﬁeld’ – that is, the total system of relations set up by 1
virtue of the presence of the developing organism in its environment. And the role of 2
genes in the morphogenetic process is not to specify the form, even incompletely, but to 3
set the parameters – such as handedness and spiral angle (see Figure 18.2B) – within 4
which it unfolds (Goodwin 1982: 111).

THE LIMITS OF DESIGN

On weaving a basket • 345 •

ON THE GROWTH OF ARTEFACTS
Returning from the growth of organisms to the manufacture of artefacts, a parallel argument applies. Just as organic form is generated in the unfolding of the morphogenetic
ﬁeld, so the form of the artefact evolves within what I have called a ﬁeld of forces. Both
kinds of ﬁeld cut across the developing interface between the object (organism or artefact) and an environment which, in the case of the artefact, critically includes its ‘maker’.
Where the organism engages its environment in the process of ontogenetic development,
the artefact engages its maker in a pattern of skilled activity. These are truly creative
engagements, in the sense that they actually give rise to the real-world artefactual and
organic forms that we encounter, rather than serving – as the standard view would claim
– to transcribe pre-existent form onto raw material. Moreover as a moment’s reﬂection
on the example of the vortex in bathwater will show, the properties of materials are directly
implicated in the form-generating process. It is therefore no longer possible to sustain the
distinction between form and substance that, as we have seen, is so central to the standard view of making things. Finally, the templates, measures and rules of thumb of the
artisan or craftsman no more add up to a design for the artefacts he produces than do
genes constitute a blueprint for the organism. Like genes, they set the parameters of the
process but do not preﬁgure the form.3
All these points apply to the making of a coiled basket. Thus the equable form of the
spiral base of the basket does not follow the dictates of any design; it is not imposed upon
the material but arises through the work itself. Indeed the developing form acts as its own
template, since each turn of the spiral is made by laying the longitudinal ﬁbres along the
edge formed by the preceding one. Now D’Arcy Thompson was of course right to point
out that there is a difference between bending material into shape, as in basketry, and an
organism’s growing into it, as with the shell of the gastropod, and that this can lead to
forms with contrasting mathematical properties. Nevertheless, if the unfolding of the
morphogenetic ﬁeld is described as a process of growth, would it not be fair to suggest
that there is a sense in which artefacts, whose forms likewise evolve within a ﬁeld of forces,
‘grow’ too – albeit according to different principles?
We could describe that growth as a process of autopoiesis, that is, the self-transformation over time of the system of relations within which an organism or artefact comes into
being. Since the artisan is involved in the same system as the material with which he
works, so his activity does not transform that system but is – like the growth of plants
and animals – part and parcel of the system’s transformation of itself. Through this autopoietic process, the temporal rhythms of life are gradually built into the structural properties
of things – or as Boas put it, with regard to artefacts:
The rhythm of time appears here translated into space. In the ﬂaking, adzing,
hammering, in the regular turning and pressing required in the making of coiled pottery,
in weaving, regularity of form and rhythmic repetition of the same movement are necessarily connected.
(Boas 1955 [1927]: 40)
The artefact, in short, is the crystallisation of activity within a relational ﬁeld, its regularities of form embodying the regularities of movement that gave rise to it.
I would like to conclude this comparison of the coiled basket and the gastropod shell
by commenting on the reasons for the remarkable durability of their respective forms.

Skill
According to the standard view, since form emanates from design, the persistence of form 1
can only be explained in terms of the stability of the underlying design speciﬁcations. In 2
the case of the organism these speciﬁcations are genetic, in the case of the artefact they 3
are cultural. The constancy of form is thus a function of the ﬁdelity with which genetic 4
or cultural information is copied from one generation to the next, combined with the 5
effects of natural selection – or its analogue in the realm of cultural ideas – in weeding 6
out less well-adapted variants.
The argument I have proposed here, however, is just the opposite. If forms are the 8
outcomes of dynamic, morphogenetic processes, then their stability can be understood in 9
terms of the generative principles embedded in the material conditions of their produc- 10
tion. For the shell the principle is one of invariant proportion; for the basket it is the 1
principle that every increment of longitudinal extension is coupled to what has gone 2
before by transverse attachment. Whereas the ﬁrst principle, through simple iteration, 3
will always and everywhere generate a logarithmic spiral, the second will just as reliably 4
generate an equable one. It is these generative principles, and not the ﬁdelity of genetic 5
or cultural copying, that underwrite the constancy of the respective forms, and explain 6
their persistence over immense spans of both historical and evolutionary time.
MAKING AS A WAY OF WEAVING
I now return to my earlier suggestion, that we reverse our normal order of priorities and 1
regard making as a modality of weaving, rather than the other way around. One intriguing 2
observation points us in this direction. Our word ‘loom’ comes from Middle English lome, 3
which originally referred to a tool or utensil of any kind. Does this not suggest that to 4
our predecessors, at least, the surface-building activity of weaving, rather than any of those 5
activities involving the application of force to pre-existing surfaces, somehow epitomised 6
technical processes in general?
The notion of making, of course, deﬁnes an activity purely in terms of its capacity to 8
yield a certain object, whereas weaving focuses on the character of the process by which 9
that object comes into existence. To emphasise making is to regard the object as the 30
expression of an idea; to emphasise weaving is to regard it as the embodiment of a rhythmic 1
movement. Therefore to invert making and weaving is also to invert idea and movement, 2
to see the movement as truly generative of the object rather than merely revelatory of an 3
object that is already present, in an ideal, conceptual or virtual form, in advance of the 4
process that discloses it. The more that objects are removed from the contexts of life- 5
activity in which they are produced and used – the more they appear as static objects of 6
disinterested contemplation (as in museums and galleries) – the more, too, the process 7
disappears or is hidden behind the product, the ﬁnished object. Thus we are inclined to 8
look for the meaning of the object in the idea it expresses rather than in the current of 9
activity to which it properly and originally belongs. It is precisely this contemplative atti- 40
tude that leads to the redesignation of the ordinary objects of the quotidian environment 1
as items of ‘material culture’ whose signiﬁcance lies not so much in their incorporation 2
into a habitual pattern of use as in their symbolic function. In suggesting that the relation 3
between making and weaving be overturned, my purpose is to bring these products of 4
human activity back to life, to restore them to the processes in which they, along with 5
their users, are absorbed.4
In what way, then, does weaving epitomise human technical activity? What sense does 7
it make to say that the blacksmith in his forge, or the carpenter at his bench, in trans- 118

On weaving a basket • 347 •

forming the surfaces of metal and wood respectively, is actually weaving? Of course, to
adopt this idiom is to interpret the notion of weaving more broadly than is customary.
It does however help to draw attention to three points about skill which are exempliﬁed
in basketry but which are nevertheless common to the practice of any craft. First, the
practitioner operates within a ﬁeld of forces set up through his or her engagement with
the material; secondly, the work does not merely involve the mechanical application of
external force but calls for care, judgement and dexterity; and thirdly, the action has a
narrative quality, in the sense that every movement, like every line in a story, grows rhythmically out of the one before and lays the groundwork for the next. In the following
chapter, I shall explore these dimensions of skill at greater length.
This broad interpretation of weaving, though it may sound strange to modern, Western
ears, is fully in accord with the understandings of the Yekuana, a native people of southern
Venezuela. In his study of Yekuana baskets and basketry, David Guss observes that
the master craftsman in this society, a person accredited with exceptional wisdom, ‘not
only weaves the world when making a basket, but in everything he does’ (1989: 170,
my emphasis). Yet this creative process of world-weaving, Guss shows, is not limited to
the experts. It rather engages all Yekuana people throughout their lives – albeit at a lower
level of perfection – in their manufacture of the essential equipment of traditional livelihood. In every case, from building houses and canoes to fabricating manioc graters and
baskets, making is regarded as a way of weaving.
Paradoxically, however, in translating the indigenous term by which such locally
produced items are distinguished from imported, commercially manufactured ‘stuff ’ (such
as tin cans and plastic buckets), Guss renders them as things not woven but made. Moreover
the essence of making, in his view, lies in loading the object with metaphorical signiﬁcance or semiotic content, such that artefacts become a mirror in which people can see
reﬂected the fundamentals of their own culture. The symbolic capacity of artefacts, Guss
insists, ‘far outweighs their functional value’ (1989: 70). Weaving the world, then, turns
out to be a matter of ‘making culture’, of submitting the disorder of nature to the guidelines of traditional design.
Now the epistemology by which Guss converts the manifold products of world-weaving
back into ‘things made’, instances of the cultural transformation of nature (1989: 161),
is one that I reject. It is, as I have shown, an epistemology that takes as given the separation of the cultural imagination from the material world, and thus presupposes the
existence, at their interface, of a surface to be transformed. According to what I have
called the standard view, the human mind is supposed to inscribe its designs upon this
surface through the mechanical application of bodily force – augmented, as appropriate,
by technology. I mean to suggest, to the contrary, that the forms of objects are not imposed
from above but grow from the mutual involvement of people and materials in an environment. The surface of nature is thus an illusion: the blacksmith, carpenter or potter – just
as much as the basket-maker – works from within the world, not upon it. There are
surfaces of course, but these divide states of matter, not matter from mind (see Chapter
Thirteen, pp. 240–1, for further discussion of this point). And they emerge within the
form-generating process, rather than pre-existing as a condition for it.
The philosopher Martin Heidegger expressed the very same point through an exploration of the notions of building and dwelling (see Chapter Ten, pp. 185–6). Opposing
the modernist convention that dwelling is an activity that goes on within, and is structured by, an environment that is already built, Heidegger argued that we cannot engage
in any kind of building activity unless we already dwell within our surroundings. ‘Only

Skill
if we are capable of dwelling’, he declared, ‘only then can we build’ (1971: 160). Now 1
dwelling is to building, in Heidegger’s terms, as weaving is to making in mine. Where 2
making (like building) comes to an end with the completion of a work in its ﬁnal form, 3
weaving (like dwelling) continues for as long as life goes on – punctuated but not termi- 4
nated by the appearance of the pieces that it successively brings into being.5 Dwelling in 5
the world, in short, is tantamount to the ongoing, temporal interweaving of our lives with 6
one another and with the manifold constituents of our environment.
The world of our experience is, indeed, continually and endlessly coming into being 8
around us as we weave. If it has a surface, it is like the surface of the basket: it has no 9
‘inside’ or ‘outside’. Mind is not above, nor nature below; rather, if we ask where mind 10
is, it is in the weave of the surface itself. And it is within this weave that our projects of 1
making, whatever they may be, are formulated and come to fruition. Only if we are 2
capable of weaving, only then can we make.

Tools, minds and machines • 349 •

Chapter Nineteen

Of string bags and birds’ nests
Skill and the construction of artefacts

BEYOND ART AND TECHNOLOGY
‘Art’ and ‘technology’ are mere words. And as with all words, their meanings are not ﬁxed
but have changed signiﬁcantly in the course of their history. They are still changing. But
I believe it remains true of modern – if not post-modern – thought, that the meanings
of art and technology are held to be somehow opposed, as though drawn from ﬁelds of
human endeavour that are in certain respects antithetical. This opposition, however, is
scarcely more than a century old, and would have seemed strange to Anglophone ears as
late as the seventeenth century, when artists were still considered no different from artisans, when the methods of working in any particular branch of art could be described as
‘technical’, and when the term ‘technology’ had just been coined to denote the scientiﬁc
study of these methods (Williams 1976: 33–4). Etymologically, ‘art’ is derived from the
Latin artem or ars, while ‘technology’ was formed upon the stem of the classical Greek
tekhnē. Originally, tekhnē and ars meant much the same thing, namely skill of the kind
associated with craftsmanship (see Chapter Fifteen). The words were used, respectively in
Greek and Roman society, to describe every kind of activity involving the manufacture
of durable objects by people who depended on such work for a living, from the painter
to the cobbler, from the temple architect to the builder of pigsties. This is not to say that
customers failed to distinguish between aesthetic and utilitarian criteria in their estimations of the objects produced. But in every case, it was the craft skill of the practitioner
that was supposed to ensure a successful outcome (Burford 1972: 13–14).
The connotation of skill is preserved in many words derived from the same roots and
that remain in common currency today. On the one hand we have ‘technics’ and ‘technique’; on the other hand such terms as ‘artless’ – meaning clumsy or lacking in skill –
and, of course, ‘artefact’. Yet the apparent continuity masks an important shift, towards
abstracting the components of intelligence, sensibility and expression that are essential to
the accomplishment of any craft from the actual bodily movement of the practitioner in
his or her environment. Thus the technique of the pianist comes to refer to the practised
ability of his ﬁngers to ﬁnd their way around the keyboard and to hit the desired notes,
as distinct from the inherent musicality of the performance. ‘A player may be perfect in
technique’, wrote Sir Charles Grove, ‘and yet have neither soul nor intelligence’. Likewise,
we have come a long way from the days when, as in the year 1610, it was possible to
eulogise a certain composer as ‘the most artiﬁcial and famous Alfonso Ferrabosco’ (Rooley
1990: 5). As David Lowenthal has observed, ‘time has reversed the meaning of artiﬁcial
from “full of deep skill and art” to “shallow, contrived and almost worthless”’ (1996:
209). By the same token, the artefact is regarded no longer as the original outcome of a

Skill
skilled, sensuous engagement between the craftsman and his raw material, but as a copy 1
run off mechanically from a pre-established template or design. This debasement of craft 2
to the ‘merely technical’ or mechanical execution of predetermined operational sequences 3
went hand in hand with the elevation of art to embrace the creative exercise of the imag- 4
ination (Gell 1992b: 56). As a result, the artist came to be radically distinguished from 5
the artisan, and the art-work from the artefact (Coleman 1988: 7).
The decisive break, according to Raymond Williams, came in the England of the late 7
eighteenth century, with the exclusion of engravers from the newly formed Royal Academy, 8
which was reserved for practitioners of the ‘ﬁne’ arts of painting, drawing, and sculpture 9
(Williams 1976: 33). It was, of course, symptomatic of a general tendency to distinguish 10
intellectual from manual labour, along the common axis of a more fundamental series of 1
oppositions between mind and body, creativity and repetition, and freedom and deter- 2
mination. But the more that ‘art’ came to be associated with the allegedly higher human 3
faculties of creativity and imagination, the more its residual connotations of useful but 4
nevertheless habitual bodily skills were swallowed up by the notion of technology. For by 5
the beginning of the twentieth century this term, too, had undergone a crucial shift of 6
meaning. Where once it had referred to the framework of concepts and theory informing 7
the scientiﬁc study of productive practices, technology came to be regarded as a corpus 8
of rules and principles installed at the heart of the apparatus of production itself, whence 9
it was understood to generate practice as a programme generates an output. Technology, 20
now, did not discipline the scholar in his study of techniques, but rather the practitioner 1
in his application of them. He became, in effect, an operative, bound to the mechanical 2
implementation of an objective and impersonal system of productive forces.1
Here, then, lies the source of the now familiar division between the respective ﬁelds of 4
art and technology. An object or performance could be a work of art, rather than a mere 5
artefact, to the extent that it escapes or transcends the determinations of the technolog- 6
ical system. And its creator could be an artist, rather than a mere artisan, insofar as the 7
work is understood to be an expression of his or her own subjective being. Where tech- 8
nological operations are predetermined, art is spontaneous; where the manufacture of 9
artefacts is a process of mechanical replication, art is the creative production of novelty. 30
These distinctions can be multiplied almost indeﬁnitely, but they are all driven by the 1
same logic, which is one that carves out a space for human freedom and subjectivity in 2
a world governed by objective necessity. As I have shown in Chapter Seventeen (pp. 3
329–30), it is a logic that operates as much in the ﬁeld of exchange as in that of produc- 4
tion. Thus the modern distinction between the true work of art and the replicated artefact 5
has its parallel in that between the ‘pure gift’ and the market commodity: the former 6
given spontaneously and motivated (at least in theory) by personal feeling; the latter 7
exchanged in line with impersonal calculations of supply and demand. But in both ﬁelds 8
the distinctions are recent, and closely tied to the rise of a peculiarly modern conception 9
of the human subject.
The division between art and technology, as it has come to be institutionalised in 1
modern society, has affected anthropology as much as any other ﬁeld of inquiry. Until 2
fairly recently, the literatures in the anthropology of art and in the anthropology of tech- 3
nology remained almost completely isolated from one another. Technology was located 4
within the sphere of ecological adaptation, mediating the material relations between human 5
populations and their environments. For assorted cultural ecologists, cultural materialists, 6
and Marxists, the conjunction of environment and technology – if not actually determi- 7
nant of cultural form – constitutes the foundation upon which the house of culture is 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 351 •

built. Art, by contrast, along with such forms as myth and ritual, is supposed to comprise
the patterns on the walls, the world of sensory experience as it is refracted through the
ﬁlters and lenses of the cultural imagination. It mediates a dialogue, not between human
beings and nature, but among persons in society. Like language, it encodes meanings.
Thus technology works; art signiﬁes: technical action is aimed to produce results in a
mechanically determined way, whereas the purpose of art is to communicate ideas. In
short, art has been split from technology along the lines of an opposition between the
mental and the material, and between semiotics and mechanics (see Chapter Sixteen,
pp. 317–18).
Despite the apparent symmetry of this opposition, the respective trajectories of the
anthropologies of art and technology have been decidedly asymmetrical. Having been
placed beyond the pale of culture and society, as a quasi-autonomous system of productive
forces, technology was largely neglected as a subject of anthropological inquiry. Only very
recently has the anthropology of technology, as a subﬁeld, begun to acquire a signiﬁcant
momentum of its own. The anthropology of art, by contrast, has long held a secure place
in the discipline. But the very reasons that have led to the inclusion of art as an object
of study for anthropologists – namely, that it is clearly positioned within a social context
and embodies cultural meaning – have also given rise to persistent doubts about the crosscultural validity of the concept of art itself. How can a concept that carries such strong
evaluative overtones, and whose meaning is so closely bound up with widely held ideas
about the ascendancy of Western civilisation, possibly be applied without courting accusations of ethnocentrism? Not for the ﬁrst time, the very credentials that make a
phenomenon eminently worthy of anthropological study have cast a pall of uncertainty
over whether the phenomenon exists ‘as such’ at all. It happened with the study of kinship,
it happened with the study of art, and now that anthropologists are at last beginning to
recognise the social embeddedness of technological systems, it is happening to the study
of technology too. No sooner is technology reclaimed for anthropological inquiry, than
we cease to know, for sure, what we are dealing with.
The source of the problem, in my view, lies not in the concept of art, nor in that of
technology, but in the dichotomy between them. It is this, along with the idea that art
ﬂoats in an ethereal realm of symbolic meaning, above the physical world over which
technology seeks control, that is tainted by its association with modernity. The idea would
have made no sense to the craftsmen of Ancient Greece or Rome. They knew what they
meant by tekhnē or ars, and it was a matter neither of mechanical functioning nor of
symbolic expression, but of skilled practice. It is my contention that by going back to the
original connotations of ars and tekhnē as skill, we can overcome the deep divisions
that currently separate the anthropologies of art and technology, and develop a far more
satisfactory account of the socially and environmentally situated practices of real human
agents. In what follows I shall pursue three aspects of this task. First, I explain in more
depth what I mean by skill. Secondly, I show how the continuity of tradition in skilled
practice is a function not of the transmission of rules and representations but of the
coordination of perception and action. Thirdly, I show how a focus on skill explodes the
conventional dichotomy between innate and acquired abilities, forcing a radical reappraisal
of the ways we think about what is ‘cultural’ and ‘biological’ in humans. I shall illustrate
my argument by way of two examples: Maureen MacKenzie’s (1991) study of the looping
skills involved in making string bags (bilum) among Telefol people of Central New Guinea,
and the study by N. E. and E. C. Collias (1984) of the nest building skills of the male
weaverbird.

Skill
I begin by drawing attention to ﬁve points which I believe are crucial to a proper appre- 3
ciation of technical skills. The ﬁrst concerns what it means to say that practice is a form 4
of use, of tools and of the body. In one of his dialogues, Plato has Socrates debate with 5
a character called Alcibiades on precisely this question. ‘What are we to say of the shoe- 6
maker?’, asks Socrates, ‘Does he cut with his tools only, or with his hands as well?’ 7
Alcibiades is forced to concede that he does indeed cut with his hands, and moreover that 8
he uses not just his hands but his eyes – and by extension his whole body – to accom- 9
plish the work. Yet he had already agreed, with Socrates, that there is a fundamental 10
difference between the user and the things he uses. So who is this user? If it be man, 1
counters Socrates, it cannot be his body, which is used. Only one possibility remains, it 2
must be the soul. ‘So’, he concludes, ‘do you require some yet clearer proof that the soul 3
is man?’ Alcibiades is convinced (in Flew 1964: 35–7).
There is no reason, however, why we should have to follow suit. ‘It would be wrong 5
to assume’, as Roger Coleman caustically remarks, ‘that because Plato was a Greek he 6
knew what he was talking about’. He was no craftsman, and had no practical experience 7
whatever of shoemaking or any other trade. Plato’s objective, in forcing a division between 8
the controlling mind and subservient body, was to establish the supremacy of abstract, 9
contemplative reason over menial work, or of theoretical knowledge over practical appli- 20
cation, and thereby to justify the institution of slavery (Coleman 1988: 11–12). Resurrected 1
in the Renaissance, Plato’s division anticipated the debasement of craft that, as we have 2
seen, came to be one of the hallmarks of modernity. To recover the essence of skill we 3
need a different concept of use from the one invoked by Plato. Instead of thinking of use 4
as what happens when we put two, initially separate things together – an agent with 5
certain purposes or designs, and an instrument with certain functions – we can take it as 6
the primary condition of involvement of the craftsman, with his tools and raw materials, 7
in an environment. In this sense the hands and eyes of the shoemaker, as well as his 8
cutting tools, are not so much used as brought into use, through their incorporation into 9
an accustomed (that is usual) pattern of dextrous activity. Intentionality and functionality, 30
then, are not pre-existing properties of the user and the used, but rather immanent in the 1
activity itself, in the gestural synergy of human being, tool and raw material.
My second point follows from this. It is that skill cannot be regarded simply as a tech- 3
nique of the body. This was the position advocated in a now classic essay by Marcel 4
Mauss (1979[1934]). Taking his cue explicitly from Plato, Mauss observed that technique 5
does not, in itself, depend upon the use of tools. Song and dance are obvious examples. 6
The dancer, according to Mauss, uses his own body as an instrument; indeed so do we 7
all, he declares, for the body is surely ‘man’s ﬁrst and most natural technical object, and 8
at the same time technical means’. Moreover in the deployment of these means, the human 9
agent experiences the resulting bodily movements as ‘of a mechanical, physical or physico- 40
chemical order’ (p. 104). This reduction of the technical to the mechanical is an inevitable 1
consequence of the isolation of the body as a natural or physical object, both from the 2
(disembodied) agency that puts it to work and from the environment in which it oper- 3
ates. To understand the true nature of skill we must move in the opposite direction, that 4
is, to restore the human organism to the original context of its active engagement with 5
the constituents of its surroundings. As Gregory Bateson argued, by way of his example 6
of the skilled woodsman notching with an axe the trunk of a tree he is felling, to explain 7
what is going on we need to consider the dynamics of the entire man–axe–tree system 118

FIVE DIMENSIONS OF SKILL

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 353 •

(1973: 433). The system is, indeed, as much mental as physical or physiological, for these
are, in truth, but alternative descriptions of one and the same thing. Skill, in short, is a
property not of the individual human body as a biophysical entity, a thing-in-itself, but
of the total ﬁeld of relations constituted by the presence of the organism-person, indissolubly body and mind, in a richly structured environment. That is why the study of
skill, in my view, not only beneﬁts from, but demands an ecological approach.
Granted that the foundations of skill lie in the irreducible condition of the practitioner’s
embeddedness in an environment, it follows – and this is my third point – that skilled
practice is not just the application of mechanical force to exterior objects, but entails qualities of care, judgment and dexterity (Pye 1968: 22). Critically, this implies that whatever
practitioners do to things is grounded in an attentive, perceptual involvement with them,
or in other words, that they watch and feel as they work. As the Russian neuroscientist
Nicholai Bernstein argued some ﬁfty years ago, the essence of dexterity lies not in bodily
movements themselves, but in the responsiveness of these movements to surrounding
conditions that are never the same from one moment to the next (Bernstein 1996). Given
the freedom of movement of the limbs as well as the elasticity of the muscles, Bernstein
had observed, it is just not possible to control the movements of the body in the same
way as one might the workings of a machine made up of rigid, interconnecting parts.
From a close study of the movements of a skilled blacksmith, hitting the iron on the anvil
over and over again with a hammer, Bernstein found that while the trajectory of the tip
of the hammer was highly reproducible, the trajectories of individual arm joints varied
from stroke to stroke. At ﬁrst glance the situation appears paradoxical: how can it be that
the motion of the hammer rather than that of the limbs is reliably reproduced, when it
is only by way of the limbs that the hammer is made to move (cf. Latash 1996: 286)?
Clearly, the smith’s movements cannot be understood as the output of a ﬁxed motor
programme, nor are they arrived at through the application of a formula. The secret of
control, Bernstein concluded, lies in ‘sensory corrections’, that is in the continual adjustment or ‘tuning’ of movement in response to an ongoing perceptual monitoring of the
emergent task.
All this has implications for the way skills are learned, which brings me to my fourth
point. If, as Bernstein contended, skilled practice cannot be reduced to a formula, then
it cannot be through the transmission of formulae that skills are passed from generation
to generation. Traditional models of social learning separate the intergenerational transmission of information specifying particular techniques from the application of this
information in practice. First, a generative schema or programme is established in the
novice’s mind from his observations of the movements of already accomplished practitioners; secondly, the novice imitates these movements by running off exemplars of the
technique in question from the schema. Now I do not deny that the learning of skills
involves both observation and imitation. But the former is no more a matter of forming
internal, mental representations of observed behaviour than is the latter a matter of
converting these representations into manifest practice. For the novice’s observation
of accomplished practitioners is not detached from, but grounded in, his own active,
perceptual engagement with his surroundings. And the key to imitation lies in the intimate coordination of the movement of the novice’s attention to others with his own bodily
movement in the world. Through repeated practical trials, and guided by his observations,
he gradually gets the ‘feel’ of things for himself – that is, he learns to ﬁne-tune his own
movements so as to achieve the rhythmic ﬂuency of the accomplished practitioner (for an
example, see Gatewood 1985). And in this process, each generation contributes to the

Skill
next not by handing on a corpus of representations, or information in the strict sense, 1
but rather by introducing novices into contexts which afford selected opportunities for 2
perception and action, and by providing the scaffolding that enables them to make 3
use of these affordances. This is what James Gibson (1979: 254) called an ‘education of 4
attention’.
It is because practitioners’ engagement with the material with which they work is an 6
attentive engagement, rather than a mere mechanical coupling, that skilled activity carries 7
its own intrinsic intentionality, quite apart from any designs or plans that it may be 8
supposed to implement (see Chapter Twenty-three, p. 415). My ﬁfth point follows from 9
this, and has to do with what we mean by making things. Let me return for a moment 10
to the example of Socrates and the shoemaker. Socrates had asked what it means to say 1
of the shoemaker that he uses tools. The other side of the question is to ask what it means 2
to say that he makes shoes. If use, as Socrates maintained, is what happens when you put 3
an agent having a certain purpose together with objects having certain functions, then the 4
purpose must precede the use through which it is realised. In these terms, to refer to an 5
action as one of making is to refer back to the prior intention that motivates it. It is as 6
though the form of the manufactured object were already preﬁgured, as a design, in the 7
mind of its maker, such that the activity of making issued directly from the design and 8
served only to transcribe it onto the material. The assumption that every form is the 9
outward expression of design is, as we saw in the last chapter, as prevalent in biology as 20
it is in technology. Thus the form of an organism is said to be given in an evolved design 1
speciﬁcation, the genotype, in advance of its phenotypic ‘expression’ in an environment. 2
And in modern architecture the form of a construction is supposed exist in miniature, in 3
models, drawings and plans, before any building work begins (Coleman 1988: 16). To 4
take this view, however, is to deny the creativity of the very process of environmentally 5
situated and perceptually engaged activity, that is of use, through which real forms emerge 6
and are held in place. It is the activity itself – of regular, controlled movement – that 7
generates the form, not the design that precedes it. Making, in short, arises within the 8
process of use, rather than use disclosing what is, ideally if not materially, ready-made. 9
HOW TO MAKE A STRING BAG
Among the Telefol people of central New Guinea, and indeed throughout this region, 3
one of the most ubiquitous and multifunctional accessories to everyday life is the string 4
bag or bilum. It is made by means of a looping technique from two-ply string spun from 5
plant ﬁbres. Children are introduced to the techniques of bilum making from a very early 6
age. All young Telefol children, both boys and girls, help their mothers and elder sisters 7
in preparing ﬁbres for spinning. ‘From the age of about two onwards they begin to exper- 8
iment with roving, rolling the shredded ﬁbres down their thigh to make a single ply, and 9
progress to experiments with spinning. It is not uncommon to see very young girls, mere 40
toddlers, diligently attempting to loop the string they have made into bilum fabric’ 1
(MacKenzie 1991: 101). Boys, as they grow older, do not go on to master fully the skills 2
of looping, for the simple reason that they are soon removed, by the conventions of their 3
society, from the sphere of women’s activities. Men have no need to make their own bags, 4
as these are willingly supplied for them by women, who thus maintain an effective 5
monopoly on bilum making. Girls, by contrast, remain close to their mothers and other 6
female relatives, and continue to develop their skills, quietly and unobtrusively following 7
in their mothers’ footsteps.

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 355 •

All the points I have made about skill, in the previous section, apply to the making of
string bags. Apart from the maker’s body – and especially her ﬁngers – the only tools
used are the mesh gauge (ding), made from a strip of leaf, to maintain the constancy of
the mesh in an open weave (see Figure 19.1), and the needle (siil ), made of bone, which
is needed for making tightly looped baskets without the use of the gauge (MacKenzie
1991: 73). But in use the needle or the gauge, along with the ﬁngers that hold it, are as
much a part of the user as they are used. Moreover the accomplished bilum-maker does
not experience the movements of her body as being of a mechanical nature. Far from
answering to commands issued from a higher source, they carry their own intentionality,
unfolding in a continual dialogue with the material. Telefol people liken this movement
to the ﬂowing water of a river. Thus the body-in-use is not moved, like a rigid object,

Figure 19.1 The step-by-step procedure for looping a ﬂat strip of ‘open, spaced’ bilum fabric, as practised by Telefol
people of central New Guinea. Steps 1–4 show how the ﬁrst row of loops is constructed around the mesh gauge
(ding), in a series of ﬁgure-of-eight loops with each loop connecting into the preceding one. By stage 5 the ﬁrst row
of loops is completed to the desired width. On completion of each row the work must be turned over so that the
working thread is always on the left-hand side. In step 6 the work is thus reversed. Step 7 illustrates how a new
strip of ding is inserted at the beginning of each successive row. This linear way of working, with each row connecting
into the loops of the preceding one, is then repeated (step 8).
From MacKenzie, Androgynous Objects: string bags and gender in central New Guinea, published by Harwood Academic,
1991, pp. 86–7.

Skill
but rather becomes one with the ﬂow (p. 102). However, in order to maintain the even- 1
ness of the string, in spinning, or of the weave, in looping, it is necessary to make continual 2
adjustments in the course of the movement itself. ‘By adolescence’, MacKenzie writes, ‘all 3
girls have mastered the technique of spinning, gaining visual acuity in selecting equal 4
assemblages of ﬁlaments during the roving process; and a sensitivity or balance in the 5
amount of pressure applied between palm and thigh during the rhythmic plying motion’ 6
(p. 76). As this passage clearly reveals, dexterity in spinning depends on the ﬁne-tuning 7
of visual as well as haptic perception. And it is equally clear that the form of the bilum 8
is an emergent outcome of rhythmically repeated, controlled movement in the processes 9
of spinning and looping.
The issue on which I want to focus here, however, concerns how bilum-making skills 1
are passed from generation to generation. MacKenzie herself describes this in terms of a 2
fairly conventional model of social learning, according to which ‘observation is followed 3
by internalisation and then mimesis’ (p. 100). Thus by watching the activity of her mother, 4
a young girl absorbs and assimilates the ‘intrinsic rules’ of the craft. Once these are ﬁrmly 5
implanted in her mind, she can proceed to execute them in the production of her own 6
work. The fact that ‘each daughter follows exactly the motor habits and bodily motions 7
of her mother’ leads to a remarkable cultural conformity from one generation to the next 8
(p. 103). There is much in MacKenzie’s own account, however, to suggest that confor- 9
mity to tradition is not a consequence of the intergenerational transmission of rules or 20
formulae, however intrinsic, but rather the result of a process of guided rediscovery in 1
which the role of experienced bilum-makers is to set up the contexts within which novices 2
are enabled to gain in proﬁciency for themselves, or in other words to ‘grow into’ the 3
skills of spinning and looping.
First of all, it is clear that to advance in these skills it is not enough for the novice to 5
know how their constituent movements look ‘from the outside’; she has also to know 6
how they feel ‘from the inside’ (cf. Bernstein 1996: 184–5). One young woman, recalling 7
how she learned to loop as a child, told of how she had once tried to carry on with an 8
unﬁnished bilum that her mother had left in the rafters of the house before leaving to 9
work in the garden. She had been carefully watching the way her mother’s hands moved 30
as she looped the bilum. But on trying it out herself, the result was a disaster. When her 1
mother returned, it took her hours to undo the mess. At ﬁrst she was angry, but then 2
she lectured her daughter with the following words of wisdom:
You must practise to get the proper feel of looping. When you’ve made your ﬁrst bilum 5
it will be cranky but then we’ll throw it in the river. The river will carry your wonky 6
bilum away, and it will wash away your heavy handedness. Then your hands will be 7
good at making bilums, your hands will move easily like running water.
(from MacKenzie 1991: 102) 9
What does it mean to get the ‘feel’ of looping? It could mean that the observation on 1
which learning depends is as much tactile as visual, or that the skill is embodied as a 2
rhythmic pattern of movement rather than a static schema, or that the key to ﬂuent perfor- 3
mance lies in the ability to co-ordinate perception and action. All three are undoubtedly 4
important, but none more so than the third. For it is this, as MacKenzie herself observes, 5
that makes the difference between clumsiness and dexterity, between having heavy hands 6
and hands that ﬂow. ‘Clumsiness, iluum t’eb’e su [to be heavy handed], is deemed natural 7
at ﬁrst, and must be practically worked through’ (p. 103).

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 357 •

It seems, then, that progress from clumsiness to dexterity in the craft of bilum-making
is brought about not by way of an internalisation of rules and representations, but through
the gradual attunement of movement and perception. As in any craft, the skilled maker
who has a feel for what she is doing is one whose movement is continually and subtly
responsive to the modulations of her relation with the material. Conversely, the clumsy
practitioner is precisely one who implements mechanically a ﬁxed sequence of instructions, while remaining insensitive to the evolving conditions of the task as it unfolds. The
hand that is heavy is experienced as a resistance to be overcome, and has to be moved
from position to position in ways that seem contrary to its nature. The light hand, by
contrast, ﬁnds its way of its own accord. The heavy-handed novice does not, of course,
move in exactly the same way as her light-handed mother, nor can she be expected to
produce such satisfactory results. This is precisely where the standard model of the social
learning of technical skills goes wrong. For in attributing the intergenerational conformity
of movements to rules that are transmitted and internalised in advance of their practical
application in mimesis, the model assumes that practice is a matter of executing identical,
rule-governed movements over and over again, leading to gains in speed, efﬁciency and
automation. But a little girl, making her ﬁrst bilum, is quite unable to produce these
movements. Rather than repeatedly carrying out the same movements, generated from an
already internalised schema, she is repeatedly set the same task, generated within the social
context of mother–daughter relations. The ability to reproduce her mother’s movements
with precision, depending as it does on subtle sensory attunement, is not a natural foundation for enskilment but its consequence (cf. Reed and Bril 1996: 438).
Telefol women, according to MacKenzie, place great value on the standardisation of their
looping techniques, since this is a way of conﬁrming tribal identity (1991: 103). But I would
contend that this standardisation is not brought about, as MacKenzie claims, by conformity
to rules. Indeed there appear to be no rules, beyond general exhortations of the kind
delivered by the mother to her daughter in the case described above, or vague ‘rules of
thumb’ that help prepare the practitioner for her impending activity but in no way determine its course (Suchman 1987: 52). Like most commonplace practical skills, such as tying
shoelaces in Western society, looping resists codiﬁcation in the form of generative rules or
algorithms (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1987). One becomes aware of this simply by looking
at the elaborate diagrams, accompanied by written commentary, by means of which
MacKenzie attempts to explain the step-by-step procedure for open-spaced looping
(pp. 83–99, and for an example, see Figure 19.1). Though these diagrams are admirable for
their intended purpose, of ethnographic description, any attempt by the untutored reader
to follow them in practice would likely lead to the same kind of tangle that the inexperienced Telefol girl produces, on secretly attempting to carry on with her mother’s work. It
would be quite mistaken to suppose that anything remotely equivalent exists in the native
mind. But if standardisation does not follow from the application of rules, how are we to
account for the persistence of technique from one generation to the next?
Partly in an attempt to answer this question, a group of us in the Department of
Social Anthropology at the University of Manchester resolved to experiment with different
ways of making knots. One of our experiments was to try making a completely unfamiliar
and rather complicated knot, guided only by a manual which provided detailed verbal
instructions and step by step diagrams. It turned out to be an immensely difﬁcult and
frustrating task. The problem we all experienced lay in converting each instruction, whether
verbal or graphic, into actual bodily movement. For while the instruction was supposed
to tell you how to move, one could only make sense of it once the movement had been

Skill
accomplished. We seemed, almost literally, to be caught in a double bind, from which 1
the only escape was patient trial and error. Of course we had resort to the instructions, 2
but far from directing our movements, what they provided was a set of landmarks along 3
the way, a means of checking that we were still on track. If we were not – if the tangle 4
of string in front of us did not match the corresponding graph (and that, in itself, 5
was not easy to discern) – there was no alternative but to unravel the whole thing and 6
start again!
Our experiments seemed to lend strong empirical support for the view that the prac- 8
tices of knotting – which are, after all, among the most common and widely distributed 9
in human societies – cannot be understood as the output of any kind of programme. 10
They cannot, then, be learned by taking any such programme ‘on board’, as part of an 1
acquired tradition, as if all you needed to know to make knots could be handed down 2
as a package of rules and representations, independently and in advance of their practical 3
application. In our experiments, despite having a manual to consult, we had to develop 4
the necessary know-how from scratch. Generally speaking, of course, this is not a problem 5
that novices face in real life. They are shown what to do by more experienced hands, as 6
we have already seen in the case of the acquisition of looping skills by Telefol bilum- 7
makers. But in seeking to emulate the work of the tutor, the novice is guided by the 8
latter’s movements, not by formal instructions that have somehow been already copied into 9
his or her head. As Merleau-Ponty put it, citing the pioneering work of Paul Guillaume 20
on imitation in children, ‘we do not at ﬁrst imitate others but rather the actions of others, 1
and . . . ﬁnd others at the point of origin of these actions’ (1964b: 117, see also Bourdieu 2
1977: 87). It follows that the reproduction of movement patterns is a function not of the 3
ﬁdelity with which information specifying these patterns is copied from one generation 4
to the next, but of the co-ordination of perception and action that lies at the heart of 5
practical mimesis.
DISSOLVING THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN INNATE AND ACQUIRED
SKILLS
It is obvious that Telefol girls have to learn to make string bags. It is not a skill that they 1
are, in any sense, ‘born with’. As MacKenzie notes, ‘talent in bilum making, that is, having 2
hands which ﬂow, is [deﬁned as] a physically acquired attribute rather than an inherent 3
pre-disposition in the sense that westerners think of ability and talent’ (1991: 103). My 4
concern now is to look more closely at what it means to say that a particular skill is 5
acquired rather than innate. I shall do so by way of another example, this time taken 6
from the animal kingdom. For while we are used to thinking of human skills as belonging 7
to this or that cultural tradition, the skills of non-human animals are commonly regarded 8
as properties of their genetically encoded, species-speciﬁc nature. What are we to make, 9
then, of the male weaverbird, which carries out the most intricate knotting and looping 40
with its beak in the construction of its nest? The nest building of weaverbirds has been 1
investigated in a remarkable series of studies by ornithologists N. E. and E. C. Collias, 2
and in what follows I draw on their report (Collias and Collias 1984).
The nest is made from long strips torn from the leaves of grasses, which are intertwined 4
in a regular lattice formed by passing successive strips over and under, and in a direction 5
orthogonal to, strips already laid. It is held together, and attached to the substrate, by a 6
variety of stitches and fastenings, some of which are illustrated in Figure 19.2. The bird 7
uses its beak rather like a needle in sewing or darning; in this the trickiest part lies in 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 359 •

threading the strip it is holding under another, transverse one so that it can then be passed
over the next. The strip has to be pushed under, and through, just far enough to enable
the bird to let go with its beak in order to shift its hold and pull it up on the other side.
If the free end is left too short, the strip may spring back; pushed too far, it could fall
to the ground. Mastering this operation calls for a good deal of practice. From an early
age, weaverbirds spend much of their time manipulating all kinds of objects with their
beaks, and seem to have a particular interest in poking and pulling pieces of grass leaves
and similar materials through holes. In females this interest declines after about the
tenth week from hatching, whereas in males it continues to increase. Experiments showed
that birds deprived of opportunities to practise and denied access to suitable materials are
subsequently unable to build adequate nests, or even to build at all.
Indeed, ﬁddling about with potential nest material appears to be just
as essential for the bird, in preparing
itself for future building, as are
the ﬁrst experiments of Telefolmin
toddlers in roving and spinning
shredded ﬁbres for their future
bilum making (Collias and Collias
1984: 201, 206–7, 212, 215–20).
It is evident from the Collias’
account that all the ﬁve qualities of
skill which, as I have shown, are
exempliﬁed in the making of string
bags by people of central New
Guinea, are also manifest in the nest
building of weaverbirds. Though the
needle of the bilum-maker is detachable from the body whereas the
bird’s beak is not, in use both are not
so much moved as incorporated into
a habitual pattern of movement.
The abilities of the weaverbird, just
like those of the human maker of
string bags, are developed through
an active exploration of the possibilities afforded by the environment, in
the choice of materials and structural
supports, and of bodily capacities of
movement, posture, and prehension.
Furthermore, the key to successful
nest building lies not so much in the
movements themselves as in the Figure 19.2 Various common stitches and fastenings used by male
bird’s ability to adjust its movements weaverbirds in constructing their nests.
with exquisite precision in relation From N. E. Collias and E. C. Collias, Nest Building and Bird Behavior,
to the evolving form of its construc- © 1984 by Princeton University Press, reprinted by permission of
tion. As Collias and Collias report:
Princeton University Press.

Skill
In watching the numerous attempts of young male weavers to fasten initial strips of 1
nest materials and their gradual improvement in weaving ability, it seemed to us that 2
what every young male weaver has to learn is what in subjective terminology one would 3
call ‘judgement’.
(1984: 219) 5
One can sense the reluctance with which these hardnosed empirical observers ﬁnd 7
themselves having to resort to a notion of this kind. But the evidence leaves them with 8
no alternative. It is clearly judgement, rather than a programme of instructions or a set 9
of design speciﬁcations to be mechanically applied, that the bird acquires through mimetic 10
practice. Finally, the form of the nest results from the iteration of a small number of basic 1
movements, and from the fact that the bird stands throughout on the same spot while it 2
weaves all around – above, below and in front – pushing out the developing shell of the 3
main chamber as far as its beak will reach, and then tilting gradually backwards to complete 4
the antechamber and entrance (1984: 193, 209–10).
Given that weaverbirds, in their nest building, exhibit the same properties of skill as 6
are manifested in the looping techniques of the Telefolmin and their neighbours, wherein 7
lies the difference? The conventional answer is to claim that the human bilum-maker 8
follows the dictates of an acquired cultural tradition, while the bird works to a template 9
that is genetically transmitted and thus innate. But if, as our experiments with knot- 20
making suggested, there can be no programme for such tasks as knotting, looping, and 1
weaving that is not immanent in the activity itself, then it makes no more sense to inter- 2
pret the weaverbird’s behaviour as the output of a genetic programme than it does to 3
interpret the bilum-maker’s as the output of a cultural one. In all likelihood the human 4
maker of string bags has an idea in mind of the ﬁnal form of the construction, whereas 5
the weaverbird almost certainly does not. Yet in both cases it is the pattern of regular 6
movement, not some prespeciﬁed design, that generates the form. And the ﬂuency and 7
dexterity of this movement is a function of skills that are developmentally incorporated 8
into the modus operandi of the organism – whether avian or human – through practice 9
and experience in an environment.
This last point is absolutely critical. Recall that Telefol girls develop their looping skills 1
at a time of life when their bodies are also undergoing rapid growth. These skills, then, 2
far from being added on to a preformed body, actually grow with it. In that regard they 3
are fully part and parcel of the human organism, of its neurology, musculature, even 4
anatomy, and so are as much biological as cultural. After all, a human being, with its 5
particular aptitudes and dispositions, is a product of neither genes nor culture, nor of 6
both together, but is rather formed within a lifelong process of ontogenetic development. 7
To be sure, the skills of looping are acquired, in the sense that at whatever stage in the 8
life-cycle they may be identiﬁed, a history of development already lies behind them. But 9
the same would have to be said of the knotting and looping skills of the weaverbird, and 40
indeed of any skill, human or non-human. Moreover one could just as well claim that 1
such skills are innate, in the sense that so long as the necessary environmental conditions 2
are in place (including the presence and activity of already skilled practitioners) they are 3
more or less bound to develop. All Telefol girls learn to make string bags, just as they all 4
learn to walk or to speak. All male weaverbirds learn to make nests, unless opportunities 5
for practice are artiﬁcially removed. Conversely, Telefol boys and female weaverbirds never 6
develop full-blown looping and weaving skills, since their respective activities and concerns 7
take them too soon into other ﬁelds of practice. In short, whatever the difference between 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 361 •

the two sets of skills, avian and human, it cannot be aligned on the axis of a distinction
between the innate and the acquired.
This conclusion, however, leaves us with our earlier question unanswered. How, exactly,
do human skills, such as those exempliﬁed in the making of string bags, differ from those
of animals such as the weaverbird? To be frank, I do not pretend to know. I remain
perplexed by the question, and have yet to ﬁnd an answer that is wholly convincing. Once
again, however, MacKenzie’s study of the Telefol offers a possible clue. It lies in the observation, to which I have already alluded, that Telefol people liken the dextrous manual
movements of the ﬂuent bilum-maker to running water (MacKenzie 1991: 136). For these
inhabitants of intermontane valleys, the current of water in a river or stream is as familiar
a part of experience as is the motion of the hands in looping. Now it seems reasonable
to suppose, likewise, that the weaverbird has as much of a ‘feel’ for air currents, while on
the wing, as it has for nest materials in building with its beak. However what the bird
does not do, so far as we know, is to tie these different strands of perception and action
together. If birds were human, they would say that the good weaver is one whose beak
seems to ‘ﬂy’, just as Telefol say that the skilled looper is one whose hands ‘ﬂow’. But
they do not do this. Human beings, it seems, differ from other animals in that they are
peculiarly able to treat the manifold threads of experience as material for further acts of
weaving and looping, thereby creating intricate patterns of metaphorical connection. This
interweaving of experience is generally conducted in the idioms of speech, as in storytelling, and the patterns to which it gives rise are equivalent to what anthropologists are
accustomed to calling ‘culture’.
However, culture thus conceived cannot be understood to comprise a system of intrinsic
rules or schemata by means of which the mind constructs representations of the external
world from the data of bodily sensation, nor can speech be regarded simply as a vehicle
for the articulation of these mental representations. Speakers no more ‘use’ their voice, as
Plato would have had it, as the mere instrument of a language-based intelligence, than
they ‘make’ sense by superimposing their pre-existing designs upon the raw material of
experience. Rather, in speech, the voice is incorporated into a current of sensuous activity
– namely, narrative performance – from which, as it unfolds, form and meaning are continually generated. For speaking is itself a form of skilled practice, and as such, exhibits all
the generic properties of skill to which I have already drawn attention. Like any other
skill, speech develops along with the growth of the organism, is continually responsive to
perturbations in the perceived environment, and is learned through repeated practical trials
in socially scaffolded contexts. Above all, it cannot be reduced to the mechanical execution of a rule-governed system, or ‘grammar’. Yet speech is no ordinary skill. Weaving
together, in narrative, the multiple strands of action and perception speciﬁc to diverse
tasks and situations, it serves, if you will, as the Skill of skills. And if one were to ask
where culture lies, the answer would not be in some shadowy domain of symbolic meaning,
hovering aloof from the ‘hands on’ business of practical life, but in the very texture and
pattern of the weave itself.

Skill
There is a wonderful footnote in Marx’s Capital that sets a whole agenda for research. It 3
runs as follows:
Darwin has aroused our interest in the history of natural technology, that is to say in 6
the origin of the organs of plants and animals as productive instruments utilised for 7
the life purposes of these creatures. Does not the history of the origin of the produc- 8
tive organs of men in society, the organs which form the material basis of every kind 9
of social organisation, deserve equal attention? Since, as Vico says, the essence of the 20
distinction between human history and natural history is that the former is the work 1
of man and the latter is not, would not the history of human technology be easier to 2
write than the history of natural technology?1
(1930: 392–3, fn. 2) 4
This passage suggests three crucial questions. First, what exactly is the difference between 6
the ‘history of natural technology’ and the ‘history of human technology’? In modern 7
usage, we have grown accustomed to referring to the former as a process of evolution 8
while reserving the concept of history for the latter. The question then becomes: how, 9
if at all, can we distinguish between evolutionary and historical change in the ﬁeld of 30
technical phenomena? Secondly, Darwin was greatly perplexed by the issue of whether 1
there is anything inherently progressive about the process he called ‘descent with modiﬁ- 2
cation’. His considered conclusion was that progress, of a kind, has occurred, but that 3
there is nothing in the theory of variation under natural selection that stipulates that it 4
must occur. Is this also the case with technology? Finally, are the mechanisms of technical 5
change comparable to, or quite different from, those that Darwin adduced for the adap- 6
tive modiﬁcation of organic species? In other words, can we account for technical change 7
in terms of a principle of variation under selection? In this chapter, I shall deal with each 8
of these questions in turn.
THE EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY AND ITS HISTORY
Comparing what students of animal behaviour on the one hand, and social and cultural 3
anthropologists, on the other, have to say about technical change, one cannot help noting 4
a curious discrepancy. Looking for the causes of such change, animal behaviourists typi- 5
cally attribute it to the evolution under natural selection of the animal species itself. Tools 6
and tool-using behaviour are regarded as part of the phenotypic expression of an under- 7
lying genotype, and they change as the genotype changes – that is, as the species evolves. 118

Chapter Twenty

The dynamics of technical change

The dynamics of technical change • 363 •

Explaining the evolution of animal tool behaviour is thus no different, in principle, from
explaining the evolution of those functional attachments – the ﬁnch’s beak, the crab’s
pincers, the lion’s claws – that remain joined to the body. Anthropologists, by contrast,
often treat technology as an aspect of a cultural system that has a dynamic of its own,
undergoing progressive development without entailing any further change in the basic
biology of the species. It is as if, to all intents and purposes, technical change in humans
were fully decoupled from the process of evolution, for the designs that underwrite the
making process are supposed to lie in the minds of the makers, not in their genes, and
to be encoded in cultural symbols rather than in strands of DNA (Wynn 1994: 137–45).
This seems like a neat way of distinguishing between the history of technicity and its
evolution. But it poses a problem that has particularly exercised prehistorians, for it implies
that at some point or other, history must have ‘started up’. A threshold had to be crossed;
our ancestors had to step beyond the old world of nature into a new world of culturally
constructed meaning. This image of stone-age hunter-gatherers standing at the dawn of
history sounds suspiciously like an imposition onto the Palaeolithic of a decidedly modern
political rhetoric. And it has set prehistorians on a frantic and much publicised search for
the point of origin of what they nowadays call ‘modern humans’. I shall reserve my critique
of this notion for the next chapter, and merely note at this juncture the implication that
once the breakthrough to culture had been made, the history of technology must have
truly taken off, leading from the earliest tools to modern machinery, without entailing
any further change in the species-speciﬁc form of the human organism. History, as psychologists David and Anne James Premack maintain, consists in ‘a sequence of changes through
which a species passes while remaining biologically stable’, and of all species in the world,
only humans have it (1994: 350).
If we are to take this view, however, then we have also to admit that the artefactual
products of technological culture cannot be taken as reliable indicators of the fundamental
cognitive and biomechanical capabilities of their makers. A prehistorian of the future,
surveying the material remains of Western industrial civilisation, would be making a serious
error were he to infer that its people were considerably more advanced in their evolved
capacities than were their predecessors of earlier millennia. As the linguist Philip Lieberman
warns, ‘who would think that we had essentially the same biological endowment as the
human populations that lived 30,000 or 20,000 or 500 years ago if all he had to go on
were the preserved artefacts – stone tools versus the ruins of great cities, dams, interlocking
highways, etc.?’ (1985: 628).
But the same argument cuts the other way. Who would think that the common human
biological endowment was signiﬁcantly different from that of chimpanzees on the evidence
of the striking similarity between the toolkits of contemporary free-ranging chimpanzee
populations and those of certain ethnographically recorded populations of human huntergatherers? In his controversially entitled book Chimpanzee Material Culture, Bill McGrew
– one of the most experienced observers of chimpanzees in their natural habitat – attempts
a systematic comparison of the subsistence technology of chimpanzee populations inhabiting a number of study areas in western Tanzania with that of the Aboriginal people of
Tasmania, as documented in the early years of the nineteenth century. The Tasmanian
Aborigines are notorious in anthropological literature for allegedly having had the simplest
material culture ever recorded (Jones 1977: 197, see Figure 20.1). I shall not go into the
details here of how the comparison was made, though one could have serious reservations
about the selection of items for comparison and the terms in which they were rendered
commensurable. I merely wish to highlight McGrew’s principal conclusion, which is that

Skill

if we conﬁne our attention to the 1
respective toolkits, although the 2
human hunter-gatherer toolkit is 3
indeed more complicated than 4
that of the ape, ‘the difference is 5
far from wide, and the gap 6
between hominid and pongid is 7
bridgeable’ (1992: 144).
Not surprisingly, when McGrew 9
ﬁrst presented his ﬁndings, at a 10
conference
devoted 1
to the anthropology of hunter- 2
gatherer societies held in London 3
in 1986, they drew a storm of 4
protest. Was he really trying to tell 5
us that Tasmanian hunter-gather- 6
ers had scarcely advanced beyond 7
the apes, that they were stuck in 8
an evolutionary time-warp? In his 9
defence, his intention was no 20
more than to suggest the possi- 1
bility of an intermediate level 2
of technology in the transition 3
from our ape-like ancestors to the 4
earliest hominid forms. Yet in tak- 5
ing nineteenth-century Tasmanian 6
Aborigines as exemplars of early 7
hominids, McGrew comes close to 8
Figure 20.1 The Tasmanian toolkit.
returning to the overt racism of an 9
From J. Clark, The Aboriginal People of Tasmania, published by Tasmanian earlier era of anthropology, when 30
Museum and Art Gallery, 1983, p. 22.
it was quite usual to regard the 1
‘savage’ as representing an earlier 2
stage in human biological evolu- 3
tion, and thus as occupying a half-way stage in the transition from apes to ‘civilised’ (that 4
is, modern European) humans.
In fact the simplicity of the Tasmanian toolkit, even when compared with that of 6
Aboriginal hunter-gatherers on the Australian mainland, presents an enigma that has never 7
been adequately solved – though it may have something to do with Tasmania’s prolonged 8
and total isolation since rising sea-levels cut it off from the mainland some 11,000 years ago 9
(Jones 1977). What does seem incontrovertible, however, is that a Tasmanian Aborigine, 40
transported to the twentieth century and raised in an afﬂuent part of the world, would have 1
no particular difﬁculty in becoming, say, an airline pilot or a software engineer. But I would 2
not, for my money, take a plane piloted by a chimpanzee! Indeed we are drawn almost 3
irresistibly to the conclusion that behind the apparent similarity of chimpanzee and human 4
hunter-gatherer toolkits there lies a fundamental difference of capacity, a difference that is 5
manifested, above all, in the progression of human technology from the axe, spear and 6
digging stick to the airplane and the computer. Thus while we might reasonably attribute 7
the failure of chimpanzees to operate a complex technology to innate incapacity, we can 118

The dynamics of technical change • 365 •

only attribute the failure of Tasmanian Aborigines to do the same
to unfulﬁlled historical conditions.
Now the development of human technology is very commonly
presented as though it could be
arrayed on a continuum from the
earliest stone tools to modern
machinery and electronics. Figure
20.2 is an example of such a ﬁgure.
Yet if the conclusion we reached
in the last paragraph is accepted,
to posit such a direct line of
continuity from the Oldowan
chopper to the space shuttle would
be quite absurd. Comparing the
ﬁnely ﬂaked blades of Upper
Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers, dating from around 30–40,000 years
ago, with the crude pebble tools
used by Homo habilis at Olduvai
Gorge in East Africa two million
years ago, it is hard to deny that
the differences reﬂect real changes
in intellectual and manipulative
abilities – changes that are also
reﬂected in the increasing size of Figure 20.2 The development of material culture.
the brain and structural modiﬁca- From B. Cotterell and J. Kamminga, Mechanisms of Pre-industrial
tions to the hand. Homo habilis Technology, published by Cambridge University Press, 1990, p. 9.
was, after all, a very different kind
of creature than Homo sapiens, in
many ways much closer to an ape than a human being. On the other hand, it would appear
that once a recognisably human level of competence had been achieved, all subsequent
technological change – from Palaeolithic hunting and gathering to modern industry –
could take place without any signiﬁcant further change in the basic biological endowment
of the species.
In short, it appears that whereas the change from Lower to Upper Palaeolithic tools is
a chapter in the story of human evolution, the change from the latter to modern industrial technologies is a chapter of history. When we speak of evolution, it is assumed that
changes in tools depend on – and can therefore be taken as indices of – changes in the
forms and capacities of the creatures that use them. When we speak of history, by contrast,
it is as though technology had broken free from the bonds of genetic constraint, and
could henceforth undergo unlimited development without entailing any enhancement of
innate human capacities. At what point, then, does the evolution of technology become
the history of technology? How can we draw a dividing line between these two processes?
Is it possible even in principle, let alone in practice, to distinguish those actions and events
that carried forward the movement of human history from those that set it in motion in
the ﬁrst place? We are very far from resolving these questions, but I would like to conclude

Skill
my discussion of this theme with the suggestion that the processes of evolution and history 1
may not be so distinct after all.
The notion of capacity seems to imply a certain view of human nature, as comprising 3
a set of universal structures or compartments, fully formed in the life of every individual 4
from the start, and waiting to be ﬁlled up with all manner of particular cultural content. 5
Thus the capacities are said to be innate, the products of an evolutionary process; the 6
content acquired, changing through history. However my discussion of skill in the last 7
chapter led me to conclude that the capabilities of action of both human beings and non- 8
human animals are neither innate nor acquired but emergent properties of the total 9
developmental system constituted by the presence of the agent (human or non-human) 10
in its environment. In the case of humans, this is as true of the most widely distributed 1
skills such as walking and speaking as it is of those of more restricted distribution such 2
as swimming and writing.
We cannot, then, place universals on the side of evolution and particulars on the side 4
of history. Rather, if history be understood as the process wherein people, through their 5
activities, establish the conditions under which succeeding generations lead their lives, 6
developing as they do the skills appropriate to these various forms of life, then it cannot 7
differ in principle from the process in which organisms, quite generally, establish by their 8
own presence and actions the context of development for their successors. That process 9
is one of evolution. To understand evolution in this sense, however, is to make a clean 20
break with the conventions of modern biology, and with the neo-Darwinian paradigm 1
upon which they are founded. For it is to attribute the changing forms and capacities of 2
living creatures not to changes in an internal programme, design or building plan (the 3
genotype), but to transformations in the whole ﬁeld of relationships within which they 4
come into being. To take this idea further would be beyond the scope of the present 5
chapter. It is, however, my subject for the next.
MEASURING TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY
Is there, then, anything progressive about technical change? It is remarkable that although 30
the majority of anthropologists are deeply suspicious of the idea that there is any inherently 1
progressive tendency in the history of human culture, they are inclined to make an excep- 2
tion of technology, and are quite content to talk about peoples with ‘simple’ and with ‘com- 3
plex’ technologies. Precisely how the simplicity or complexity of a technology is to be 4
gauged, however, has remained far from clear. One of the few attempts to construct such 5
a measure has been made by Wendell Oswalt (1976). Oswalt deﬁned the complexity of a 6
tool by the number of ‘technounits’ that make it up. A technounit is a physically distinct 7
part that makes a particular contribution to the overall implement. It was in these terms 8
that McGrew compared the relative complexity of chimpanzee and human hunter-gatherer 9
technologies. He found that none of the tools used by chimpanzees in the procurement of 40
subsistence comprised more that one technounit, whereas the mean number of technounits 1
(1.2) for the Tasmanian Aboriginal repertoire was very slightly greater. In fact, no 2
Tasmanian implement was of more than one technounit; the raised mean is fully accounted 3
for by two kinds of ﬁxed facility used in hunting, involving two and four technounits respec- 4
tively (McGrew 1992: 138, 144). By contrast, the Inuit (Eskimo) sealing harpoon shown 5
in Figure 20.3 has no fewer than 26 structurally distinct components.
On the basis of a comparative survey of the toolkits of hunter-gatherers, farmers and 7
herdsmen, Oswalt was able to refute the common assumption that hunters and gatherers 118

The dynamics of technical change • 367 •

have simpler tools than any other human
groups. In fact the most complex tools were
found among specialised hunters, especially
hunters – like the Inuit – of large aquatic
mammals, who have to use considerable
ingenuity to obtain inaccessible or potentially dangerous prey. The herdsman, who
has ready access to comparatively docile animals, faces nothing like the same technical
challenges, and his toolkit is correspondingly
simpler: thus the lasso, the principal instrument by which the reindeer herdsman
catches hold of his animals, is no more than
a length of rope tied to a sliding toggle
(Ingold 1993b). The equipment of the gatherer tends to be simpler than that of the
hunter (plants do not attempt to escape
those who ‘hunt’ them, nor do they have to
be outwitted or outmanoeuvred), but again,
the tools of the farmer are no more complex.
For both gatherer and farmer, the essentials
may consist of just an axe or adze, digging
stick, and some form of carrying device for
transporting harvested produce.
But comparisons based on the structural
properties of the tools themselves can be Figure 20.3 Inuit (Angmagsalik) toggle-headed ‘feather’
and throwing board for hunting large seals from a
misleading. Returning the objects to the harpoon
kayak.
contexts of their use reveals a different
picture. The Inuit harpoon is a rather Drawing by Patrick Finnerty, from W. H. Oswalt, An
Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology, published
specialised piece of equipment, which is used by John Wiley & Sons, 1976, p. 100.
only for sealing. The reindeer herdsman’s
lasso, by contrast, can be put to use in all
manner of different ways. I have seen herdsmen use their lassos for setting traps, for tying
animals to sledges for transport home, and for countless other purposes. Likewise among
hunter-gatherers with an apparently simple inventory of tool types (including Tasmanian
Aborigines), it is common to ﬁnd that each kind of object is turned to an account for an
astonishing variety of different tasks.
Among the Aboriginal people of the Australian Western Desert there is a clear division
between men’s tools (principally the spear and spear-thrower) and women’s tools (principally digging sticks and wooden bowls). The spear-thrower, in the context of hunting, is
designed to enhance the ﬂight of the spear by imparting extra angular momentum to the
throw. But it has numerous other uses: as a friction stick in making ﬁre, a woodworking
tool (with the addition of a hafted stone adze-ﬂake), a mixing tray for pigments or tobacco,
a percussion instrument in songs and dances, a device for clearing an area of thorns and
pebbles when preparing a campsite, and (when embellished with decorative markings) a
mnemonic for recalling the sequence and locations of waterholes and other features of the
landscape (Gould 1970: 22, Figure 20.4). The woman’s digging stick is similarly multifunctional. It can be used to obtain burrowing animals as well as plants, as a weapon in

Skill
small-game hunting and in self-defence. Small wooden 1
bowls can be used to carry produce, but also to shovel 2
away soil when digging. Large bowls can be used to 3
carry both infants and drinking water (Hamilton 4
1980: 7).
Comparing Australian Aboriginal and Inuit 6
toolkits, it might seem at ﬁrst glance that the ﬁrst is 7
extremely simple and the second rather complex. But 8
a more signiﬁcant difference is between the economy 9
and versatility of the Australian toolkit and the diver- 10
sity and specialisation of the Inuit one. Australian 1
Aboriginal people have few tools, but use them in 2
whatever way they come in handy, for manifold 3
purposes that we might never come to think of when 4
we classify the objects by function – for example, as 5
spear-throwers or digging-sticks. Inuit have many 6
tools, some of them – like the harpoon – of great 7
complexity and ingenuity, but each is used for a 8
prescribed purpose which governs, at least to some 9
extent, the manner of its construction. It is only 20
because of a peculiar bias that leads us to look for 1
technical operations in the properties of the tools 2
themselves, rather than in the know-how of their 3
users, that we are led to conclude that Inuit are 4
somehow more ‘advanced’, in the technical sphere, 5
than Australian Aborigines. As I have already shown 6
(Chapter Sixteen, p. 315), the source of this bias lies 7
in the concept of technology itself.
These observations all point towards a single 9
conclusion: that to comprehend the technical accom- 30
plishments of hunter-gatherers, or of any other people 1
for that matter, it is not sufﬁcient just to look at their 2
tools. We have to understand their knowledge. Tools 3
are of no use if you don’t know how to work with 4
them; moreover up to a point, the simpler the tool, 5
the more knowledgeable and skilled you have to be 6
to be able to work it effectively. The reindeerman’s 7
lasso is a simple tool, but it requires immense skill to 8
Figure 20.4 Decorated spear thrower from the Nyatunyara 40
people of the Australian Western Desert. Designs depict water- 1
holes and landmarks along the track of a totemic snake.
From R. A. Gould, Spears and spear-throwers of the Western 3
Desert Aborigines of Australia, American Museum Novitates, 4
1970, p. 28. Courtesy of the American Museum of Natural 5
History

The dynamics of technical change • 369 •

use it effectively. The same could be said of an axe, digging stick, spear or boomerang.
The food processor on my kitchen table is, by contrast, an extremely complex tool, with
hundreds of interconnected parts. But it took only a few minutes to learn to use it.
As Robin Ridington has put it (1982: 470), understanding technical know-how means
focusing on artiﬁce rather than artefacts, on tool-use as skilled practice rather the mechanical operation of exterior devices. But by artiﬁce we do not mean the kind of objective,
generalisable, scientiﬁc knowledge which, in its application, might be covered by the
modern concept of technology. It is rather knowledge of a very personal kind, partly intuitive, largely implicit, and deeply embedded in the particularities of experience. One grows
into such knowledge much as one learns one’s country or one’s kinship system. It is knowledge that both enables a person to ﬁnd his or her way in a world of human and non-human
others, and that endows them with a speciﬁc identity. Thus, as we saw in Chapter Sixteen,
it is indistinguishably social and technical.

THE ORGANIC ANALOGY
The idea that in the history of human technology, tools and machines have evolved
according to principles similar to those governing the evolution of organic species is an
attractive one that has had numerous adherents, from Marx, Butler and Pitt-Rivers in the
nineteenth century to contemporary advocates of ‘evolutionary archaeology’ who argue
that mechanisms of variation, differential replication and retrospective selection will
account just as well for artefactual as for organic change.2 All the necessary conditions
seem to be present, in the technological domain, to support the analogy. There is diversity, which, if anything, is greater than that of species. George Basalla, for example, notes
that the number of patents issued in the United States since 1790 (4.7 million) is more
than three times the number of species of ﬂora and fauna yet identiﬁed (Basalla 1988:
2). There is continuity, in the sense that technical change, by and large, seems to be
gradual, amassed from a very large number of minor variations rather than punctuated
by momentous steps of absolute invention. There is novelty, insofar as all making activity,
however closely it strives to copy an existing model, is bound to diverge from it to some
degree. Replication, in practice, can never be perfect. And ﬁnally, there is selection, albeit
artiﬁcial rather than natural, in that it is guided by human intention in rather the same
way as in the practice of animal or plant breeding. In other words, the context for the
differential replication of technical variants is human, and therefore social and historical
(Basalla 1988: 25).
Arguments for the analogy between organic evolution and technical change, though
they vary in detail, generally run roughly as follows. In the replication of existing technical designs, innovations of one kind and another inevitably creep in. Some of these may
be entirely accidental, and in that respect resemble genetic mutations. Others are clearly
stimulated by the particular conditions in which the object or technique in question is to
be applied: to the extent that this is the case, the evolutionary process is often said to be
more ‘Lamarckian’ than ‘Darwinian’. Another way of putting this would be to deﬁne
Darwinian evolution as the special case in which the degree of coupling between a novel
variation and its environmental conditions of selection is reduced to zero (Ingold 1996b:
196–7). Whether accidental or premeditated, the majority of innovations will probably
turn out in practice to be useless or even detrimental. A small proportion, however, bring
evident beneﬁts. Variants that work well in the particular conditions prevailing in the
environment will tend to ‘catch on’, through extensive replication, while others will dwindle

Skill
and disappear. Thus in the long run, the more successful technical designs will undergo 1
a kind of adaptive radiation, splitting into diverse forms suited to speciﬁc contexts of use, 2
while others may become effectively extinct.
One of the virtues of the organic analogy is that it suggests a way of explaining how 4
the majority of extant techniques and artefacts have come to be so admirably adapted to 5
current requirements, without our having to suppose that they appeared from nowhere, 6
dreamt up in a moment of inspiration by a designer who was somehow able to see the 7
totality of every problem and conceive its solution in a vacuum. It is no more possible 8
in the history of artefacts than in the evolution of species for new forms to appear out 9
of thin air. Every object, and every technique, comes with a history attached, or as Basalla 10
puts it, ‘every novel artifact has an antecedent’ (1988: 208–9). True, in the history of 1
artefacts the selection involved carries a component of intentionality: human beings may 2
be able to author their own designs in a way that other animals cannot. What they cannot 3
do, however, is stand outside of history and treat the world as though it were a blank 4
slate. Every designer is a creature of his or her own time, and the objects and practices 5
with which each is surrounded, bequeathed through the activities of predecessors, form a 6
necessary resource for the design process itself. That is why, as Reuleaux pointed out in 7
his Kinematics of machinery of 1876, most of what goes for invention in the technical 8
sphere consists in hitting on new uses for old things.
‘The ﬁrst machinal arrangements’, Reuleaux argued, ‘were of a kind which we may 20
designate as make-shifts’. Cobbled together for one purpose, these arrangements were 1
pressed into service for others, coming up against new demands for improvement which 2
were met by further rearrangements, and so on.
Very gradually each invention came to be used for more purposes than those for which 5
it was originally intended, and the standard by which its excellence and usefulness were 6
judged was gradually raised. An external necessity thus demanded its improvement, and 7
from this cause machinal ideas slowly crystallised themselves out, and gradually assumed 8
forms so distinct that men could use them designedly in the solution of new problems. 9
These attempts resulted in further improvements, and these in their turn led once more 30
to new applications and more extended use.
(Reuleaux 1876: 231) 2
Only a few years previously, in his treatise of 1862 On the various contrivances by which 4
British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects, Darwin had advanced a precisely analo- 5
gous argument to account for the evolution of mechanisms in nature. In order to facilitate 6
the transfer of pollen, Darwin showed, the orchid uses whatever parts happen to be avail- 7
able, parts that may have arisen as adaptations to quite different functions.
Although an organ may have been originally formed for some special purpose, if it now 40
serves for this end, we are justiﬁed in saying that it is especially contrived for it. On 1
the same principle if a man were to make a machine for some special purpose, but 2
were to use old wheels, springs and pulleys, only slightly altered, the whole machine, 3
with all its parts, might be said to be specially contrived for that purpose. Thus 4
throughout nature almost every part of each living being has probably served, in a 5
slightly modiﬁed condition, for diverse purposes, and has acted in the living machinery 6
of many ancient and distinct speciﬁc forms.
(Darwin 1862: 348) 118

The dynamics of technical change • 371 •

As Darwin showed, natural selection, in adapting organisms to their conditions of life,
continually puts old structures to work in new ways, having no other materials on which
to work. More than a century later we ﬁnd the same idea echoed in the work of the
distinguished biologist, François Jacob. The process of organic adaptation under natural
selection, for Jacob, is akin to ‘tinkering’. The mammalian ear, for example, is derived
from a part of the jaw of the ﬁsh, and birds’ feathers, with their aerodynamic properties,
are derived from hairs once designed for insulation (Jacob 1977).
As with organisms so with artefacts, every novelty is but an expedient solution to a
very speciﬁc, context-bound, local difﬁculty: it is a matter of getting by with what is
already available rather than producing the absolutely new. Thus it is an illusion to suppose
that anything is ever perfectly ﬁt for the purpose to which it is used. ‘Every thing we
design and make’, writes David Pye, ‘is an improvisation, a lash-up, something inept and
provisional. We live like castaways . . .’ (1964: 10). More often than not, the stock of
materials available to the maker consists of previously made things, constructed for other
purposes but now co-opted for the project in hand. This is the kind of making that
Claude Lévi-Strauss famously likened to bricolage. The bricoleur is someone who delights
in making novel contraptions out of the bits and pieces of old ones. The inventory of
tools and materials he has to work with, as Lévi-Strauss explains, ‘bears no relation to the
current project, or indeed to any particular project, but is the contingent result of all the
occasions there have been to renew or enrich the stock or to maintain it with the remains
of previous constructions or destructions’ (1966b: 17). In the history of human technology, perhaps the outstanding example of bricolage lies in the so-called ‘invention’ of
writing. Let me pause to say a few words about it.
The nameless inventors of the earliest scripts – and there seem to have been several,
who arrived at the same idea quite independently – did not ﬁrst conceive in the abstract,
and then proceed to construct, full-blown, purpose-built writing systems. They did not
even imagine the possibility of writing as we think of it now. What they did was simply
to hit on the idea that a graph or diagram depicting a thing could be used instead to
represent the sound of the word for that thing – a sound which could be homophonous
with words or parts of words for other things. This, the so-called rebus principle, has
been hailed as ‘one of the greatest inventions of human history’ (DeFrancis 1989: 50).
Yet its signiﬁcance has been hugely exaggerated by indirect and largely fortuitous consequences of which its originators can have known nothing. All they were doing was pressing
into service, on an ad hoc basis, well-known and easily identiﬁable icons for the new
purpose of representing speech sounds, in order to solve such limited problems as keeping
accounts, recording proper names or divining fortunes. What modern historians rather
grandly call ‘writing systems’ undoubtedly developed as accumulations of expediences of
this kind. DeFrancis is right to describe them as ‘jerry-built structures’ that ‘bear less
resemblance to carefully constructed schemes for representing spoken languages than they
do a hodgepodge of mnemonic clues that adept readers can use to arrive at coherent
messages’ (1989: 262). In short, they are more like Rube Goldberg devices than the exemplary instances of engineering design that the popular notion of writing as a technology
of language would lead us to expect.3
Now organisms, it would appear, have evolved in rather the same way as writing systems.
Jacob, it will be recalled, likened natural selection to a tinker, and a similar image is
invoked by another leading contemporary exponent of Darwinian thinking, Michael
Ghiselin: ‘organic mechanisms may be shown . . . to have been haphazardly thrown
together, out of whatever materials the moment happened to supply’ (Ghiselin 1969: 153).

Skill
In one respect, however, this kind of image is seriously misleading. For real, living organ- 1
isms are not pieced together out of ready-made components, however fragmentary, 2
heterogeneous and diverse in origin. Rather, they undergo growth and development in an 3
environment. Thus to be more precise, the tinkering – if such it is – must occur not in 4
ontogeny but in phylogeny, that is in the assemblage, by natural selection, of a design 5
or construction blueprint for the organism. This design is what is generally known as the 6
genotype. And if the same argument is to be applied by analogy to the construction of 7
artefacts, we would have to conclude that what is fashioned, through a process of variation 8
under selection, is likewise a design for the tool or machine in question rather than the 9
object itself.
My discussion in Chapter Eighteen, however, led me to question the very idea that the 1
making of artefacts consists of a simple transcription of a prior design onto raw material. 2
I argued, to the contrary, that the forms of artefacts emerge through the unfolding of a 3
system of relations comprised by the presence of the artisan in a richly structured environ- 4
ment that could include other persons, other examples of artefacts of the kind that it is 5
desired to make, a selection of materials, and a range of tools and supporting surfaces. 6
Should we conclude, then, that the analogy does not hold; that the processes that give 7
rise to organisms and artefacts are profoundly dissimilar? Could it be, in complete reversal 8
of commonsense understanding, that whereas organisms are built, artefacts grow?
I think not. The analogy is indeed sound. It is, in short, not that organisms are built 20
like artefacts, knocked together out of bits and pieces as the Darwinian model suggests, 1
but rather that artefacts grow like organisms, within the equivalent of a morphogenetic 2
ﬁeld. Where plans or blueprints exist, as they often do in the ﬁelds of architecture and 3
engineering, they are generated within the same, environmentally situated process from 4
which also emerge the forms they are said to specify. But they may not exist at all. Thus 5
where apparently identical objects are made, generation after generation, this is not because 6
each is a replica run off from a template that has been somehow transmitted from ances- 7
tors to descendants, independently and in advance of the construction process. It is rather, 8
as we saw in the case of the making of string bags described in Chapter Nineteen, that 9
form-making involves a precise co-ordination of perception and action that is learned 30
through copying the movements of experienced practitioners in socially scaffolded contexts. 1
Making, in other words, is copying; it is not the realisation of a design that has already 2
been copied. The same point could be alternatively expressed in terms of a contrast between 3
reproduction and replication: every artefact, formed as it is within the process of produc- 4
tion, is an original, not a replica. And whatever variations may be introduced in the process 5
lie in the dynamics of making, not in errors of transmission.
Now I believe that precisely the same argument may be applied to the growth of organ- 7
isms. The transgenerational stability of organic form is due to the dynamics of 8
reproduction, not to the mechanics of replication. In each generation the form emerges 9
anew, in the course of ontogenetic development; it is not run off from a pre-existing 40
design speciﬁcation. Indeed for organisms, there is no such speciﬁcation. The genotype, 1
conceived as a programme or blueprint for the growth of the organism, does not exist. 2
To recall my conclusion from the ﬁrst part of this chapter, the forms and capacities of 3
organisms are attributable not to genes but to the properties of developmental systems (of 4
which the genes are, of course, an integral part). An exploration of the radical implica- 5
tions of this conclusion for evolutionary theory is my subject for the next chapter.

Tools, minds and machines • 373 •

Chapter Twenty-one

‘People like us’
The concept of the anatomically modern human

INTRODUCTION: THE ORTHODOX VIEW
Let me begin with a rather facetious question. Why did Cro-Magnon Man not ride a
bicycle? I shall ﬁrst elaborate on the answer that will surely seem obvious: it is not that he
lacked the basic anatomical prerequisites to perform such a feat, but simply that he lived in
an era long before anything as ingenious and complex as a bicycle had been developed.
And even if it had, given the nature of the terrain and the prevailing mode of subsistence,
a bicycle would probably have been of little use to him. In other words, although
biologically prepared to take to the saddle, the cultural conditions that would make cycling
a practicable option were not yet in place. I intend to show, however, that this answer is
seriously ﬂawed, and that the search for a more satisfactory alternative forces a fundamental revision of our most basic notions of evolution, of history and indeed of humanity
itself. In particular, I shall argue that the idea of the ‘anatomically modern human’, the
pivot around which all these other notions revolve, is an analytic ﬁction whose principal
function is to cover up a contradiction at the heart of modern evolutionary biology.
Cro-Magnon Man, unearthed by Louis Lartet in the village of Les Eyzies, France, in
1868, has of course acquired the mantle of the prototypical ‘modern’, albeit by no means
the earliest representative of its type in the fossil record. Compared with its predecessors
– the ‘archaic’ Neanderthals and, before that, Homo erectus – this type was recognisably
different: a kind of man, as William Howells wrote, ‘who was entirely like ourselves’
(1967: 240). In contemporary palaeoanthropology, the Cro-Magnons are included, along
with all subsequent and present-day human populations, within the single sub-speciﬁc
taxon Homo sapiens sapiens. And the implication of such categorisation is that, at least so
far as their biological endowment was concerned, these Upper Palaeolithic people fell well
within the existing range of variation of the sub-species. Had they been born in our own
time, and grown up in a society like our own, they would undoubtedly have been able
to do all the things we can: read and write, play the piano, drive cars, ride bicycles, and
so on. That is, they had the potential to do all these things, a potential that nonetheless
remained unrealised in their own lifetimes.
Now I should like to return to Howells’s characterisation of the Cro-Magnons, as people
‘entirely like ourselves’, bearing in mind that at this stage of the argument my purpose is
to spell out what I believe to be the orthodox position in current anthropology. Somebody
might object that they were not like us at all. They did not, after all, live in cities, read
books, write scientiﬁc monographs, play the piano or drive cars. To this kind of objection, two responses are immediately forthcoming. One is to point out that the objection
rests on a narrow and ethnocentric view of who ‘we’ are, a view that would exclude a

Skill
large proportion even of contemporary humanity. In comparing Upper Palaeolithic people 1
to ourselves, the reference is to humankind in its global distribution, irrespective of cultural 2
variation. The other response is to qualify the sense in which the people are said to have 3
been ‘modern’. This should not be confused with conventional usage in social and cultural 4
anthropology, in which modernity has generally been linked to some notion of Western 5
urban-industrial society. The Cro-Magnons were modern in an anatomical, not in a socio- 6
cultural sense. They were ‘like us’ biologically, but not culturally.
What separates the anatomically modern humans of thirty thousand years ago (and 8
earlier) from their contemporary descendants, according to orthodox theory, is a process 9
not of evolution but of history – or as some would have it, of cultural rather than biolog- 10
ical evolution. This is not to suggest that with the advent of the ‘moderns’, the evolution 1
of our species literally stopped. There have been continuing changes, but these have been 2
relatively minor, and pale into insigniﬁcance beside the truly colossal transformations in 3
ways of life that have occurred – apparently at an escalating rate – throughout the course 4
of human history. Whether, or in what sense, these transformations can be considered 5
progressive has been hotly debated: nevertheless it seems to be generally agreed that the 6
history of culture has been marked by a cumulative increase in the scale and complexity 7
of its technological component. Not only, however, was the historical process of complex- 8
iﬁcation in the technological sphere of culture made possible by a biological endowment 9
that was already established by the Upper Palaeolithic; it also left that endowment unaf- 20
fected. The motor car is a modern invention, but the man behind the wheel remains a 1
creature biologically equipped for life in the Stone Age!
Thus so far as their basic biology is concerned, cyclists are no different from walkers, 3
and the walkers of today are no different from their predecessors of the Upper Palaeolithic. 4
It is generally accepted that bipedal locomotion is a universal human characteristic, whose 5
evolution entailed a distinctive suite of anatomical adjustments (Lovejoy 1988). Cycling, 6
by contrast, is an acquired skill which has appeared relatively lately in some, but not all 7
human populations. Though its advent was conditional upon a long chain of prior circum- 8
stances of invention and diffusion (from the discovery of the wheel to the manufacture 9
of steel tubing), as well as of environmental modiﬁcation (the construction of roads and 30
tracks), it entailed no reconﬁguration of human anatomy. In its structure and propor- 1
tions, after all, the bicycle was designed to ‘ﬁt’ a human body that had already evolved 2
for walking, and its essential mechanical function is to convert bipedal into rotary motion. 3
This brings us back to the conventional answer to the question with which I began. 4
The reason why Cro-Magnon Man did not ride a bicycle has nothing whatever to do 5
with biology. That is, the reason is historical rather than evolutionary. The same distinc- 6
tion, as we saw in the last chapter, is generally invoked to explain why the toolmakers of 7
the Upper Palaeolithic worked with ﬂaked stone rather than complex mechanical or elec- 8
tronic equipment. And if it is absurd to posit a direct line of continuity from the very 9
earliest stone tools to modern machinery, then it is equally absurd to posit a similar 40
progression from quadrupedal to bicyclic locomotion. For whereas the transition from 1
walking on four feet to walking on two belongs to evolution, the transition – if you will 2
– from two feet to two wheels belongs to history.
WALKING AND CYCLING
I trust it will be agreed that this is a fair representation of the orthodox view. I shall now 7
go on to show why I think it is wrong. Let me begin by taking a fresh look at the contrast 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 375 •

between walking and cycling. It is commonly supposed that walking is something we are
‘born with’ whereas cycling is a product of enculturation; in other words the former is
presumed to be innate, the latter acquired. Yet the fact is that new-born infants cannot
walk. They have to learn to walk, and the help of older persons, already competent in
the art, is invariably enlisted in the enterprise. In brief, walking is a skill that emerges for
every individual in the course of a process of development, through the active involvement of an agent – the child – within an environment that includes skilled caregivers,
along with a variety of supporting objects and a certain terrain (Ingold 1991: 370). How,
then, can we continue to maintain that it comes, as it were, ‘pre-packaged’ in the human
biogram? True, the vast majority of human infants do learn to walk, moreover they do
so within a fairly narrowly deﬁned period. Thus while the baby does not exactly land in
the world on two feet, it comes with a built-in developmental schedule which ensures
that it will eventually walk upright provided, however, that certain conditions are present
in its environment.
This last proviso is absolutely critical. Infants deprived of contact with older caregivers
will not learn to walk – indeed they would not even survive, which is why all surviving
children do walk, unless crippled by accident or disease. One could imagine a future
scenario in which human locomotive needs were met entirely by wheeled vehicles, or of
life under conditions of weightlessness in outer space, where walking would disappear.
Such scenarios are admittedly fantastic, but to imagine them serves to reinforce my point,
which is that the capacity for bipedal locomotion can only be said to be innate by presupposing the presence of the necessary environmental conditions for its development. Strictly
speaking, therefore, bipedalism cannot be attributed to the human organism unless the
environmental context enters into the speciﬁcation of what that organism is.
With this point in mind, let me turn from walking to cycling. Children can only
become proﬁcient in cycling, as in walking, through a process of learning in which adult
assistance is generally required. Compared with walking, however, the conditions for the
development of cycling are a good deal more stringent. Obviously, no-one can learn to
cycle who does not have a bike to ride, and the environment must also include roads or
tracks that are negotiable on two wheels. In contemporary industrial societies these conditions are so ubiquitously present that we tend to think it as natural that children beyond
a certain age should be able to cycle as it is that they can walk. In other societies, by
contrast, bicycles may be rare or absent altogether, or the terrain may be quite unsuited
to their use. And so the skills of cycling are of far more limited distribution than those
of walking.
This is a difference, however, of extent rather than principle. If walking is innate in
the sense – and only in the sense – that given certain conditions, it is bound to emerge in
the course of development, then the same applies to cycling. And if cycling is acquired
in the sense that its emergence depends on a process of learning that is embedded in
contexts of social interaction, then the same applies to walking. In other words, it is as
wrong to suppose that cycling is ‘given’ exogenously (independently of the human
organism) as it is to suppose that walking is ‘given’ endogenously (independently of the
environment). Both walking and cycling are skills that emerge in the relational contexts
of the child’s involvement in its surroundings, and are therefore properties of the developmental system constituted by these relations.
Moreover these skills are literally embodied, in the sense that their development entails
speciﬁc modiﬁcations in neurology, musculature, and even in basic features of anatomy.
Though children generally learn to walk before they learn to ride, the modiﬁcations entailed

Skill
in cycling are not simply inscribed upon an anatomy that comes, as it were, ‘ready-made’ 1
for walking. For the human body is not ready-made for anything, but undergoes 2
continuous change throughout the life-cycle as it is pressed into the performance of 3
diverse tasks. Indeed the recurrent stresses and strains of everyday life do not just affect 4
the relative development of different muscles; they also leave their mark on the skeleton 5
itself. Thus carrying loads on the head affects the bones of the upper spine; squatting 6
puts a strain on the knee, resulting in a notched kneecap, and no doubt cycling, too, 7
leaves tell-tale signs.1 It is of course true that the bicycle is designed for a creature already 8
accustomed to bipedal locomotion, so that cycling calls for no major overhaul of human 9
anatomy. Cyclists can still walk, and it is doubtful whether even the most percipient 10
observer could distinguish a cyclist from a non-cyclist, save by putting them to the test. 1
However the facts that no novice has succeeded in sustaining balance and co-ordination 2
on a ﬁrst attempt, and that the knack of riding a bicycle, once learned, is never lost, 3
indicate that the exercise of the requisite sensory and motor skills leaves an indelible 4
anatomical impression, if only in the normally invisible architecture of the brain. Indeed, 5
this conclusion is supported by recent neurological research which shows, as Kandel and 6
Hawkins report, that ‘our brains are constantly changing anatomically’, even as we learn 7
(1992: 60).
In the light of these considerations, it is perhaps not so absurd, after all, to situate the 9
emergence, respectively, of walking and cycling within the same overall process of evolu- 20
tion – an evolution, that is, of the developmental systems which underwrite these capacities. 1
For once we introduce the environmental context of development into our speciﬁcation 2
of what an organism is, it must follow that a human-being-in-environment-A cannot be 3
the same kind of organism as a human-being-in-environment-B. Thus Cro-Magnon Man 4
was indeed a rather different kind of creature from the cycling or car-driving urban dweller 5
of today. He was not ‘like us’ – not even biologically. He may have resembled us genet- 6
ically, but that is another matter. How it was that biology came to be identiﬁed with 7
genetics is a problem in the history of ideas to which I return below; sufﬁce it to say at 8
this juncture that such identiﬁcation is already implicit in the notion that every individual 9
receives his or her biological constitution, at the moment of conception, in the form of 30
an endowment. Before examining this notion more closely, I should ﬁrst like to review an 1
area in which very similar issues arise to those raised in my comparison of walking and 2
cycling, but which has been the site of far more serious controversy: namely, the evolu- 3
tion of language.
SPEECH AND WRITING
It is generally recognised that Cro-Magnon Man, as a paragon of anatomical modernity, 8
had a fully-ﬂedged capacity for language. He could speak just as well as you or I. But he 9
could neither read nor write. I begin with the comparison between speech and literacy, 40
since it bears the most obvious parallel with that between walking and cycling. Thus 1
according to the orthodox view, the capacity for language is a human universal, some- 2
thing that we all receive as part of a common biological endowment that was in place by 3
the Upper Palaeolithic, if not earlier (I am not here concerned with the arguments over 4
dating). Literacy, by contrast, is a technology of language that arose independently in 5
various parts of the world as a result of speciﬁc events of invention and diffusion, and 6
which – even today – is by no means universally shared. The capacity for language, then, 7
is a product of evolution; the capacity to read and write a product of history. The former 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 377 •

is said to be innate, the latter acquired. Cro-Magnon’s failure to read and write, like his
failure to ride a bicycle, had nothing to do with his biology. It was rather that, in the
epoch during which he was living, the cultural developments that culminated in the invention of writing systems had yet to run their course.
I believe this view is wrong, for reasons that I have already spelled out. Human babies
are not born talking, any more than they are born walking. Their capacity for language
develops, through a series of fairly well-deﬁned stages. The support of speaking caregivers,
and the presence in the environment of a rich and highly structured array of signiﬁcant
features, are essential for normal language development. Since these conditions are almost
invariably fulﬁlled, the overwhelming majority of children learn to speak without difﬁculty, and the exceptions are those whose development is impeded by some other handicap.
The conditions that have to be fulﬁlled if a child is to learn successfully to read and write
are, of course, far more restricted. Indeed, just what these conditions are is a matter of
vigorous debate, especially in educational circles. Since literacy skills and practices are
in fact exceedingly diverse, having no more in common than the representation of words
in a graphic medium, the conditions necessary for their acquisition are, in all probability,
equally variable (Street 1984). But this does not affect my main point, namely that literacy
is not ‘added on’, through enculturation, to a human constitution that is biologically
ready-made for speech. Rather, the abilities both to speak and to read and write emerge
within a continuous process of bodily modiﬁcation, involving a ‘ﬁne-tuning’ of vocalauditory and manual-visual skills together with corresponding anatomical changes in the
brain, and taking place within the contexts of the learner’s engagement with other persons
and diverse objects in his or her environment. Both capacities, in short, are the properties
of developmental systems.
Without prejudging the vexed issue of whether the so-called ‘archaic’ humans, typiﬁed
by Neanderthal Man, could speak, there is considerable agreement among contemporary
palaeoanthropologists that this capacity – at least in its fully-ﬂedged form – was not shared
by earlier, pre-human hominids such as Homo erectus and Homo habilis. The question we
need to ask, however, is this: in what way, if at all, did the failure of these early hominids
to speak differ from the failure of Upper Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers to read and write?
To recall a distinction I introduced in the last chapter (pp. 364–5), in the context of a
comparison of the technical capabilities of chimpanzees and human hunter-gatherers, how
can we justify the attribution of the former to innate incapacity, when the latter is attributed to unfulﬁlled historical conditions? If Cro-Magnon Man, had he been brought up
in the twentieth century, could have mastered the skills of literacy, why should not Homo
erectus, had he been brought up in the Upper Palaeolithic, have mastered language?
A somewhat comparable question arises in the context of research into the linguistic
capacities of great apes, especially chimpanzees. Reared under ‘natural’ conditions – that
is, without signiﬁcant contact with humans – chimpanzees do not learn to speak. Yet
recent research shows fairly convincingly that chimpanzees reared in a human environment with speaking caregivers are capable of the spontaneous acquisition of linguistic
syntax and semantics of a complexity equivalent to that used by small children (SavageRumbaugh and Rumbaugh 1993). Does this prove that contrary to expectations,
chimpanzees – and by analogy, early hominids – do or did have a capacity for language,
albeit of a limited sort? Are we to believe that thanks to the legacy of their common
ancestry with humans, such a capacity is pre-installed, as an hereditary endowment, in
the mind of every individual chimpanzee, merely awaiting propitious environmental
circumstances for it to be ‘brought out’?

Skill
I think not, for the question itself rests on a false premise, namely that the capacity 1
for language is something whose presence or absence may be attributed to individuals of 2
a species, irrespective of the environmental contexts of their development. Indeed it makes 3
no sense to ask whether chimpanzees or hominids ‘have’ or ‘had’ language, as though it 4
were programmed into them from the start. The biological deﬁnition of species depends 5
upon the possibility of a context-independent speciﬁcation: thus a chimpanzee is a chim- 6
panzee, Pan troglodytes, whether reared among other chimpanzees or among humans, 7
whether in the forest or in the laboratory. Yet the chimpanzee-in-an-environment-of-other- 8
chimpanzees is not at all the same kind of animal as the chimpanzee-in-an- 9
environment-of-humans: the latter may be credited with a rudimentary capacity for 10
language which the former lacks. This capacity, as Dominique Lestel has pointed out, is 1
the outcome of a process of development situated in the peculiar context of the hybrid 2
human–animal community set up for the purposes of ape-language research (Lestel 1998: 3
13). And while this context may seem rather exceptional, it is nevertheless true of any 4
process of development that it must involve an organism in relationships that cross-cut 5
the boundaries of conventional taxonomic groupings. It follows that if a capacity – like 6
language – can be shown to arise as an emergent property of the developmental system 7
comprised by these relationships, then it cannot be attributed to a species. (Conversely, 8
to attribute language to species is automatically to have resort to an innatist view that 9
involves some kind of neural ‘hard-wiring’ that comes miraculously ready-made.)
The notion of the ‘capacity for language’ is itself deeply problematic. The orthodox 1
account, which attributes this capacity to ‘anatomically modern humans’, requires that it 2
be clearly distinguished, as a human universal, from the capacity to speak this language 3
rather than that. Competence in one’s particular mother-tongue is supposed to be a product 4
of enculturation rather than given as part of one’s biological endowment as a member of 5
the human species. But human children are not ‘born with’ an innate programme 6
(a language acquisition device) for assimilating an acquired one (in the form of the rules 7
of syntax for a particular language). For whatever devices may be deployed in the process 8
of language acquisition have themselves to undergo formation within a developmental 9
context which is the very same as that within which the child learns the language of his 30
or her community. There are not, in other words, two distinct and successive processes 1
– the ﬁrst ‘wiring up’ the brain for language, the second providing speciﬁc syntactic and 2
semantic content – for it is in learning to speak in the manner of the people in his or 3
her surroundings, and with their active assistance and support, that the neurological 4
connections underwriting the child’s linguistic competence are forged. Consequently, 5
speakers of different languages, exposed at critical stages of development to different 6
patterns of acoustic stimulation in different environments, will also differ in those aspects 7
of their neural organisation that are involved in the production and interpretation of vocal 8
utterances.2
In short, it is only by artiﬁcially separating out the more general from the more partic- 40
ular aspects of the total developmental system within which the skills of speaking emerge 1
that ‘language’ can be identiﬁed as a universal capacity as against the speaking of one 2
language rather than another. And in this respect, speaking is much like walking. There 3
are, indeed, as many different ways of walking as there are ways of speaking. But as Esther 4
Thelen and her colleagues have shown, in a series of studies of infant motor development, 5
there is no ‘essence’ of walking that can be isolated from the real-time performance of 6
the action itself (Thelen 1995: 83). Thus to refer to ‘bipedal locomotion’ or to ‘language’ 7
as a universal attribute, distinct from the manifold skills of walking or speaking as these 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 379 •

are actually deployed in the everyday life of human communities, is to reify what is, at
best, a convenient analytic abstraction. Moreover speaking, like walking, is an achievement of the whole human organism, it is not merely the behavioural output of a cognitive
mechanism installed within the organism, and for which it serves as a vehicle. Thus both
walking and speaking are, in Mauss’s phrase, ‘techniques of the body’ (1979 [1934]:
97–123). We carry these techniques with us in the ways that our bodies have been formed
in and through the developmental process.
The corollary of this conclusion, however, is quite radical. It is to overturn, once and
for all, the deep-seated presumption that those differences in language, body posture and
so on that we are inclined to call cultural are superimposed upon a pre-constituted substrate
of human biological universals. We can no longer remain content with the facile notion
that all human beings start out (biologically) much the same and end up (culturally) very
different. Consider, for example, this formulation from Geertz: ‘One of the most significant facts about us may ﬁnally be that we all begin with the natural equipment to live
a thousand kinds of life but end in the end having lived only one’ (1973: 45). My point,
contra Geertz, is that human beings are not naturally pre-equipped for any kind of life;
rather, such equipment as they have comes into existence as they live their lives, through
a process of development. And this process is none other than that by which they acquire
the skills appropriate to the particular kind of life they lead. What each of us begins with,
then, is a developmental system. It follows that cultural differences – since they emerge
within the process of development of the human organism in its environment – are themselves biological. Before examining the implications of this result, I must take a step back,
to show how it was that biology and culture came to be separated in the ﬁrst place. With
this, I return to a reconsideration of the notion of ‘biological endowment’.

THE GENOME AND THE GENOTYPE
As I have already indicated, anatomically modern humans are supposed to be biologically
endowed not only with bipedalism but also with a host of other attributes from language
to advanced cognitive and manipulative abilities, all of which are often lumped together
under the general rubric of the capacity for culture. Let me remind you of Lieberman’s
comment, which I cited in the last chapter, that despite all the monuments to human
technological advance which litter the landscape, present-day people have ‘essentially the
same biological endowment’ as their predecessors of 30,000 years ago. That endowment,
then, must be bequeathed to individuals in every successive generation, independently of
the diverse environmental contexts in which they grow up as walkers or cyclists, as stone
toolmakers or machine tool operators, as hunter-gatherers or city dwellers, and so on. In
other words, it amounts to a context-independent speciﬁcation of the human organism,
given to each and every member of the species at the point of conception.
In modern biology, the technical term for such a context-independent speciﬁcation is
genotype. By contrast, to characterise the organism in the form in which it actually appears
– in terms of its outward morphology and behaviour as revealed within any particular
environmental context – is to specify its phenotype. A fundamental premise of evolutionary
theory, in its current neo-Darwinian guise, is that only the characteristics of the genotype, and not those of the phenotype, are carried across generations. On this principle
rests the conventional division between ontogeny and phylogeny, or between development
and evolution. Whereas development refers to the process whereby, in the life-history of
the individual, the initial genotype is ‘realised’ in the concrete form of an environmentally

Skill

speciﬁc phenotype, evolution refers to the gradual 1
change, over a large number of successive genera- 2
tions, in the genotype itself (Figure 21.1). More 3
exactly, it is the frequency of the constituent 4
G1
P1
E1
elements of the genotype, in populations of indi- 5
viduals, that is supposed to undergo evolutionary 6
change, through a process of variation under natural 7
selection.
G2
P2
E2
To make this theory work, some vehicle is required 9
that would serve to carry elements of the formal spec- 10
iﬁcation of the organism – namely genetic traits – 1
G3
P3
E3
from one site of development to another, heralding 2
the initiation of a new life-cycle. With the discovery 3
of DNA, it was thought that such a vehicle, long 4
predicted, had at last been found. The DNA mole- 5
G4
P4
E4
cule comprises a very long string of nucleotide bases 6
(some three billion in humans, contained within the 7
twenty-three chromosomes of every cell in the body), 8
each of which is one of only four possible kinds. 9
This molecule has two critical properties. First, it 20
Figure 21.1 Schematic representation of the binds with a complementary string which, rather like 1
orthodox distinction between evolution and devel- a photographic negative, provides a template in a 2
opment. G1 – G4 are successive genotypes linked in chemical copying process that results in the synthesis 3
an ancestor-descendant sequence. P1 – P4 are the of further strands of DNA with precisely the same 4
respective phenotypes generated under environsequence of bases as in the original. Secondly, 5
mental conditions E1 – E4. The vertical arrows depict
an intergenerational phylogenetic pathway, the hori- segments of the molecule, of the order of ten thou- 6
zontal arrows depict ontogenetic processes conﬁned sand bases in length, guide the synthesis of speciﬁc 7
within each generation.
proteins – the composition of each protein being 8
determined by the linear sequence of bases in the 9
corresponding segment. These proteins, in turn, are 30
the fundamental constituents of the living organism. Thus the total complement of DNA 1
in the cell, otherwise known as the genome, is supposed to encode in its base sequence 2
a complete speciﬁcation of the organism to which the cell belongs.
To explain this encoding, geneticists often resort to the language of information theory 4
(Medawar 1967: 56–7). The genome, they say, carries a message which, roughly trans- 5
lated, means ‘build an organism of such-and-such a kind’ – that is, according to the formal 6
speciﬁcations of the genotype. Now in fact, the theory of information, as it was devel- 7
oped in the 1940s by Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann and Claude Shannon, took 8
up the notion of information in a specialised sense which had little to do with how the 9
term was generally understood – namely to refer to the semantic content of messages 40
passing between senders and recipients. Information for these theorists had no semantic 1
value whatever; it did not mean anything. In their terms, a random string of letters could 2
have the same informational content as a Shakespeare sonnet (Kay 1998: 507). This point, 3
however, was entirely lost on the molecular biologists who, having realised that the DNA 4
molecule could be regarded as a form of digital information in the technical, information- 5
theoretic sense, immediately jumped to the conclusion that it therefore qualiﬁed as a code 6
with a speciﬁc semantic content. The point was not lost on the information theorists 7
themselves, however, who repeatedly warned against the conﬂation of the technical sense 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 381 •

of information with its generic counterpart, and looked on in dismay as the
Genotype
Trait
scriptural metaphors of message, language, text and so forth became
‘Gene’
entrenched in a biology that had become
DNA segment
seemingly intoxicated with the idea of
Genome
DNA as a ‘book of life’.
The upshot of this conﬂation was that
the information theoretic model, as it
came to be reincarnated in the context of
Mental
Concept
biological science, was all about messages
representations
and their transmission. It is a require‘Word’
ment of the model, thus conceived,
Sound-pattern
that the message to be transmitted be
Physical world
ﬁrst broken down into its minimal constituents of meaning, each of which is
then represented, in coded form, in an
21.2 A schematic representation of the analogy between
appropriate physical medium. In verbal Figure
genes and words as signs.
communication, for example, concepts
are said to be represented by distinctive
combinations of sounds (in the case of
speech) or graphic traces (in the case of writing). In this physical guise they are picked
up by a receiver who, through a reverse process of decoding, recovers the original meanings
and puts them together to reconstitute the message. In the case of genetic transmission,
the minimal constituents of meaning were supposed to correspond to characters or traits,
each represented by a DNA segment with a distinctive base sequence. Just as the linguistic
sign is understood to unite a particular concept with a particular sound pattern, so the gene
came to be conceived as the union of a particular trait with its corresponding segment of
the DNA molecule (Figure 21.2).
I shall defer until later the question of whether this model of information transmission
provides an adequate account of what goes on even in ordinary verbal discourse. Sufﬁce
it to say at this point that the model is premised upon an ontological separation of
mind and world. Indeed this separation is intrinsic to the very notion of information in
its original sense – to the idea that form is brought in to real-world contexts of interaction. The message or instruction to be conveyed is thus supposed to pre-exist in the
mind of the sender, and to be translated into a physical medium by means of a set
of encoding rules that are themselves entirely independent of the contexts in which it is
sent and received. How a message, once received, will be interpreted may of course depend
upon the situation, but the message itself must be unambiguously speciﬁed. Likewise, if
we are to suppose that the genome is a carrier of coded information from one context
of development to another, then the ‘message’ – that is, the genotypic speciﬁcation – must
pre-exist its representation in the DNA, and be linked to it by context-independent
encoding rules. In other words, it must be possible to ‘read off’ each element of the
genotype – each trait – from its corresponding DNA segment, regardless of local conditions of development. However, just as a received message may be interpreted differently
in different circumstances, so also the genotype will be ‘realised’ in different ways depending upon the environmental context, leading to observed variations in phenotypic form
(Figure 21.3).

Skill

The problem inherent in this 1
kind of account may be posed 2
Context-independent
in terms of a simple question: 3
encoding
where is the genotype? Where, 4
MIND
in other words, is the formal 5
WORLD
speciﬁcation that – according 6
Context
to the model – is said to be 7
VEHICLE
imported with the genome into 8
INTERPRETATION
the inaugural context of a new 9
(context-specific)
life-cycle, as a ‘biological en- 10
dowment’? We may grant that 1
GENOTYPE
the newly conceived organism 2
comes into being with its com- 3
plement of DNA; taken on its 4
MIND
own, however, the DNA ‘speci- 5
ﬁes’ nothing. It is, after all, just 6
WORLD
Context
a molecule, and a remarkably 7
GENOME
inert one at that. But in reality, 8
DNA never exists on its own, 9
PHENOTYPE
except when artiﬁcially isolated 20
in the laboratory. It exists within 1
Figure 21.3 The relation between message, vehicle and interpretation cells, which are the parts of 2
organisms, themselves situated 3
(above), and its analogue in the biological domain (below).
within wider environments. And 4
it is only by virtue of their in- 5
corporation into the living machinery of the cell that molecules of DNA have the effects 6
they do. They do not, unaided, make copies of themselves or construct proteins, let alone 7
build entire organisms (see Lewontin 1992: 33, for an exceptionally lucid exposition of this 8
point). Thus the DNA is not an agent but a reactant, and the particular reactions it sets in 9
train depend upon the total organismic context in which it is situated. Only by presuming 30
such a context can we ever say what any particular gene is ‘for’ (Ingold 1991: 368). To put 1
it another way, it is the cellular machinery that ‘reads’ the DNA, and that reading is part 2
and parcel of the very development of the organism in its environment. Hence there is no 3
‘decoding’ of the genome that is not itself a process of development; no attributes of form 4
that do not themselves originate within that process; no speciﬁcation of the organism that 5
is independent of the developmental context.
So to return to my earlier question, ‘where is the genotype?’, there can be only one 7
possible answer: ‘in the mind of the biologist’. The genotype, I would argue, is the outcome 8
of biologists’ attempts to write a programme or algorithm for the development of the 9
organism, in the form of a coherent system of epigenetic rules. These rules are derived 40
by abstraction from the organism’s observed characteristics, in a manner analogous to the 1
way in which a linguist would derive the rules of syntax by abstraction from a sample of 2
recorded utterances – an analogy that receives explicit acknowledgement in the notion 3
of the ‘biogram’. Moreover the same trick is then applied: as Bourdieu (1977: 96) puts 4
it, by transferring onto the object of study the exteriority of the observer’s relation to it, 5
that object appears as the mere vehicle for an interiorised system of rational principles, a 6
kind of ‘intelligence’ installed at the heart of the organism and directing its activity from 7
within. Just as the linguist regards speaking as the application of syntactic structures located 118
MESSAGE

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 383 •

inside speakers’ heads, so the biologist regards the development and behaviour of the
organism as having its generative source in an innate biogram. In both cases aspects of
form, abstracted from the contexts in which they arise, are converted into the elements
of a programme that is said to precede and govern the processes of their production. As
an explanation for the genesis of form, the circularity of this argument needs no further
elaboration.
Nothing better illustrates the transferral, onto the organism, of the principles of the
observer’s external relation to it, than the fate of the concept of biology itself. Referring
initially to the procedures involved in the scientiﬁc study of organic forms, ‘biology’ has
come to be seen as a framework of rational principles – literally a bio-logos – supposedly
residing in the organisms themselves, and orchestrating their construction. For any particular organism, this bio-logos is, of course, its genotype. Herein, then, lies the explanation
for the identiﬁcation, noted above, of ‘biology’ with genetics. In the ﬁnal analysis, this
identiﬁcation betrays a logocentrism that biology shares with the entire enterprise of
Western natural science: the assumption that the manifest phenomena of the physical
world are underwritten by the work of reason. But the reason that science sees at work
there is its own, reﬂected in the mirror of nature.

FORM AND DEVELOPMENT
If organisms do not receive their form, with the genome, as a ‘biological endowment’,
then how are we to explain the stability of form across generations? The answer lies in
the observation that the life of any organism is inaugurated with far more than its complement of DNA. For one thing, as Lewontin points out, the DNA is contained within an
egg which, even before fertilisation, is equipped through its own development with the
essential prerequisites for launching future growth. ‘We inherit not only genes made of
DNA but an intricate structure of cellular machinery made up of proteins’ (Lewontin
1992: 33). For another thing, that egg exists not in a vacuum but in an already structured environment. Life begins, then, with DNA, in an egg, in an environment. Or as
Oyama succinctly puts it, ‘what is quite literally passed on or made available in reproduction is a genome and a segment of the world ’ (1985: 43, my emphasis). Together, these
constitute a developmental system, and it is in the dynamic functioning of this system –
in the complex interactions among components both internal to the organism (including
the genome) and beyond its boundaries – that form is generated and maintained
(Ho 1991: 346–7).
It follows that no one component – such as the DNA – can be privileged as ‘holding’
the form, which the others ‘bring out’, since the form itself is an emergent property of
the total system consisting in the relations between them. Change in any component of
the system, whether in the genome or in some aspect of the intra- or extra-organismic
environment, insofar as it alters the parameters of development, may bring about significant change in form; however the possibilities for change are not unlimited but are
constrained within the range of forms that can be generated by the system’s properties of
dynamic organisation. Thus the explanation for the intergenerational stability of form is
to be found not in the ﬁdelity of DNA copying, but in the self-organising potentials of
the entire ﬁeld of relations within which development occurs (Goodwin 1988, see also
Chapter Eighteen, pp. 345–6).
It is important to be precise about how this conclusion differs from what is generally
accepted in evolutionary biology. The issue of whether organisms are determined by their

Skill
nature or their nurture, by innate endowment or environmental conditioning, has long 1
been declared obsolete, having given way to an interactionist perspective according to 2
which every organism, at any moment of its life-cycle, is the product of a complex and 3
ongoing interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Naturally, it is argued, organ- 4
isms take on different appearances in different environments. It is nevertheless assumed 5
that these environmentally induced differences merely reveal the potential for variation of 6
what is essentially the same organism, and that only those differences attributable to genetic 7
modiﬁcation attest to evolutionary change in the organism itself. And it is on precisely 8
this assumption, with its implicit privileging of the genome as the true bearer of organic 9
form, that the conventional distinctions between genotype and phenotype, and between 10
evolution and development, have been allowed to rest.
For orthodox theory, these distinctions are quite critical. Evolution, as we have seen, 2
is taken to refer to intergenerational changes in the genotype; development to the trans- 3
lation, within each generation, from genotype to phenotype (see Figure 21.1). This is not 4
to say that these processes are thought to be unrelated. Thus it is recognised, on the one 5
hand, that the circumstances of development – insofar as they have a bearing on genetic 6
replication – may exert an inﬂuence on evolution, and on the other hand that it is the 7
evolved genotype that establishes the schedule for development (Hinde 1991: 585). But 8
the theory rules out any possibility that the life-history of the organism may itself form 9
an intrinsic part of the evolutionary process. From an evolutionary perspective, it is not 20
what organisms do but the reproductive consequences of their activity that are signiﬁcant. 1
Considerations of agency and intentionality have no place in evolutionary explanation: 2
these are assigned to the proximate mechanisms involved in the realisation of strategies 3
whose ultimate rationale is already established by natural selection. For this reason, it is 4
customary to speak of organisms as the sites where evolution occurs, but not as agents of 5
evolutionary change. Thus changes are said to take place in, but not to be brought about 6
by, populations of organisms.
But if form, as I have argued here, is a property not of genes but of developmental systems, 8
then to account for the evolution of form we need to understand how these systems are 9
constituted and reconstituted over time. We have seen that what an organism initially 30
receives from its predecessors includes, besides its complement of genetic material, the 1
environment wherein this material is placed. This placement sets up speciﬁc relations that 2
are enfolded in the developing form. Yet as it develops, the organism also contributes by 3
way of its actions to the environmental conditions not just for its own further development 4
but for the development of other organisms – of its own and of different kinds – to which 5
it relates. It may do so either directly, insofar as it has an immediate presence in the 6
other’s environment, or indirectly, insofar as its actions sustain, modify or transform 7
the environment of another’s experience. For example, the human child may grow up 8
surrounded by parents and siblings, in a house constructed long ago by predecessors whom 9
she will never meet. Yet all these people, and doubtless many more besides, play or have 40
played their part in establishing the conditions for that child’s development. Conversely, 1
as she grows older and her powers of agency expand, she in turn will contribute to the 2
conditions of development for her own contemporaries and successors.
Speaking of human beings, it is usual to refer to this process, wherein the people of 4
each generation furnish through their life-activities the contexts within which their succes- 5
sors grow to maturity, as history. My point, however, is that human history is but one 6
part of a process that is going on throughout the organic world (see Ingold 1990: 224). 7
In this process, organisms ﬁgure not as the passive products of a mechanism – variation 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 385 •

under natural selection – that stands outside of time and change, but as active and creative
agents, producers as well as products of their own evolution (Ho 1991: 338). For every
organism not only undergoes development within a wider ﬁeld of relationships, but
also contributes through its activity to the perpetuation and transformation of that ﬁeld.
Thus what it does, in its life, is not expended in the reproduction of its genes but is
incorporated into the developmental potentials of its successors. There can, then, be no
separation between ontogeny and phylogeny, development and evolution. Ontogenesis,
far from being accessory to evolutionary change, is the very fount from which the evolutionary process unfolds.
To forestall any possible misunderstanding, let me be quite clear about what I am
claiming. I do not deny the existence of the genome or its importance as a regulator of
developmental processes. Nor do I deny that changes can and do occur in the composition of the genome, as a result of the mutation, recombination and differential replication
of its constituent segments across generations. I do deny, however, that the genome contains
a speciﬁcation of the essential form of the organism, or of its capacities for action, and
therefore that a record of genetic change is in any sense tantamount to an account of its
evolution. Much genetic change occurs without any corollary on the level of form or
behaviour; conversely, signiﬁcant morphological or behavioural transformation may occur
without any corresponding changes in the genome. We have seen that since organisms,
in their activities, can modify the conditions of development for successor generations,
developmental systems – and the capacities speciﬁed therein – can go on evolving without
requiring any genetic change at all. Nowhere is this more evident than in the evolution
of our own kind. In order to explain how change can occur in the absence of signiﬁcant
genetic modiﬁcation, orthodox evolutionary theory has had to conceive of a ‘second track’,
of culture history, superimposed upon the baseline of an evolved genotypic heritage. Once
it is realised, however, that capacities are constituted within developmental systems, rather
than carried with the genes as a biological endowment, we can begin to see how the
dichotomies between biology and culture, and between evolution and history, can be
dispensed with. This is a matter to which I now turn.

BIOLOGY AND CULTURE
Let me begin by returning to the comparison between walking and cycling. Bipedal
locomotion, according to orthodox theory, is part of the human biological endowment –
that is, it is included as a property of the ‘anatomically modern’ genotype. Now we have
seen that the genotype is the product of biologists’ attempts to attribute the capacities of
the organism to an interior programme, consisting of a set of rules or algorithms capable
of generating appropriate responses under any given environmental circumstances. Thus if
the capacity to walk belongs with the genotype, then it must be possible to comprehend
walking as the output of a programme of this kind, designed by natural selection and
imported with the genome into diverse contexts of development. What, then, are we to
make of the capacity to ride a bicycle? It is doubtful whether much could be learned
about the origins and development of this capacity through an examination of changing
gene frequencies in the cycling public! By common consent, it forms no part of the human
genotype, and for that reason is not generally considered to have evolved in the biological
sense. Yet clearly, cycling is a skill that, in some sense, is passed on from one generation to
the next. It cannot therefore be ascribed to the phenotype, since phenotypic characters are
not supposed to be transmitted across generations.

Skill

To accommodate the kind of non-genetic transmis- 1
sion that is apparently at work here, it has often been 2
proposed that in human populations, a second mode 3
of inheritance operates in parallel with the genetic 4
C1
B1
E1
one. ‘Human beings’, as Durham puts it, ‘are pos- 5
sessed of two major information systems, one genetic, 6
one cultural’ (1991: 9). The capacity to ride a bicy- 7
C2
B2
E2
cle, then, is included in a cultural analogue of the 8
genotype – a ‘culture-type’ (Richerson and Boyd 9
1978: 128) – whose constituent elements or traits are 10
likewise encoded in a symbolic medium. This model 1
C3
B3
E3
of enculturation rests on precisely the same assump- 2
tions that I have already spelled out in connection 3
with genetic transmission. It presupposes that the 4
cultural ‘message’ that the individual receives from its 5
C4
B4
E4
conspeciﬁcs pre-exists its symbolic representation, 6
that the message can be ‘read off’ from the represen- 7
tation by means of context-independent decoding 8
rules, and that this reading precedes the application 9
of the received cultural knowledge in the set- 20
Figure 21.4 Individual and social learning. The tings of practice. Thus a clear distinction has to be 1
vertical arrows depict the intergenerational trans- drawn between the intergenerational transmission 2
mission of cultural information through social of cultural information and its expression in the 3
learning in the ancestor-descendant sequence C1 –
career of each individual, exactly parallel to the dis- 4
C4. The horizontal arrows depict the processes of
individual learning through which, in each genera- tinction that orthodox theory in evolutionary biology 5
tion, the received cultural schemata are translated draws between the transmission of the elements mak- 6
into overt behaviour (B1 – B4) under given environ- ing up the genotype and the latter’s realisation, 7
mental conditions (E1 – E4). Compare Figure 21.1. within the life of every organism, in the guise of the 8
phenotype. The former distinction has convention- 9
ally been made by means of a contrast between ‘indi- 30
vidual’ and ‘social’ learning (Figure 21.4).
Individual learning, here, refers to the way in which behaviour, just as much as mor- 2
phology, is ‘acquired’ through the environmental steering of development culminating in 3
the mature phenotype. In this each organism learns for itself, through experience, and the 4
process of learning is coterminous with its own lifespan. Social learning, on the other hand, 5
refers to the transmission, across generations, of a body of cultural knowledge in the form 6
of a tradition. This tradition consists not in behaviour itself, but in a system of schemata 7
– ‘plans, recipes, rules, instructions’ (Geertz 1973: 44) – for generating it. In the case of 8
bicycle riding, for example, what an individual acquires from his or her seniors are the 9
elements of a programme, analogous to the genetically encoded programme that supposedly 40
underwites the skills of walking, which is then ‘realised’ through practice and experience in 1
an environment. Notice how this division between the social and the individual compo- 2
nents of learning effectively divorces the sphere of the learner’s involvement with others 3
from the contexts of his or her practical engagement in the world. It assumes that what is 4
passed on, in learning, is a context-independent speciﬁcation for behaviour, and that such 5
a speciﬁcation is available for transmission, in coded form, outside the situations of its appli- 6
cation. Accordingly, the inter-generational stability of cultural form is seen to lie in the 7
ﬁdelity with which this information is copied from mind to mind.

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 387 •

As an account of what goes on in learning to ride a bicycle, or for that matter in
the acquisition of any other practical skill, this is highly artiﬁcial. For one thing, the art
of cycling – as indeed that of walking – deﬁes codiﬁcation in terms of any formal system
of rules and representations. Even if it were possible to devise a programme for bicycle
riding, it is doubtful whether a creature endowed with such a programme, and equipped
with a machine to ride, would ever be able to achieve the ﬂuency of the skilled practitioner. For another thing, where adult assistance is required it is above all to provide
demonstration and support – that is, to set up situations in which the novice is afforded
the possibility of getting the feel of things for him- or herself. The same is true in language
learning, aptly described as a process of ‘guided reinvention’ (Lock 1980), in which the
contribution of adults in the infant’s environment is to provide contextually speciﬁc interpretations of the infant’s vocal utterances that lead it to the discovery of how words can
be used to convey meaning. What each generation contributes to the next, then, are not
rules and schemata for the production of appropriate behaviour, but rather the speciﬁc
conditions of development under which successors, growing up in a social world, acquire
their own embodied skills and dispositions.
Words and deeds, of course, are full of meaning, and in any situation of learning the
novice will listen to what people say and watch what they do. Yet there is no ‘reading’
of words or deeds that is not part of the novice’s own practical orientation to his or her
environment. Spoken words, for example, taken in themselves, are no more for anything
than are genes. They do not carry meaning into contexts of interaction, as the orthodox
model of information transmission requires. Rather, again like genes, they gather their
meanings from the contexts of activities and relationships in which they are in play
(I return to this point in Chapter Twenty-three, p. 409). Thus culture, as a body of
context-independent, traditionally transmitted knowledge, encoded in words or other
symbolic media, can exist nowhere except in the mind of the anthropological observer.
It is derived by abstraction from observed behaviour, in just the same way that the biologist derives the genotype by abstraction from the observed characteristics of the organism,
and the linguist derives a grammar from the record of utterances. And by the same
trick that we have already noted in the ﬁelds of linguistics and biology, this abstraction
is imagined to be implanted within the minds of the actors themselves, as the generative
source of their behaviour.
I have argued, to the contrary, that whether our concern be with walking or cycling,
talking or writing, making tools or operating machines, what people do cannot be understood as the behavioural output of an inner programme but only as the intentional activity
of the whole human organism in its environment. Thus to reiterate my earlier conclusion, we have no grounds for distinguishing between those capacities for action due to
‘biology’ and those due to ‘culture’. True, there are things that human beings can do
which are apparently impossible for any other creature, even if raised in a human environment. And it is reasonable to suppose that these potentials would not have emerged were
it not for certain changes in the genome that could, in principle, be traced in ancestral
populations. But the genome, on its own, does not specify a capacity of any kind. Thus
we will search in vain for a capacity for culture, whose evolutionary emergence might have
marked what is sometimes called the ‘human revolution’. For there is no such thing, apart
from the diverse capacities of human beings growing up in different surroundings. These
differences of developmental experience, as I have shown, are incorporated anatomically
so as to make of each of us an organism of a different kind.

Skill
Where does all this leave the Cro-Magnons? Did their arrival on the scene really mark 3
the appearance of people ‘entirely like ourselves’? We are not, of course, by any means 4
perfect; nevertheless – Howells remarks – ‘it is not unfair to say that Homo sapiens seems 5
to have ﬁnished up all the unﬁnished business of human progress in the Pleistocene’ 6
(1967: 242). Yet in another sense, human progress had scarcely begun. These two 7
senses of progress correspond, as we have seen, to what are customarily distinguished as 8
evolution and history. Now this is not a distinction that would generally be made for any 9
other species. It is assumed, in other words, that there can be no cumulative or progres- 10
sive changes in the behavioural capacities of non-human kinds that are not tied to 1
evolutionary changes in their essential, species-speciﬁc forms. For this reason, no-one ﬁnds 2
it necessary to speak, for example, of ‘anatomically modern chimpanzees’ or ‘anatomically 3
modern elephants’. What the concept of anatomical modernity does, in effect, is to recog- 4
nise an alternative sense in which people can be ‘modern’, only to place it out of bounds, 5
as of no concern to the student of human biological evolution. Yet this second sense of 6
modernity, founded as it is upon a commitment to the supremacy of reason, is built into 7
the very project of contemporary science and underwrites its claim to be able to deliver 8
an authoritative account of the workings of nature. Here, then, lies the contradiction to 9
which I referred at the outset. For the historical process, which purports to raise humanity 20
onto a level of existence above the purely biophysical, is presupposed by science as providing 1
the platform from which its practitioners – who are of course humans too – can launch 2
their declarations to the effect that the human is just another species of nature (Foley 3
1987).
The roots of the contradiction considerably antedate the rise of evolutionary theory in 5
its modern Darwinian form, and may be traced back to a basic dualism in eighteenth- 6
century thinking between nature and reason. In his Systema Naturae of 1735, Linnaeus 7
recognised the status of man as a species within the animal kingdom, under the designa- 8
tion Homo. Yet unlike all other animal species, it was not by his physical characteristics 9
that he was to be known. Indeed, Linnaeus declared himself hard-pressed to ﬁnd any 30
deﬁnitive criterion whereby human beings could be distinguished anatomically from the 1
apes. Rather, he chose to identify the human distinction by means of a word of advice: 2
Nosce te ipsum (‘know for yourself ’). It is in his wisdom, Linnaeus thought, not in his 3
bodily form, that man differs essentially from the apes. Through our unique possession 4
of the intellectual faculty of reason, we are the only beings who can seek to know, through 5
our own powers of observation and analysis, what kinds of beings we are. There are no 6
scientists among the animals.
The great nineteenth-century theorists of social and cultural evolution – men like 8
Edward Tylor and Lewis Henry Morgan – placed their scenarios of human progress within 9
a similarly dualistic framework. While all animal species were ranked, according to their 40
physical form, in a chain of being culminating in humankind, the latter was supposed to 1
have been uniquely endowed by the Creator with an incorporeal consciousness which, 2
through history, has undergone progressive advance under laws of development of its own, 3
within the bounds of an unchanging body (Ingold 1986b: 58–60). Thus all human beings 4
were deemed to be alike in their essential nature and developmental potentials, but popu- 5
lations were supposed to differ in the degree to which these potentials were realised in 6
the passage from savagery to civilisation. With the publication, in 1871, of Darwin’s The 7
descent of man, the doctrine of common human potential – or, as it was then known, of 118

EVOLUTION AND HISTORY

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 389 •

the ‘psychic unity of mankind’ – was brought into contention, challenged by the view
that inter-population differences on the scale of civilisation could be attributed to anatomical variation, above all in the size and complexity of the brain. Thomas Huxley went so
far as to declare that the superiority of the European over the allegedly small-brained
savage was no different, in principle, from that of the savage over the even smaller-brained
ape. There ensued a period of quite rampant racism from which anthropology did not
begin to recover until the second decade of the twentieth century. It did so by reasserting
the universality of human nature, and by insisting that whatever differences of biological
endowment may exist between populations are of no consequence for history and cultural
development.
Indeed so long as it is assumed that the biological constitution of human organisms is
given as a genetic endowment, there can be no escape from racism save by disconnecting
cultural from biological variation. Clearly there is no foundation in fact for the raciological belief that cultural differences have a genetic basis. My point, however, is that in
turning its back on racist dogma, subsequent theorising about human evolution has reconstituted the eighteenth-century view in all its essentials. Once again human beings ﬁgure
in a dual capacity, on the one hand as a species of nature, on the other as creatures who
– uniquely among animals – have achieved such emancipation from the world of nature
as to make it the object of their consciousness. It is true that unlike Linnaeus, contemporary students of human evolution are able to point with some precision to a whole
cluster of anatomical features by which human beings may be distinguished not only from
extant, non-human primates but also from their pre-human, hominid forbears. These are
the diagnostic features for the recognition of anatomical modernity. But humans of this
recognisably ‘modern’ type did not evolve as scientists, let alone with a ready-made theory
of evolution. Science and its theories are widely understood to be the products of a cultural
or civilisational process quite separate from the process of biological evolution: a cumulative growth of knowledge that has left our basic natures unaffected.
We thus have two distinct continua, one evolutionary, leading from ancestral pongid and
hominid forms to ‘anatomically modern’ Homo sapiens sapiens, the other historical, leading
from our presumed hunter-gatherer past to modern science and civilisation (Ingold
1998: 89–93). And it is the intersection of these continua that sets up a point of origin,
without parallel in the history of life, at which our ancestors stood on the threshold of
culture and, for the ﬁrst time, came face to face with meaning (Figure 21.5). This point
is believed to mark the emergence of what is sometimes called ‘true humanity’ (see, for
example, Botscharow 1990: 64), or the arrival, in Howells’s words, of ‘the new kind – our
kind – of man’ (1967: 242). This kind of man, equipped anatomically for life as a huntergatherer, was possessed of a mind that would eventually enable him to reason like a scientist.
Cro-Magnon Man, it seems, had all the biological potential necessary to make him into a
scientist: his brain was as big, and as complex, as Einstein’s. But the time was not ripe, in
his era, for this potential to be brought out. Stretched between the poles of nature and
reason, epitomised respectively by the contrasting ﬁgures of the hunter-gatherer and the
scientist, lies the entire history of human culture, a history that has unfolded within
the parameters of an essentially stable bodily form. And that form, which all human beings
are supposed to receive as a common biological endowment, irrespective of cultural or
historical circumstance, is of course none other than the ‘modern human’ genotype.
Just as in the eighteenth-century doctrine of psychic unity, the human genotype – albeit
installed by natural selection rather than divine intervention – is said to establish a universal
baseline for cultural development. As an ideal representation of the essential form of

Skill

humanity, the ‘modern human’ is 1
itself a creature of modern Western 2
Western scientists
thought. He (or she) is conceived 3
as the epitome of everything a 4
human being possibly could be, 5
a compendium of universal capaci- 6
ties abstracted from the manifold 7
forms of life that have actually 8
appeared in history, and retrojected 9
onto the Palaeolithic past as a set of 10
genetically inscribed, developmen- 1
Cro-Magnons
BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION
tal potentials underwriting their 2
realisation.4 Thus the course of his- 3
Origin of
tory reappears as the progressive 4
modern
unfolding of the latent capacities 5
humans
of our ancestors, biologically ﬁxed 6
in evolution even before history 7
began. There is a certain irony here. 8
Biologists, who long ago co-opted 9
the notion of evolution to describe 20
Figure 21.5 The origin of ‘true humanity’, conceived as lying at the
the process that Darwin had origi- 1
intersection between the continuum of biological evolution leading from
ancestral pongid and hominid forms to anatomically modern humans, nally called ‘descent with modiﬁca- 2
and the continuum of culture history leading from Palaeolithic hunting tion’, have been scathing in their 3
and gathering to modern science and civilisation.
criticism of social scientists who 4
have continued to use the notion, 5
with reference to human history, in 6
its original sense of progressive development. Yet just such a view of human history, as the 7
developmental realisation of innate potentials, is implied by their own theory!
I have argued that the distinction between evolution and history, as set out in the 9
orthodox view, cannot be sustained. Regarded as a process whereby people, in their 30
activities, shape the contexts of development for their successors, history reappears as the 1
continuation, by another name, of a process of evolution that is going on throughout the 2
organic world. In the Eighteenth Brumaire, Marx wrote that ‘men make their own history, 3
but they do not make it just as they please, they do not make it under circumstances 4
chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted 5
from the past’ (Marx 1963 [1869]: 15). In just the same way do organisms in general 6
make their own evolution. There is, then, no point of origin when history began; no 7
moment of emergence of ‘true humanity’. Thus we do not need one theory to explain 8
how apes became human, and another to explain how (some) humans became scientists. 9
For the business of human evolution was not ﬁnished with the arrival of the Cro-Magnons, 40
but has carried on into the present – though we call it history now. I have attempted to 1
show that the various forms and capacities that have emerged within this process are 2
neither given in advance as a genetic endowment, nor transmitted as components of a 3
separate body of cultural information, but are rather generated in and through the dynamic 4
functioning of the developmental systems constituted by virtue of the involvement of 5
human beings in their diverse environments.
For human as for any other organisms, such involvement is an inescapable condition 7
of existence. I believe we need to recast the whole way we think about evolution, taking 118
CULTURE
HISTORY

Neanderthals

H. Erectus

H. Habilis

Australopithecines

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 391 •

this condition of involvement as our point of departure. Orthodox theory, which attributes evolutionary change to underlying modiﬁcations in the genotype, requires that human
beings be completely speciﬁable, independently of the relational contexts of their development. But such a speciﬁcation, as I have shown, exists only in the mind of the observer,
and therefore introjects a division between mind and world, or between reason and nature,
as an ontological a priori. There is, in truth, no species-speciﬁc, essential form of humanity,
no way of saying what an ‘anatomically modern human’ is apart from the manifold ways
in which humans actually become (Ingold 1991: 359). These variations of developmental
circumstance, not of genetic inheritance, make us organisms of different kinds. Thus my
conclusion, that the differences we call cultural are indeed biological, carries no racist
connotations whatever. By refocusing on the human-being-in-its-environment, we can
dispense with the need for a species-speciﬁc characterisation of humankind, and so also
with the opposition between species and culture. People inhabit one world, not because
their differences are underwritten by universals of human nature, but because they are
caught up – along with other creatures – in a continuous ﬁeld of relations, in the unfolding
of which all difference is generated.

Skill
As Horne Tooke, one of the founders of the noble science of philology, observes, 3
language is an art, like brewing or baking; but writing would have been a better simile. 4
It certainly is not a true instinct, for every language has to be learnt. It differs, however, 5
widely from all ordinary arts, for man has an instinctive tendency to speak, as we see 6
in the babble of our young children; whilst no child has an instinctive tendency to 7
brew, bake or write.
Charles Darwin, The descent of man (1871: 131) 9
THE LANGUAGE CAPACITY: ORIGINS OF AN ILLUSION
All theorising about the origins and evolution of language rests on a distinction that, by 3
and large, is regarded as so obvious that it virtually goes without saying. It is that by 4
‘language’, in this context, is meant not any particular language, as spoken presently or 5
in the past by members of some human community, but a capacity that is manifestly 6
common to all human beings, and that is surely one of the hallmarks of our species. One 7
could of course examine the changes over time that have given rise to the immense prolif- 8
eration of languages spoken around the world, but that is a problem for philologists or 9
historians of language. Does not the very possibility of this history, however, rest on the 30
fact that all of us, including our ancestors up to a certain critical point, share (or shared) 1
the capacity to speak? If so, then explaining how, when and why this capacity arose is a 2
problem not of history but of evolution. The twin distinctions, between particular 3
languages spoken and the capacity for language, and between history and evolution, do 4
indeed seem intuitively reasonable. For my part, however, I am convinced that they are 5
unsustainable, and in this chapter I shall try to show why.
I contend that there is no essence of language, no way of saying what language is, apart 7
from the manifold ways in which people actually speak. But if there is no such thing as 8
language as such, what is the point of seeking its origins? I do in fact take the view that 9
it is futile to inquire into the origins of language, not for the reason that is usually offered 40
– namely, that such inquiry calls for empirical evidence about the behaviour of our earliest 1
ancestors that is simply not available – but because the very idea of an origin is a ﬁction 2
that serves more to confer legitimacy on the present than to illuminate the past. I shall 3
argue that Charles Darwin, and Horne Tooke before him, were right to compare language 4
to an art like brewing or baking, though it might have been more appropriate to select 5
different examples, such as singing, dancing or playing a musical instrument, which 6
do not involve the procurement and processing of raw materials. But no more than 7
these other arts did language evolve at some point, as a built-in property of the human 118

Chapter Twenty-two

Speech, writing and the modern
origins of ‘language origins’

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 393 •

make-up. Rather, it inheres in the very practice of the art, in the activities of speaking
themselves. These activities, in their unfolding, constitute a process of evolution. Thus
there is, in reality, no point of origin, since the evolutionary process continues even as
we speak.
Although my thesis as regards the question of origin is a negative one, I would not
want what I have to say to be construed in an entirely negative light. It may make no
sense to seek the point where language began, but it makes a good deal of sense to inquire
into the evolution of speech. To do this, however, it will be necessary to drop two assumptions that lie at the heart of most contemporary theorising on the subject. First, we must
cease to regard speech as the derivative output of something else – that is, ‘language’ –
which is supposed to pre-exist as a generative potential or capacity independently of human
activity in the world. And secondly, we must not assume that what evolves is some kind
of context-independent speciﬁcation of the essential form of humanity.
Closely bound up with the argument I have just introduced is another one, about the
relation between speech and writing. Reﬂecting on the parallel between language and other
practical arts, Darwin came to the conclusion that the latter could be better compared to
writing than to speech, and that spoken language was – after all – a rather special case.
I propose to argue, somewhat to the contrary, that language looks special to us only
because we view it from a perspective that has been conditioned through our familiarity
with certain practices of writing. I contend that these practices have had a decisive impact
in shaping our modern view of language as an objective system of rules and meanings –
as something that people have, and can use. According to my argument, it is only thanks
to the reiﬁcation of speech which writing makes possible, that the idea of language as a
thing, and hence of language origins, becomes even conceivable. If language, in a certain
formal sense, is a consequence of writing, then to seek the evolutionary origins of language
in this same sense, as a precondition for writing, is manifestly circular.1
I shall conclude, however, by suggesting that besides considering the effects of writing
on our view of what language is, we need to attend to the possible bias in our view
of what writing is, a bias that stems from the frequently asserted notion that writing is
a technology of the word. It is not, then, writing per se, but rather a technologised conception of writing, associated with the rise of modern print literacy, that leads to the
objectiﬁcation of speech as language, and thence to the problematic of language origins.

THE STANDARD MODEL: GENETIC BASES OF CULTURAL
TRANSMISSION
That, stripped to its bare essentials, is what I have to say. In what follows I shall elaborate
on, and seek to demonstrate, the various claims I have made. I begin, however, by returning to what I shall henceforth call the ‘standard model’ of the relation between language as
a universal human capacity, and the manifold languages of particular communities. This
holds that the former is a product of evolution under natural selection, and is transmitted
genetically, thereby establishing the cognitive foundations, in successive generations, for the
acquisition of the latter through a parallel process of cultural transmission.
I have summarised the standard model in Figure 22.1, and shall devote a few moments
to spelling out three of its key features. The ﬁrst is that every particular language may be
fully described as a system of acquired rules and representations – comprising its syntax
and lexicon – inscribed in the minds of its speakers and transmissible as a body of information, from one generation to the next, independently of its instantiation in those acts

Skill

of speaking and listening for 1
which it is prerequisite. The 2
second is that this transmission 3
is possible only thanks to the 4
presence, in the mind of each 5
and every human being, of a 6
c1
c2
c3
c4
ready-made acquisition device 7
that allows the novice to derive 8
g1
g2
g3
g4
the speciﬁcations of his or her 9
language from the input of 10
biogenetic transmission
otherwise unintelligible speech 1
sounds. And the third is that 2
Figure 22.1 The orthodox view of the relation between biogenetic and the relation between the acqui- 3
cultural transmission. The letters g1–4 refer to the genetic speciﬁcations, in sition device and the acquired 4
successive generations, of an innate acquisition device; the letters c1–4 refer to information is one of container 5
the content, again in successive generations, of acquired culture.
to content. The novice starts 6
life with a certain capacity 7
already in place, which is then 8
gradually ﬁlled up with the informational content upon which his or her linguistic compe- 9
tence is based.
Now I believe that in each of these respects the standard model is wrong. Let me begin 1
with the second. It is perfectly true that if the essence of linguistic competence lies in 2
acquired rules and representations, then the mind must be pre-equipped with cognitive 3
devices of some kind that allow the relevant information to be reconstructed through a 4
processing of the raw input of sensory data. Consider, for example, the following deﬁni- 5
tion of learning, from one of the leading exponents of cognitive science, Philip 6
Johnson-Laird. Learning, he writes, amounts to ‘the construction of new programs out of 7
elements of experience’. But if you need programmes to process the data of experience, 8
how can they be constructed from such data? There is only one possible answer, and that 9
is by means of programmes that are already in place. Thus, if you are to learn anything, 30
you must be pre-equipped with a programme governing the construction process. Perhaps 1
this latter programme was constructed in the same way, through the processing of expe- 2
riential input according to yet another programme. ‘You can learn to learn’, Johnson-Laird 3
continues, ‘but then that learning would depend on another program, and so on. 4
Ultimately, learning must depend on innate programs that make programs’ (Johnson-Laird 5
1988: 133, my emphasis).
Following this line of reasoning, what applies to learning in general must also apply to 7
language acquisition in particular. Maybe there are rules or algorithms governing the acqui- 8
sition of language that are themselves acquired. But then there must be processing devices 9
in place that make possible their construction in the mind of the learner. So where do 40
these come from? Whence comes the information that speciﬁes the construction of the 1
innate devices, without which no learning would be possible at all?
By and large, in the literature of cognitive science, the postulation of innate structures 3
is taken to require no more justiﬁcation than vague references to genetics and natural 4
selection. It is assumed that the problem of where they come from has already been solved, 5
at least in general terms, by evolutionary biology. Unfortunately this is not the case. For 6
one thing, most biologists claim that they have long since discarded the distinction between 7
innate and acquired structures. According to what is often called the ‘ﬁrst law of biology’, 118
cultural transmission

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 395 •

the actual characteristics of organisms are neither innate nor acquired, but are products
of the interaction, throughout the life cycle, between endogenous, genetic causes and
exogenous, environmental ones. Thus interactionism has long since replaced innatism as
the dominant creed within biological science. In fact, however, a doctrine of genetic preformation still lurks beneath the surface of orthodox interactionism, since it is built into
biology’s own master theory – the theory of evolution under natural selection. To see
how this is so, we need to focus on the account that is offered, within the framework of
Darwinian evolutionary biology, of the process of ontogenetic development. This calls for
a brief detour into the realms of biological theory.

THE EVOLUTION OF FORM: GENOTYPES AND DEVELOPMENTAL
SYSTEMS
Interactionism describes development as an unfolding relation between genes and environment. In this relation, however, it is the genes that are supposed to hold the essence of
form, whereas the environment is conceived merely to furnish the material conditions for
its realisation. Each gene is taken to represent a unit of pure, digital information, encoded
in the molecular structure of DNA. Put together, these units make up a formal speciﬁcation of the organism-to-be (the genotype) which, by deﬁnition, is given independently
and in advance of any real-world context of development. At the commencement of every
new life-cycle, this genotypic speciﬁcation is introduced, by way of the DNA of the germ
cells, into a particular environmental context. In development, the information carried in
the genes is then said to be outwardly expressed in the phenotypic form of the resultant
organism. But whereas the elements of the genotype are transmitted across generations,
the characteristics of the phenotype are not. Over many generations within a population,
through accidents of mutation and recombination coupled with the effects of differential
reproduction, the informational content of the genotype changes. These changes, it is
claimed, add up to a process of evolution.
This is all very neat, save for one problem. To be sure, every organism starts life with
its complement of DNA. But if genes are to be understood, as the theory requires, as the
carriers of a formal design speciﬁcation, shaped up through natural selection, from one
locus of development to another, then there must be some systematic correspondence
between the elements of this speciﬁcation and the actual DNA of the genome that is independent of any developmental process. Such a correspondence has been generally assumed,
but has never been demonstrated (see Cohen and Stewart 1994: 293–4). What happens
in practice, as I showed in the last chapter (pp. 382–3), is that biologists seek to redescribe
the observed phenotypic characteristics of organisms as the outputs of a formal system of
epigenetic rules. These are then ‘read in’ to the genome, so that development can be seen
as the ‘reading off’ of a programme or speciﬁcation that is already there, and that is
imported with the genome into the site of inauguration of a new life-cycle. In short, as
an account of the evolution of form, Darwinian theory rests on a simple circularity. That
is one reason, of course, why it has proved so hard to refute.
At root, the issue comes down to one about copying. The orthodox account has it that
the formal design features of the incipient organism are copied along with the DNA, in
advance of its interaction with the environment, so that they can then ‘interact’ with the
environment to produce the organism. I would argue to the contrary, and as illustrated
schematically in Figure 22.2, that copying is itself a process that goes on within the context
of organism-environment interaction. In other words, the ‘missing link’ between the

Skill

genome and the formal characteristics of 1
the organism is none other than the devel- 2
opmental process itself. There is, then, no 3
Copying
DNA
of formal
design for the organism, no genotype 4
replication
characters
– except, of course, as this might be 5
Environment
Genome ⬅ Genotype
constructed by the observing biologist. 6
Organic form, in short, is generated, not 7
Interaction
expressed, in development, and arises as an 8
emergent property of the total system of 9
Development
relations set up by virtue of the presence 10
of the organism in its environment. Hence 1
the evolution of form, as Susan Oyama 2
Phenotype
has put it, is tantamount to ‘the deriva- 3
tional history of developmental systems’ 4
DNA
(Oyama 1989: 5).
replication
Environment
Genome
THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE
MIND: ITS CONSTRUCTION
Developmental
system
AND FURNISHING
Let me now return to the question I left 1
hanging a moment ago. From where are 2
Copying
we to conjure up the innate devices that 3
are supposed to make possible the acqui- 4
sition of language? It is generally assumed 5
Organic form
that having been fashioned by natural 6
selection, these devices must have a genetic 7
Figure 22.2 Two theories of copying: (1) in the orthodox, basis. Thus the information that speciﬁes 8
Darwinian account, a design for the organism is copied with the their construction must form one com- 9
DNA of the genome, which is then ‘brought out’ in the course ponent of the human genotype. Yet here, 30
of development within an environmental context; (2) in the
psycholinguistics runs into the very 1
‘developmental systems approach’ proposed here, the process of
copying is equivalent to that of the organism’s development in same dilemma that, as we have seen, 2
derails Darwinian theory – in an even 3
its environment.
more acute form. It is more acute because 4
the cognitive devices in question must 5
already exist, not merely in the virtual guise of a design, but in the concrete hardwiring 6
of human brains. Somehow or other, in order to kick-start the process of ontogenetic 7
development, strands of DNA have miraculously to transform themselves into informa- 8
tion processing mechanisms. This is rather like supposing that merely by replicating the 9
design of an aircraft, whether on the drawing board or on the computer screen, one is 40
all prepared for take-off.
Attempts in the literature to resolve this problem, insofar as it is even recognised, are 2
confused and contradictory. To cut a rather long and tangled story short, they boil down 3
to two distinct claims. One is that the concrete mechanisms making up what has 4
been called the ‘evolved architecture’ of the human mind are reliably constructed under 5
all normal environmental circumstances. The other is that these universal mechanisms 6
proceed to work on ‘variable environmental inputs’ to produce the diversity of manifest 7
competencies and behaviours that we actually observe (Tooby and Cosmides 1992: 45). 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 397 •

Let me unpack these claims, illustrated
schematically in Figure 22.3, with speciﬁc
reference to language acquisition. Here
the alleged universal mechanism is the
‘language acquisition device’ (LAD).
During a well-deﬁned stage of infancy,
this device is said to be activated, operating upon the input of speech sounds from
the environment so as to establish, in the
infant’s mind, the grammar and lexicon
of the particular language (or languages)
spoken in his or her community. An
infant reared in social isolation, and thus
deprived of relevant environmental input,
would not learn a language, but would
still possess a fully formed LAD. It would
thus appear that language acquisition is a
two-stage process: in the ﬁrst, the LAD is
constructed; in the second it is furnished
with speciﬁc syntactic and semantic content. That, at least, is the theory, but is it
borne out in practice? Is there any basis
in reality for separating out the construction of innate psychological mechanisms
from the transmission of acquired cultural information, as shown in Figure
22.4, or is the division into these two
stages merely an artefact of our own analytic procedures? In what follows, I shall
argue that the latter is the case.

THE MYTH OF THE LANGUAGE
ACQUISITION DEVICE

Building
design
(genotype)

Environment

‘reliably constructs’

Evolved
architecture
Evolved
architecture

Environment
‘variable inputs’

Specific
cultural
competencies

Figure 22.3 Two claims for the construction of mind, following
the model presented by Tooby and Cosmides (1992). (1) A universal building design (one component of the genotype) interacts
with the environment to ‘reliably construct’ the ‘evolved architecture’ consisting of a number of cognitive mechanisms including, for
example, the ‘language acquisition device’. (2) The architecture
(presumed universal) interacts selectively with the environment,
accepting information specifying diverse cultural competencies such
as, for example, the ability to speak English, Japanese or Swahili.

The ﬁrst point to note is that the mechanisms (if we can call them that)
underwriting the child’s ability to speak
are not constructed in a vacuum, but rather emerge in the context of his or her sensory
involvement in a richly structured environment. Recent research has shown that from well
before birth, infants are sensitive to the surrounding ambience of sound, and above all to
the mother’s voice (De Casper and Spence 1986). Thus the human baby comes into the
world already attuned to certain environmentally speciﬁc sound patterns. From birth
onwards, it is surrounded by an entourage of speakers who provide support in the form
both of contextually grounded interpretations of the infant’s vocal utterances and of
demonstrations, or ‘attention-directing gestures’ (Zukow-Goldring 1997: 221–3), to
accompany their own. This environment, then, is not a source of variable input for preconstructed mechanisms, but rather furnishes the variable conditions for the self-assembly,
in the course of early development, of the mechanisms themselves. And as the conditions

Skill

E

Building
design
Constant
component
(Stage 1)
Language acquisition
device
Variable
component
(Stage 2)
Competence
in particular
language(s)
Figure 22.4 Putting the two claims of Figure 22.3 together yields a two-stage model of cognitive devel1
opment. Note, however, that this model depends on factoring out those features of the environment
that are constant, or ‘reliably present’ in every conceivable developmental context, from those that repre- 2
sent a source of ‘variable input’ from one context to another. Only the former are relevant in the ﬁrst 3
stage (the construction of innate mechanisms such as the ‘language acquisition device’); only the latter 4
are relevant in the second (the acquisition of speciﬁc cultural competencies such as the ability to speak 5
a particular language or languages).
vary, so the resulting mechanisms will take manifold forms, each differentially tuned both 9
to speciﬁc sound patterns and to other features of local contexts of utterance. These vari- 30
ably attuned mechanisms, and the competencies they establish, are of course the 1
neurophysiological correlates of what appear to us observers as the diverse languages of 2
the world.
In short, language – in the sense of the child’s capacity to speak in the manner of his 4
or her community – is not acquired. Rather, it is an ability that is continually being gener- 5
ated and regenerated in the developmental contexts of children’s involvement in worlds 6
of speech (Lock 1980).2 And if language is not acquired, then there can be no such thing 7
as an innate language acquisition device (Dent 1990).
This conclusion puts paid to the last of the three features of the standard model that 9
I outlined earlier: that learning a language is like ﬁlling a universal, genetically speciﬁed 40
container with particular cultural content. Of course, people raised in different environ- 1
ments learn to speak in different ways. But these differences, far from being received into 2
the prefabricated compartments of a universal psychology, are immanent in those 3
very ﬁelds of relations wherein human beings undergo the organic processes of growth 4
and maturation, and in which their powers of speech are developed and sustained. 5
Bearing this in mind, we can now return to the ﬁrst feature of the standard model, that 6
each particular language is transmissible as a corpus of context-independent rules and 7
representations from one generation to the next. This cannot be true, for the simple reason 118
n

i r

o

n

e

n

t

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 399 •

that it rests, as we have seen, on the impossible precondition of a ready-made cognitive
architecture. For the theory of language learning as information transmission to work,
lengths of DNA would have magically to transform themselves into concrete brain mechanisms, ready and prepared to process relevant environmental input. In reality, as Dent
has pointed out (1990: 694), there can be no mechanisms in advance of experience, since
no matter at what point in development the mechanisms are identiﬁed, the individual at
that point already has a history of interaction with the environment.
Lest this argument be misunderstood, let me emphasise that my purpose in questioning
the real existence of innate mechanisms is not to argue for the priority of nurture
over nature, or to substitute for innatism a doctrine of the environmental determination
of human capacities. These are not the only theoretical alternatives, and indeed both
are fallacious for the same reason, most succinctly expressed by Oyama, namely that the
information specifying the capacities in question – whether its source be supposed to lie
inside the organism or outside in the environment – must be presumed to ‘pre-exist the
processes that give rise to it’ (Oyama 1985: 13). My point is that these capacities are
neither internally prespeciﬁed nor externally imposed, but arise within processes of development, as properties of dynamic self-organisation of the total ﬁeld of relationships in
which a person’s life unfolds.

WRITING, PRINT LITERACY AND THE MODERN CONCEPTION
OF LANGUAGE
What is the source of the peculiar conception of language enshrined in the standard model?
Consider the following three implications of the notion that language is fully describable
as an objective system of rules and representations for generating well-formed and meaningful utterances. First, every verbal composition must exist initially as an entity in its
own right – a mental construction – independently of the contexts of its enunciation and
interpretation in the real world of other persons and relationships. Secondly, performance
is a matter of placing this composition ‘on line’ for mechanical execution by the physical
apparatus of the body. Thirdly, the particular qualities of performance – such as tone of
voice, facial expression, and so on – may be considered superﬂuous to linguistic competence and therefore disregarded.
Now in ordinary speech, these conditions never obtain, although linguists often write
as though they do. That is to say, in real life verbal composition is inseparable from performance, and performance is an intentional and ﬁnely nuanced activity that draws its
meaning from the situational contexts of its enactment. In modern literate societies,
however, there is one domain of activity where the conditions outlined above approximately obtain – and this is the activity of writing. There is a sense in which the written
verbal composition does exist as an entity in its own right, moreover with modern print
technology the writing itself does seem like the mechanical replication of a preconstructed
design, while words printed on paper are, in themselves, expressionless, and are silent to
the work and feeling that went into their production.
Thus we are brought at length to writing, or more precisely to the rise of modern print
literacy, as the source of the conception of language that underpins what I have called
the standard model. It would be no exaggeration to claim, with Roy Harris (1980: 6),
that no other historical development has had such a profound impact on the concept of
what a language is. It is from systems of writing, as David Olson has convincingly shown,
that the concepts and categories have been drawn for thinking about the structure of

Skill
spoken language, rather than the other way around. Moreover it is our experience of 1
reading written texts that leads us to regard the spoken utterance as ‘composed of words 2
related by means of a syntax’ (Olson 1994: 68–78). As units of linguistic analysis, the 3
phoneme, the word and the sentence are all artefacts of writing that, far from being 4
intrinsic to speech, have latterly been imposed upon it (Coulmas 1989: 39).3 In most 5
modern, literate societies, grammarians and lexicographers have worked hard to rationalise 6
and standardise the forms of speech so as to bring them into line with these artiﬁcial, 7
scribal conventions, setting up canons of correctness against which actual utterances may 8
be judged more or less well-formed, and which citizens are encouraged (or sometimes 9
forced) to emulate. In these societies, language has become an institution.
It is hardly surprising, then, that linguists working from within this institutional context 1
imagine that in learning, language is copied into the minds of practitioners in much the 2
same way that, in their own analyses, it is reproduced on the printed page. It is this scrip- 3
tist bias that leads many linguists naïvely to assume that the ‘languages’ of non-literate 4
communities exist, each complete with grammar and lexicon, implanted in the uncon- 5
scious minds of their speakers, simply waiting to be discovered and written down. The 6
idea, however, that writing is simply the transcription of speech – or that, in the 7
words of Jonathan Rée, ‘everything that is linguistic must in principle be writable as well’ 8
(1999: 320) – is an illusion. For what is not writable, and therefore lost in the tran- 9
scription, is everything that gives the spoken utterance its ‘illocutionary force’ (Austin 20
1962: 100), that is its power to launch intentions and produce effects, including intona- 1
tion, voice quality, accompanying manual or facial gesture, and so on. Much of the history 2
of literacy may be understood as a struggle to compensate for this limitation, largely 3
through an elaboration of the lexicon to convey subtleties of intention and interpretation 4
that are normally expressed non-lexically in speech (Olson 1994: 109–10). Thus in its 5
rendering as the output of a language that is fully writable, speech is not so much tran- 6
scribed as transformed.
Such is the power of writing on the way we both conceive and practice speech that it 8
takes quite an effort of imagination to think ourselves back into the condition of what 9
Walter Ong (1982) calls ‘primary orality’, in which speech had the power to move people, 30
as song does still, by virtue of its immediate impact on the senses. To get a perspective 1
on this, we could do worse than adopt the advice of Giambattista Vico, offered in 2
his New Science of 1725. For a genuine understanding of the origins of civilisation, 3
Vico wrote, ‘we must reckon as if there were no books in the world’ (1948 §330). That, 4
presumably, was the state of affairs in prehistory. How, says Vico, can we have a theory 5
of the origins of civilisation in prehistory if our very concept of civilisation presupposes 6
the existence of the book? How likewise, we could ask, can we have a theory of language 7
origins whose very notion of what language is presupposes print literacy? As John Shotter 8
puts it, commenting on Vico’s counsel, ‘if we are to grasp the nature of the beginnings 9
of language, and reckon as if there were no books in the world, . . . we must grasp the 40
nature of a form of communication which does not consist in a sequential occurrence of 1
events or things, nor in a series of products or of component meanings, but which rather 2
“subsists” in the continuous ﬂow of sensuous, “moving” activity between people’ (Shotter 3
1991: 385).

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 401 •

IF SPEAKING IS A SKILL, IS WRITING A TECHNOLOGY?
This is the point at which to return to my initial claim that speaking is akin to the practice of an art like singing or dancing. I do not mean art in its modern sense, a sense that
has come to be opposed to technology as the spontaneous creation of novelty to the
mechanical replication of pre-existing design (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 349–50). I have
in mind, rather, the traditional meaning of art as skill, of the kind we associate with craftsmanship – a sense preserved in such words as ‘artisan’ and ‘artefact’.
Before proceeding further, it is necessary to reiterate three general points about skill. I
have already introduced and discussed these points at length in Chapter Nineteen
(pp. 352–4), and will summarise them only brieﬂy here. First, skills are not techniques
of the body considered, objectively and in isolation, as an instrument in the service of
culture. They are rather properties of the whole system of relations constituted by the
presence of the practitioner in his or her environment. Secondly, skilled practice is not
just the mechanical application of external force but is continually responsive both to
changing environmental conditions and to the nuances of the practitioner’s relation to
the material as the task unfolds. Thirdly, skills are refractory to codiﬁcation in the programmatic form of rules and representations. Thus it is not through the transmission of any
such programmes that skills are learned, but rather through a mixture of improvisation
and imitation in the settings of practice. Now all these points, which apply to skills in
general, also apply to speaking in particular. Speaking is not a discharge of representations in the mind but an achievement of the whole organism-person in an environment;
it is closely attuned and continually responsive to the gestures of others, and speakers are
forever improvising on the basis of past practice in their efforts to make themselves understood in a world which is never quite the same from one moment to the next.
What, then, of the difference between speaking and writing? Earlier, I drew attention
to certain properties of writing, speciﬁcally of the kind associated with modern print
literacy, that may be responsible for the conception of language enshrined in the standard
model. These properties – that writing divorces the author from the immediate context
of sensuous engagement with his or her surroundings, that it involves the more or less
mechanical execution of a preconceived verbal composition, and that it is fully analysable
in terms of an objective system of rules and representations – are the precise opposites of
the three general properties of skill outlined above. Viewed in these terms, it would seem
that the key difference between speaking and writing is that the latter is not a skilled
practice at all, not an art in that sense, but the operation of a technology.
The idea of writing as a technology of language enjoys widespread currency in the literature (Sampson 1985: 17, Coulmas 1989: 9–11). A leading proponent of the idea has
been Walter Ong. One of the things that makes writing technological, according to Ong,
is that it involves the use of tools and other equipment (Ong 1982: 81). For us the tool
that immediately comes to mind is, of course the pen or pencil, or perhaps the typewriter.
But it is worth remembering, in passing, that the writer’s equipment may involve far more
than that. For example the tools of the medieval English scribe, according to Michael
Clanchy, included: a knife or razor for scraping parchment, a pumice for smoothing it,
a boar’s tooth for polishing the surface, a ruler, plumbline and awl for ruling the lines,
and, for the writing itself, quill pens and a penknife, inkhorn and inks of various colours.
This is not to mention the furniture, lamp-lighting and other paraphernalia of the study
(Clanchy 1979: 116). Where writing is pressed on wet clay, as in Sumerian cuneiform,
or engraved in stone, stamped on metal or embroidered in tapestry, the tools would have

Skill
been quite different, and often of a kind that we would not immediately associate with 1
writing at all. My concern, however, is not with what kinds of tools are used, or even 2
with whether tools are necessarily used at all (think of writing in the air, or with a ﬁnger 3
in the sand), but whether the use of tools in writing is tantamount to operating a 4
technology.
Ong thinks it is, and to demonstrate his point he invites us to compare writing with 6
playing the violin. The violinist, in Ong’s characterisation, is an operative whose task is 7
to induce vibrations in the strings of her instrument, according to its principles of acoustic 8
functioning, in order to render a pre-prepared musical composition in the concrete medium 9
of sound. Let me cite the relevant passage in full:
A violin is an instrument, which is to say a tool. An organ is a huge machine, with 2
sources of power . . . totally outside its operator . . . What do you think the sounds of 3
an organ come out of? Or the sounds of a violin or even a whistle? The fact is that 4
by using a mechanical contrivance, a violinist or an organist can express something 5
poignantly human that cannot be expressed without the mechanical contrivance. To 6
achieve such expression of course the violinist or organist has to have interiorized the 7
technology, made the tool or machine a second nature, a psychological part of himself 8
or herself.
(Ong 1982: 83) 20
Just as the violinist has to interiorise a technology, Ong goes on to argue, so also must 2
the writer, in order to be able to use his tools to inscribe linguistic forms upon a material 3
surface.
Now whatever one may think of the organ, to describe the violin as a ‘mechanical 5
contrivance’ seems a little odd, and certainly contrary to the experience of any practising 6
musician. It is evident that in this passage, Ong has fallen prey to the fallacy, already 7
discussed in Chapter Sixteen, that where tools or instruments are being used there must 8
exist a technology (p. 316). For what the concept of technology does, as we have seen, 9
is to recast the skilled activity of artisans as the behavioural or mechanical output of a 30
formal system of rules and principles, a logos of tekhnē, that is embodied in the construc- 1
tion of the tools of the trade, and that practitioners are bound to put into effect, regardless 2
of their personal experience and sensibilities. There is far more to playing the violin, 3
however, than the mechanical execution of a pre-prepared series of instructions. And if 4
there is a certain analogy between violin-playing and writing, it must point to a conclu- 5
sion that is the very converse of the one that Ong draws from it: namely, that the activity 6
of the writer, like that of the violinist, is an art in itself.
THE ART OF WRITING
To learn to play the violin, the novice has to practise with her instrument, over and over 1
again, and often from a young age while her body is still rapidly growing, until her move- 2
ments and the sounds that ﬂow from them gain the ﬂuency and responsiveness of the 3
accomplished performer. Precisely the same is true, as we saw in Chapter Nineteen (pp. 4
356–7), of learning to make string bags in Central New Guinea. And in just the same 5
way, too, the young apprentice scribe learns the craft of writing. This is not a matter, as 6
Ong would have it, of interiorising a technology, but rather one of developing a skill. As 7
with any skill, the art of handwriting emerges through a continuous process of bodily 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 403 •

modiﬁcation within the contexts of novices’ engagement with other persons and diverse
objects in their environments. That writing is not merely added on, as a cultural supplement, to a body that is naturally ready-made for speech is apparent as soon as we pause
to consider the demands, both postural and gestural, that it places on the developing
human organism.
The postures routinely adopted in writing are in fact very variable, depending in part
on tools, raw materials and furniture, and in part on status etiquette. For example the
postural change adopted by Sumerian scribes when they started writing on large rectangular clay tablets rather than small square ones was probably responsible for the 90°
rotation of all the originally pictographic signs of the cuneiform script (Powell 1981,
Coulmas 1989: 74–5). Ancient Egyptian scribes adopted a variety of positions from crosslegged or kneeling to standing upright. Japanese and Chinese calligraphers knelt on the
ﬂoor with the paper spread before them, while the Medieval European scribe settled into
a solid wooden chair with a table or desk to support his work. Despite his relative immobility, however, he considered his writing to be an act of endurance ‘in which’, as one
scribe mournfully wrote, ‘the whole body labours’ (Clanchy 1979: 116). And at least one
contemporary professor of linguistics would agree. It is no more true, observes Roy Harris,
to say that writing consists simply in the movements of the hand in holding a pen (or
other instrument) than it is to say that speech consists only in the movements of the vocal
tract. For ‘we speak and write with our whole body’, including the head, eyes, facial
musculature, hands, arms, and general posture (Harris 1980: 99).
Jack Goody has characterised writing as a ‘technology of the intellect’ (1977: 151), but
from the examples cited above it would seem equally appropriate to follow the lead of
Marcel Mauss (1979 [1934]), and regard it as a technique of the body. For the regular
practice of writing, like that of any other skill, leaves an indelible anatomical impression,
whether in the visible form of the scholar’s rounded shoulders or in the normally invisible architecture of the brain. Writing, as Paul Connerton has observed, is an incorporating
as well as an inscribing practice: that is, it has an ‘irreducible bodily component’, not just
in the controlled movement of the hand but in the way in which the hand together with
the tool it holds is brought into a certain angular relation with the surface of the material to be inscribed, which in turn affects the writer’s entire comportment (Connerton
1989: 76–7). Without diminishing the importance of the inscriptional aspect of writing,
we should not forget that there can be no inscription without incorporation – without,
in other words, the building of habitual patterns of posture and gesture into the bodily
modus operandi of the skilled practitioner. Just like speech, in short, writing is an achievement of the whole human organism-person in his or her environment.
To view writing as an art is to think of it, in the ﬁrst place, as a kind of dextrous
movement, and to think of the text (recalling a distinction introduced in Chapter Eighteen
(pp. 346–8)) as something woven rather than made. That is to say, the patterning or
weave of the text emerges as the crystallisation of this movement, and is not preﬁgured
as a mental construction which the writing hand merely serves to transcribe onto a surface.
This is what André Leroi-Gourhan had in mind when he referred to prehistoric inscriptions as instances of ‘graphism’, whose meaning was drawn from contexts of oral narrative
now irretrievably lost. Graphism, as Leroi-Gourhan insisted, is not representational but
the congelation, as an enduring trace, of those rhythmic bodily movements that are intrinsic
to preliterate speech (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 190). Regarded as an instance of graphism,
writing, just like mapping (see Chapter Thirteen, pp. 231–5), is inscriptive, not transcriptive. Indeed the idea that its forms and patterns are woven into the surface rather than

Skill
impressed upon it is supported by the derivation of the word ‘text’ from the Latin texere, 1
meaning ‘to weave’ (Carruthers 1990: 12). Comparably, the word for writing among the 2
Quiché Maya of Guatemala (tz’ib) comes from the stem -tz’iba, which refers to actions 3
involving ‘the creation of designs by means of weaving’ (Tedlock and Tedlock 1985: 4
124–6).
In sum, far from being conceived as the operation of a technology, writing would be 6
better understood as a graphic counterpart to speech. Since we speak, to recall Harris’s 7
point, with the whole body, and not just with the voice, the relation between speech and 8
writing is not so much between a sonic reality and its visual representation as it is between 9
the communicative bodily gesture and its graphic inscription.
HISTORY AS AN EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS: THE ILLUSION OF ORIGINS
With this point I return, at length, to Darwin, and to his idea that writing is comparable 4
to brewing or baking, conceived as a skilled practical activity rather than a technology to 5
be applied. Now for Darwin, it will be recalled, writing differed from speaking only insofar 6
as it is not grounded, as is speaking, in an ‘instinctive tendency’. In the last chapter, 7
however, I set out to demonstrate that speaking is no more or less ‘instinctive’ than writing. 8
As varieties of skilled practice, both speaking and writing emerge quite naturally in the 9
course of development, so long as the necessary support structure or ‘scaffolding’ is present 20
in the environment. Now if, as I have suggested, writing is an inscriptive counterpart to 1
speech, it must follow that any account of the evolution of speech, in the sense I have 2
proposed here, must at one and the same time be an account of the evolution of writing. 3
Hence, contrary to conventional wisdom (Sampson 1985: 13, Coulmas 1989: 3), speech 4
and writing are not separated on opposite sides of a dichotomy between human biolog- 5
ical evolution and the history of technology, but are mutually implicated in a single 6
evolutionary process.
It is this dichotomy between evolution and history, as I showed in the last chapter, 8
that sets up a point of origin at their intersection. This is where scholars have conven- 9
tionally placed the genesis of language, art, technology, religion, and all the other capacities 30
that are supposed to mark our distinctive humanity. Yet not only has the conception of 1
language enshrined in this origin story been profoundly inﬂuenced by writing, but also 2
our conception of writing has been equally profoundly shaped by the idea of technology. 3
It is, I suggest, the inherent ‘logocentrism’ of modern Western thought, its understanding 4
of practice as rule-governed execution, that renders writing as a technological system. 5
Hence it is this, too, and not writing per se, that is ultimately responsible for the reiﬁca- 6
tion of speech as language, and thus for the establishment of the whole problematic of 7
language origins. To that extent, the problematic itself has its origins in modernity. I have 8
argued here, to the contrary, that there is no point at which language could be said to 9
have originated. For language exists only in the activities of speaking and writing them- 40
selves. These activities, and the skills in which they are based, emerge through what Harvey 1
Whitehouse (1996: 113) has aptly called ‘the labours of maturation’, within ﬁelds of prac- 2
tice constituted by the activities of predecessors. And as each generation, through its 3
activities, contributes to the conditions of maturation of the next, they continue to evolve. 4
It is, to conclude, fundamentally wrong to populate the past with people like ourselves, 5
equipped with the capacities or potentials to do everything we do today, such that history 6
becomes nothing more than the teleological process of their progressive realisation. The 7
notion of an origin, deﬁned as the point at which these capacities became established, 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 405 •

awaiting their historical fulﬁlment, is part of an elaborate ideological justiﬁcation for the
present order of things and, as such, an aspect of the pervasive presentism of modern
thought. I have shown that the capacity to speak (or write) is inseparable from the capacity
to speak (or write) in this way or that. We would not say, I think, that all human beings
have evolved with the innate capacity to play musical instruments, and that this is distinct
from the capacity to play the violin, the trumpet or the oboe. Likewise, it makes no sense
to distinguish a universal capacity for language or speech from the ability to speak English,
Japanese or Swahili. Speech is a dynamic phenomenon, and its forms change through
history. As it does so, capacities evolve. They are still evolving. Language has not originated yet, and it never will.

Skill
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, neo-Darwinian biology, cognitive science and psycholinguists have 5
conspired to produce an extremely powerful approach to understanding the relations, in 6
human evolution, between technology, language and intelligence. It is argued that linguistic 7
and intellectual capacities, common to all human beings, are built-in properties of a mind 8
whose basic architecture has evolved through a process of variation under natural selec- 9
tion. Remaining issues for debate concern whether the selective pressures guiding the 20
evolution of these capacities lay in the social domain of the relations among conspeciﬁcs 1
or in the technical domain of adaptation to the non-human environment, and whether – 2
or at what point in either ontogeny or phylogeny – technical capacities are dissociated 3
from linguistic ones. What is the difference, it is asked, between the kinds of mental 4
constructional tasks involved in toolmaking and tool-using, on the one hand, and speaking, 5
on the other? To what extent does the performance of these tasks call upon similar or 6
even identical neurophysiological mechanisms?
As a social anthropologist, perched precariously on a narrow ledge while buffeted 8
by contrary winds from the humanities and the natural sciences, I view these debates 9
with increasing unease. I am disturbed by their apparent disregard of the intellectual 30
ferment that has accompanied the contemporary critique of modernism, by the commit- 1
ment of those involved to a version of ‘normal science’ that brooks no challenge to 2
fundamental paradigmatic assumptions, and by their readiness to frame their various, 3
competing accounts – of the entire career of humanity from earliest origins to the present 4
day – in terms of concepts that, like the disciplines to which they belong, are recent 5
products of a very speciﬁc history in the Western world. These concepts, as we have 6
already seen (Chapter Sixteen, p. 312), are grounded in a general claim to the supremacy 7
of human reason – a claim that is perhaps the deﬁning feature of the discourse of moder- 8
nity. Thus intelligence is the faculty of reason, language its vehicle, and technology the 9
means by which a rational understanding of the external world is turned to account for 40
human beneﬁt.
I would like to propose a radically alternative claim: namely, that there is no such thing 2
as technology, or language, or intelligence, at least in pre-modern or non-Western societies. 3
By that I do not for one moment mean to suggest that people in such societies do not make 4
common use of tools in their everyday activities, that they do not engage with one another 5
in the verbal idioms of speech, or that these and other activities do not represent creative 6
ways of coping in the world. My concern is rather to focus attention on what it means 7
to say that everyday tool-using is a behavioural instantiation of technology, or that spoken 118

Chapter Twenty-three

The poetics of tool use

From technology, language and intelligence
to craft, song and imagination

The poetics of tool use • 407 •

dialogue is the instantiation of language, or that creative activity is the instantiation of intelligence. Even in our own society, in which these propositions form a part of received wisdom, they are not immediately or obviously borne out in experience.1
For example, I am presently writing with a pen, I am wearing spectacles which help
me to see, I carry on my wrist a watch which tells me the time, a chair and table provide
supports respectively for my body and my work, and I am surrounded by innumerable
other bits and pieces that come in handy for one thing and another. I incorporate these
diverse objects into the current of my activity without attending to them as such: I concentrate on my writing, not the pen; I see the time, not my watch. Indeed it could be said
that these and other instruments become truly available to me, as things I can use without
difﬁculty or interruption, at the point at which they effectively vanish as objects of my
attention. And if anything links them together, it is only that they are brought into the
same current, that of my work. Drawing an explicit parallel with tool-use, Wittgenstein
made much the same point about the use of words in speech (1953, §11): different words
have different uses, just as do the pen, watch and spectacles; one normally attends not to
the words themselves but to what the speaker is telling us with them, and they are bound
together solely by virtue of the fact that the various situations of use are all embedded
within a total pattern of verbal and non-verbal activity, a form of life.
There are, then, words, and activities that people do with words (i.e. speaking). And
there are tools, and activities that people do with tools (i.e. tool-using). But is there
language? Or technology? What is entailed in the assumption that for people to speak
they must ﬁrst ‘have’ language, or for people to use tools they must ﬁrst ‘have’ technology
– or indeed for people to engage in intelligent activities of any kind they must ﬁrst ‘have’
intelligence? If, on the other hand, we drop the assumption, what further need do we
have of these concepts? Suppose, to pursue my alternative claim, that we set ourselves the
task of examining the relation, in human evolution, not between technology, language
and intelligence, but between craftsmanship, song and imagination. The resulting account,
I suspect, would be very different. Without prejudging the issue of which is the better
conceptual frame, I shall attempt in what follows to indicate where some of the differences might lie. I begin with language and song.

LANGUAGE, MUSIC AND SONG
In the voice, human beings are equipped with a wonderfully expressive and versatile instrument. We use it to speak, and we use it to sing. But how, if at all, can we distinguish
speaking from singing? In the modern conception the answer is simple: speaking is essentially linguistic, singing is essentially musical. Of course, speech may be present in the
song, in the words that accompany the music – thus the song may be conceived as it is
written on paper, in two registers proceeding in parallel: the musical sequence written as
a series of notes, and the linguistic sequence as a concurrent series of words. So what is
the difference between these two sequences, between the melodic line and the syntagmatic
chain? One possible answer, to which I have already alluded in Chapter Fourteen
(pp. 247–8), is that the former is immanent in the stream of sound, whereas the latter
lies in some sense behind the sound. To listen to music is to dwell in a world of sound,
which permeates our entire awareness. When we listen to speech, however, it is as though
our awareness reaches through the sound to a world of words beyond – a world that is
as silent as the book, where there are no sounds as such but only images of sound. What
happens, then, when we listen to song?

Skill
‘When words and music come together in song’, writes Susanne Langer, ‘music swal- 1
lows words’ (1953: 152). Her point is that the sounds of speech, to the extent that they 2
are incorporated into a total musical phenomenon, cease to draw the listener’s attention 3
to meanings beyond themselves – meanings that, in speech, the sounds had served 4
only to convey or deliver up to the listener rather than actually to embody. For Langer, 5
sound that does not convey meaning in this sense is no longer verbal sound. Thus what 6
essentially distinguishes verbal sound is that its signiﬁcance can be extracted from the 7
sound itself. Musical sound, by contrast, delineates its own meaning: it is meaningful not 8
because of what it represents, but simply because of its affective presence in the listener’s 9
environment. If this were so, then speech is what you would be left with if you took the 10
music out of song, and music is what you would be left with if the verbal component of 1
song were swallowed up in its entirety, while poetry lies ambiguously, somewhere in 2
between: more verbal than song, and yet more musical than speech. Thus in poetry we 3
stretch words beyond the limits of normal utterance so that, in their sounding, they become 4
expressive in themselves.
The very idea of a ‘coming together’ of words and music, however, presupposes their 6
original separation. To produce a song, it seems, we have to combine two things that are 7
initially distinct, music and language. But on what grounds do we assume this distinction? 8
Could we not, equally well, put the argument in reverse, and suggest that music and 9
language, as separate symbolic registers, are the products of a movement of analytic decom- 20
position of what was once an indivisible expressive totality, namely song? To support such 1
a reverse argument, we would need to be able to demonstrate that the difference between 2
speech and melodic gesture is one of degree rather than kind, that to speak is indeed – in 3
a sense – to sing, and hence that no absolute line can be drawn between them.2
The issue here largely hinges on the question of how words acquire meaning. The 5
orthodox view has it that words refer to concepts. And concepts are the building blocks 6
of comprehensive mental representations. At once there is presupposed a division between 7
a subject, in whose mind these representations are to be found, and an objective world 8
‘out there’. Meaning is in the mind, not in the world – it is assigned to the world by the 9
subject. As I move around physically in the world, and advance through time, I carry my 30
concepts with me – rather as I might carry a map in navigating the landscape (see Chapter 1
Thirteen pp. 223–4). In different times and places I experience different sensations, but 2
like the map, the system of concepts which organizes these sensations into meaningful 3
patterns remains the same, regardless of where I stand. But if the world exists for me only 4
as I have thus constructed it from the data of perception, how can it be shared? How can 5
subjects inhabit a common world of meaning?
Again, the orthodox account argues that meanings are shared through verbal commu- 7
nication. Thus, my pre-prepared thought or belief has to be ‘encoded’ in words, which 8
are then ‘sent’ in the medium of sound, writing or gesture to a recipient who, having 9
performed a reverse operation of decoding, ﬁnishes up with the original thought success- 40
fully transplanted into his mind. Of course every act of communication takes place in a 1
context, involving a particular speaker and a particular listener (or listeners) in a given 2
environmental setting. But since words refer to abstract concepts rather than real-world 3
objects, the relation of signiﬁcation (between word and concept) is itself context- 4
independent. The logic of this account therefore entails that signs can achieve the status 5
of words, that is they become properly ‘linguistic’, only at the end point of a process of 6
decontextualisation. At this point, the sign severs all connection with the external world, 7
such that the relation between sign and meaning is wholly interior to the subject.

The poetics of tool use • 409 •

Not only must this relation of signiﬁcation be context-free, it must also be conventional. Agreement on the conventional meanings of words is clearly a condition for the
faithful transcription of ideas from one mind to another, according to the model of
communication presented above. Such conventions, moreover, are presumed to be arbitrary
– again on the grounds of the severing of iconic links between verbal signs and the
properties of the exterior world. Linguists are fond of reminding us, naïve speakers all,
that one word is as good as another for signifying the same concept, so long as the pattern
of phonemic contrast that serves to set each word off from each and every other in the
language is retained. To me it may seem that a quality of hardness is presented in
the very utterance of the word ‘hard’, just as it is presented in a passage of music played
staccato. And likewise, the word ‘smooth’ sounds smooth, as does the same passage
played legato. But that, says the linguist, is an illusion born of the frequent association,
in experience, of words and their ‘real-world’ denotata. To clinch the argument, he points
to the sheer diversity of natural languages, to the fact that the different words – say – for
‘dog’, in these different languages, may bear not the slightest resemblance to one another,
nor indeed to the real-world animal of that name.
Perhaps it is time for naïve speakers to put linguists in their place. For what the former
can provide, which the latter cannot, is the perspective of a being who, quite unlike the
dislocated, closed-in subject confronting an external reality, is wholly immersed, from the
start, in the relational context of dwelling in a world. For such a being, this world is already
laden with signiﬁcance: meaning inheres in the relations between the dweller and the
constituents of the dwelt-in world. And to the extent that people dwell in the same world,
and are caught up together in the same currents of activity, they can share in the same
meanings. Such communion of experience, the awareness of living in a common world of
meaningful relations, establishes a foundational level of sociality which exists – in Pierre
Bourdieu’s (1977: 2) phrase – ‘on the hither side of words and concepts’, and that constitutes the baseline on which all attempts at verbal communication must subsequently
build. For although it is indisputable that verbal conventions are deployed in speech, such
conventions do not come ready made. They are forever being built up over time, through a
cumulative history of past usage: each is a hard-won product of the hazardous efforts
of generations of predecessors to make themselves understood. When we speak of the
conventional meaning of a word, that history is simply presupposed or, as it were, ‘put in
brackets’, taken as read. And so we are inclined to think of use as founded on convention
when, in reality, convention can only be established and held in place through use. Thus
to understand how words acquire meaning we have to place them back into that original
current of sociality, into the speciﬁc contexts of activities and relations in which they are
used and to which they contribute. We then realize that, far from deriving their meanings
from their attachment to mental concepts which are imposed upon a meaningless world
of entities and events ‘out there’, words gather their meanings from the relational properties of
the world itself. Every word is a compressed and compacted history.3
Armed with this ‘dwelling perspective’, how should we view the difference between the
spoken word and the musical gesture? It is no longer possible to argue that the former
carries a conventional meaning that can be detached from the sound whereas the latter
embodies its meaning in itself. We should rather argue that in words, the process of sedimentation and compression of past usage which contributes to the determination of their
current sense has advanced to an exceedingly high degree, whereas in melody it is still
incipient. But this is a difference of degree rather than kind, one that has perhaps been
stretched to its maximal extent in the West by virtue of a cultural emphasis on the novelty

Skill
of music as against the conventionality of language. One cannot expect the difference to 1
be everywhere, and at all times, to be so clearcut. For all music, viewed in this light, is 2
on its way to becoming speech, and there is no Rubicon beyond which we can say that 3
it is unequivocally one thing rather than the other. Conversely, all speech has its origins 4
in vocal music, that is in song. As Merleau-Ponty put it, once we put speech back into 5
the current of intercourse from which it necessarily springs, ‘it would then be found that 6
the words, vowels and phonemes are so many ways of “singing” the world’ (1962: 187) 7
– not, it should be stressed, in the naïve sense of producing an onomatopoeic resemblance 8
between particular sounds and particular aspects of the world, but in the sense of entering 9
intentionally and expressively into it, of ‘living’ it.
EMOTION AND REASON
The decomposition of song into the two ‘compartments’ of language and music has come 4
about, I believe, through the assimilation of vocal gesture to a particular view of the human 5
constitution, one that has long held a central place in Western thought, and that reached 6
its apotheosis in the rationalism of Descartes. According to this view, every human being 7
is a composite creature made up of body and mind, susceptible, on the one hand, to 8
emotions and feelings (bodily sensations), but capable, on the other, of rational delibera- 9
tion (mental operations). Thus the musical phrase is envisaged as a feeling shaped in 20
sound, the verbal utterance as the representation of a thought. One is visceral, the other 1
cerebral; one is experienced directly, the other presupposes a mental processing of received 2
sound to extract the ‘message’. In music (and more obviously still in dance) the body 3
resonates with the world, in language one mind communicates with another. Music, assumed 4
to be devoid of propositional content, is placed on the ‘purely expressive’ side of human 5
existence; language is placed on the ‘purely rational’ side – all expressive aspects of speech 6
being removed from language itself and assigned to contingent aspects of performance. 7
Moreover, the rational is normally ranked above the expressive, as an index of ‘higher’ 8
cognitive faculties that enable their possessors to step outside the world and – from this 9
decentred vantage point – to take a cool, dispassionate view of it.
Such, of course, is the professed aim of natural science. Since the ascendancy of reason 1
over emotion is implicated in science’s claim to deliver an objective account of the natural 2
world, it comes as no surprise to ﬁnd the same principle of ranking at the basis of scien- 3
tiﬁc accounts of the evolution of language – for it is surely language that enables humans 4
to be scientists. Early formulations of the gestural theory of language origins, for example, 5
rested on claims that the vocalisations of non-human primates (and by imputation, those 6
of early hominids) were purely emotional or affective, and were therefore unlikely candi- 7
dates as precursors for linguistic communication, whose key property was taken 8
to be the conveyance of propositional information. Neurophysiologists, for their part, 9
claimed to ﬁnd empirical proof of the existence of a dichotomy between volitional and emo- 40
tional behaviours and body movements, and proceeded to map these onto different regions 1
of the brain (Myers 1976). Language was unequivocally ascribed to the former category of 2
behaviour: thus Ronald Myers could assert that ‘the use of words in verbal communications 3
is clearly volitional’. What, then, are we to make of those words that are uttered without 4
deliberate, prior intent? Myers is at least dimly aware of the problem. He continues:
The existence of a second type of use of the voice, i.e. in emotional expression, remains 7
uncertain, and its neurology poorly deﬁned. Indeed the neurologist, when confronted 118

The poetics of tool use • 411 •

with the proposition of an emotional use of the voice, inevitably thinks of curse words
or interjections.
(1976: 746)
The implication is that what are rather primly called ‘curse words’ do not really merit inclusion within the domain of language at all! Language proper comes to be marked
out, through the exclusion of all vocal expression of emotion, as a realm of propositional
statements delivered completely free from emotional or affective overtones. Gordon Hewes
suggests an example: ‘The message “the house is on ﬁre” can, if need be, be conveyed with
no more excitement than the information that Paris is a city in France’ (Hewes 1976: 490).
This may be so. Yet in practice, anyone who says ‘the house is on ﬁre’ does so in a
context, and in a tone of voice that may vary from a level monotone to a high-pitched
shout. In the context of utterance the former tone is as expressive of indifference as is the
latter of urgency or anguish, and each is liable to evoke a quite different response on the
part of the audience, from a detached contemplation of the conﬂagration to a rush to
evacuate the building. How, then, can these possibly be regarded as alternative renderings
of the same proposition? Only by abstracting the verbal phrase from its context, by treating
it as though – like words printed, as they appear here, on paper – it had a separate existence of its own. In reality, regardless of whether I utter the words with excitement or
indifference, or of whether or not I have already rehearsed my speech beforehand in
thought, my speaking is an intentional act which can only artiﬁcially be broken down
into propositional and expressive components. And the same, of course, goes for the utterance of a swearword, which may indeed be no more premeditated than my cry, ‘the house
is on ﬁre’, but which nevertheless launches my intention into the world and carries it
forward towards its goal.
In short, whether I speak, swear, shout, cry or sing, I do so with feeling, but feeling –
as the tactile metaphor implies – is a mode of active and responsive engagement in the
world, it is not a passive, interior reaction of the organism to external disturbance (see
Chapter One, pp. 23–4). We ‘feel’ each other’s presence in verbal discourse as the craftsman feels, with his tools, the material on which he works; and as with the craftsman’s
handling of tools, so is our handling of words sensitive to the nuances of our relationships with the felt environment. Thus, far from characterising mutually exclusive categories
of behaviour – namely ‘volitional’ and ‘emotional’ – intentionality and feeling are two
sides of the same coin, that of our practical involvement in the dwelt-in world. Only by
imagining the human organism to be an isolated, preconstituted entity, given in advance
of its external relations, do we come to regard feeling as an inner, affective state that is
‘triggered’ by incoming sensations. And by the same token, we are led to recover the
intentional (or ‘volitional’) character of speech by supposing that what makes it so is that
it does not arise in reaction to external stimulus but is rather caused by an internal mental
representation – by a thought, belief or proposition pressing to make itself heard (Chomsky
1968: 10–11).
What, then, is language? Or more precisely, how do we come to have the idea that
such a thing as language exists, and that it therefore has an evolution that we can attempt
to describe and explain? One answer might be that the idea is a by-product of the process
of ‘interiorisation’ of personhood that has marked the emergence of the modern Western
concept of the individual (Mauss 1985, Dumont 1986). It is this concept that leads us
to look within the human being, rather than to the sphere of its involvement in a wider
ﬁeld of relations, to discover the ultimate, generative source of purposive action. Thus

Skill
every individual, as we saw in the last chapter, is supposed to come independently equipped 1
with a ‘built-in’ language capacity (or at least a device for its acquisition), located some- 2
where inside the brain, which is the generative source of speech. Another possible answer, 3
related to the ﬁrst, is that the idea of language is necessarily entailed by a rationalism that 4
is unable to conceive of action except as the mechanical replication, in a physical medium, 5
of assemblies already constructed in thought. To language, then, is accorded the respon- 6
sibility for constructing those assemblies, namely sentences, which are merely executed in 7
speech. Yet a third answer might be that the idea of language is a ‘fetish of linguists’ 8
(Goodman 1971: 34) who have sought to model the activities of speaking as the 9
application of a coherent system of syntactic and semantic rules, derived by abstraction 10
from observed behaviour. To be able to do this, they have to stand back from the current 1
of discourse, focusing on speech as speech whilst the rest of us concentrate on what other 2
people are telling us in their speech. But they have gone on to transfer, onto the speakers 3
themselves, their own external relationship to the object of study, imagining the abstrac- 4
tions derived from this ‘view from the outside’ to be implanted within the speakers’ minds 5
and to constitute the essence of their competence. Hence, speaking is seen to consist in 6
the implementation of linguistic rules. Inside the head of every speaker there appears a 7
miniature linguist.4
Irrespective of which of the three answers presented above we might favour, the idea 9
of language is a relatively recent one in the annals of human history. Yet it has had a 20
profound impact, not only on the way we interpret our own activities of speaking, but 1
also on those activities themselves. I have already shown, in the previous chapter, how 2
the explicit codiﬁcation of lexical conventions and grammatical rules sets standards of 3
correctness which may – to varying degrees – be emulated or enforced. This institution- 4
alisation of language is reﬂected in systems of education. Children not only learn to speak, 5
as they have always and everywhere done, through immersion in an environment of vocally 6
accomplished caregivers, they also receive formal schooling in the principles of language, 7
as formulated by those appointed by society to act as its guardians – the grammarians 8
and dictionary-makers. Above all, they are taught to write. The inﬂuence of writing on 9
modern ideas and practices of language cannot be overestimated (Harris 1980: 6). For 30
writing is not simply the equivalent of speech in an alternative medium. It is rather a 1
kind of reconstructed, as if speech: as if the verbal utterance were fully amenable to system- 2
atic analysis in terms of syntactical rules; as if the tone of voice and pronunciation 3
were entirely dispensable to meaning; as if the utterance had an autonomous existence, 4
independently of the context of its production.
None of these things are actually true of speech, except perhaps for some kinds of 6
‘reading aloud’. Yet modern linguistics has operated largely on the assumption that they 7
are. Thus it turns out that the prototypical instance of the linguistic utterance, a rule- 8
governed, context-independent proposition delivered without expression or affect, is that 9
artefact so familiar to us but unknown to non-literate societies: the sentence of writing. 40
Every theory of language evolution that holds up this prototype as its point of culmina- 1
tion, as the exemplar of a fully evolved language capacity, has an inbuilt ‘scriptist’ bias, 2
treating speech that emulates or imitates writing as more perfect than speech that does 3
not, and regarding the latter’s deviations from the ideal as imperfections or errors. It is 4
no wonder that in modern society, where the practices of speech have come to be modelled 5
on writing and where speakers are taught to observe a rationalised system of rules and 6
conventions (that is, to apply language), it has fallen to a specialised branch of verbal 7
craft, namely poetry, to attempt to make up for the resulting expressive and aesthetic 118

The poetics of tool use • 413 •

impoverishment by producing forms which – whilst approaching the rhythmic and tonal
patterns of music – are lexically and syntactically aberrant. But as Alfred Gell has argued,
in a brilliant analysis of the vocal artistry of the Umeda, a society of Papua New Guinea,
for a non-literate people whose speech has retained its expressive, song-like quality, unexpurgated by the rationalizations of the language-makers, all speaking is inherently poetic.
‘What need of poets then?’ (Gell 1979: 61).5

TECHNOLOGY, ART AND CRAFTSMANSHIP
I have argued that song, far from being put together from separate linguistic and musical
components, is rather an expressive unity that is decomposed into these components
through the imposition of a concept of language of recent, Western origin. Exactly the
same argument can be made for the kind of skilled, technical artistry that I denote
by the term ‘craftsmanship’. For the concept of technology recasts the technical skills of
the craftsman in terms of an objective system of rational principles, a logos, in just the
same way that the idea of language recasts the verbal art of speaking in terms of the rules
of grammar (see Chapter Fifteen, pp. 294–5). And as practice comes to be seen as the
mechanical application of technological rules, so its expressive, aesthetic aspects are
consigned to a separate domain of ‘art’ – a concept once synonymous with technical skill
but whose meaning is now constituted by its opposition to technology on precisely the
same grounds that music, in the modern conception, is constituted by its opposition to
language (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 349–51).
In a technologically literate society, tool-using is assimilated to the operation of artiﬁcial systems, much as speaking is assimilated to writing. Hence the prototypical tool appears
as the mechanical gadget which embodies in its own construction the principles of its
operation. As an antidote to the scriptist bias of formal linguistics, I have suggested
(following Merleau-Ponty) that we regard speech as a species of song. To follow up this
suggestion into the analogous ﬁeld of tool-use, I propose that we consider, as a prototypical instance, the kind of tool-using that comes closest of all to song – that is, playing
a musical instrument. For if to speak is to sing, then surely to use a tool is to play. Since,
as every anthropologist knows, it is helpful to be able to draw on ﬁrst-hand experience,
I shall consider the example of playing the ’cello. As a reasonably proﬁcient ’cellist, my
experience is that when I sit down to play everything falls naturally into place – the bow
in my hand, the body of the instrument between my knees – so that I can launch myself
directly, and with the whole of my being, into the music. I dive in, like a swimmer into
water, and lose myself in the surrounding ambience of sound.
This is not to say that I cease to be aware, or that my playing becomes simply mechanical or automatic: quite the contrary, I experience a heightened sense of awareness, but
that awareness is not of my playing, it is my playing. Just as with speech or song, the
performance embodies both intentionality and feeling. But the intention is carried forward
in the activity itself, it does not consist in an internal mental representation formed
in advance and lined up for instrumentally assisted, bodily execution. And the feeling,
likewise, is not an index of some inner, emotional state, for it inheres in my very
gestures, in the pressure of my bow against the strings, in the vibrato of my left hand.
In short, to play is itself to feel, so that in playing, I put feeling into the music. It makes
no more sense, then, to split off a rational-technical component from the (residually)
expressive component of playing a musical instrument than it does to split off a
propositional component from the expressive component of speech or song.

Skill
I do not claim, of course, that all of what I have described above happens spontan- 1
eously, without preparation or rehearsal. A great deal of practice is required, and there 2
are puzzles to be solved. To get around awkward passages, complex conﬁgurations of 3
ﬁngering and hand position have to be worked out in advance, and bowing movements 4
have to be planned so that at the end of one phrase the bow is in the right place on the 5
strings for the beginning of the next. At such times, as also when something goes wrong 6
in the performance, one becomes painfully aware both of oneself and of the instrument, 7
and of the distance that separates them. The instrument is felt to be obdurate or resis- 8
tant; it sticks. My point, however, is that this opposition between player and instrument 9
is collapsed in the instant when the former begins actually to play. In that instant, the 10
boundaries between the player, the instrument and the acoustic environment appear to 1
dissolve.
Lest my choice of example may seem to force the issue – for in playing a musical 3
instrument one does not achieve any direct, practical effect beyond the rapidly fading 4
tapestry of sound – let me suggest another instance of tool-use, again drawn from my 5
own experience, this time of anthropological ﬁeldwork among reindeer herdsmen 6
in northern Finland. The tool I have in mind is the lasso, and the herdsman uses it to 7
capture selected deer from the throng of animals circulating in the round-up enclosure 8
(Ingold 1993b). In construction, the lasso is extremely simple: no more than a length of 9
rope with a sliding toggle. When not in use it hangs limply in a coil from the hand, or 20
trails loose on the ground. Yet in the moment of being cast, it assumes the lively form 1
of a ﬂying noose, a form which never stands still even for a single instant. Like the musical 2
phrase shaped in sound, the form hangs suspended in the current of action. Thus, working 3
a lasso, like playing a musical instrument, is pure movement or ﬂow, and everything that 4
I have said applies to the latter applies to the former as well. It involves an embodied 5
skill, acquired through much practice. It carries forward an intention, but at the same 6
time is continually responsive to an ever-changing situation. Just as, with the orchestral 7
’cellist, the processes of his visual attention to the conductor and his manual handling of 8
the instrument are indissociable aspects of one ongoing process of action, so also the 9
herdsman’s handling of the lasso is inseparable from his attention to the movements of 30
the herd in the enclosure. The attentive quality of the action is equivalent to what, in 1
relation to musical performance, I have called ‘feeling’: to play is to feel; to act is to 2
attend. The agent’s attention, in other words, is fully absorbed in the action. Yet things 3
can go wrong in the roundup, as they can in performance: the lasso can miss its mark, 4
ropes can become entangled, the efforts of other herdsmen working in the enclosure may 5
be disrupted, animals can even be injured. The frustrated herdsman then becomes an 6
object of embarrassed self-regard, not to mention abuse from his fellows (I speak from 7
experience). The ﬂow is broken, and one has to begin all over again.
COGNITION AND PRACTICE
So much for the view of the naïve, yet reasonably skilled practitioner. Enter now the 2
cognitive scientist, who claims that where tools are used, there must be a technology – a 3
theory of how the tools are to be operated – lodged, albeit unbeknown to its possessors, 4
inside their heads. The claim is, of course, parallel to that of the linguist who assumes 5
that the ‘languages’ of non-literate peoples exist fully-formed in the minds of speakers, 6
merely awaiting explicit formulation. One wonders, then, what such a logos of ’cello- 7
playing or lasso-throwing would look like. It would consist, presumably, in a set of formal 118

The poetics of tool use • 415 •

rules or algorithms capable of combining elementary motor schemata into complex,
patterned sequences which, precisely executed, should produce instrumental gestures appropriate to any given context. The task of representing the technique of ’cello-playing or
lasso-throwing in such formal terms would likely be an inﬁnite one, but even supposing
it were possible, would an imaginary creature, programmed with this knowledge, and
provided with the requisite material equipment, be able to function remotely like a skilled
practitioner?
The answer, I believe, is that it would not. It would produce, rather, a sort of ‘as if ’
action, as if what in reality is a continuous ﬂow could be reconstructed in the form of
countless steps, each the mechanical execution of a pre-established plan or assembly –
analogous to the sentence of language (Bourdieu 1977: 73, Ingold 1986b: 209–10). It is
as though the quality of attention that, as we have seen, inheres in the skilled practitioner’s conduct were to be withdrawn from the conduct itself and concentrated in the
operation of a mental constructional device (an ‘intelligence’), which, on the basis of a
processing of sensory inputs, is supposed to generate plans and place them ‘on line’ for
execution. Thus thought becomes active, action passive. In essence, the ‘as if ’ actor and
the skilled practitioner employ different kinds of intentionality. The ﬁrst is the kind
entailed in orthodox Cartesian accounts of volitional behaviour, in which to have an intention is to preﬁx that behaviour with a thought, plan or mental representation which it
serves to deliver. The second is a kind of intentionality that is launched and carried forward
in the action itself, and corresponds to the attentive quality of that action. It is the intentionality not of an isolated mind, of the cogitating subject confronting an exterior world
of things, but rather that of a being wholly immersed in the relational nexus of its instrumental ‘coping’ in the world.
There is a certain (though as we shall see, inexact) parallel between the ‘as if ’ actor
and the inexperienced novice, and they fail for the same reason. Every act has to be
thought out in advance, and once embarked upon, it cannot be changed without further
deliberation which, in turn, interrupts the action. Attention precedes response, introducing
a time lag which would make anything like orchestral playing or capturing reindeer with
lassos completely impossible. The skilled practitioner, by contrast, is able continually to
attune his movements to perturbations in the perceived environment without ever interrupting the ﬂow of action, since that action is itself a process of attention. Skilled practice
cannot, therefore, be understood as the application of objective knowledge in the form of
an ‘expert system’, as though it followed the steps of (say) a ’cello-playing or lasso-throwing
programme. This is not to deny that complex neurophysiological processes are involved,
which operate on sensory inputs and yield appropriate motor responses. But it is to suggest
that whatever goes on in the brain of the practitioner cannot be modelled as entailing
anything analogous to mental rules and representations (Dreyfus 1991: 219). It is, of
course, entirely tautologous to model neurological processes in this way and then, inverting
the relation between model and reality, to claim that neurology provides independent
conﬁrmation for the existence of mental representations.
The novice becomes skilled not through the acquisition of rules and representations,
but at the point where he or she is able to dispense with them. They are like the map
of an unfamiliar territory, which can be discarded once you have learned to attend to
features of the landscape, and can place yourself in relation to them. The map can be a
help in beginning to know the country, but the aim is to learn the country, not the map.
Similarly, the ’cello-teacher may place marks on the ﬁngerboard to show the novice where
to put his ﬁngers in order to obtain different notes. The novice is thereby enabled to feel

Skill
for himself the particular muscular tensions in the left hand, and to hear the resulting 1
intervals of pitch. Having learned to attend to these things, his ﬁngers will ﬁnd their own 2
place (he can now play in tune), and the marks, which serve no further purpose, can be 3
removed. The same applies to any other branch of apprenticeship in which the learner is 4
placed, with the requisite equipment, in a practical situation, and is told to pay attention 5
to how ‘this’ feels, or how ‘that’ looks or sounds – to notice those subtleties of texture 6
that are all-important to good judgement and the successful practice of a craft. That one 7
learns to touch, to see and to hear is obvious to any craftsman or musician. As Gibson 8
succinctly put it, learning is an ‘education of attention’ (1979: 254).
This kind of learning exempliﬁes what Lave (1990: 310) has called ‘understanding in 10
practice’, to which she counterposes ‘the culture of acquisition’. The latter phrase denotes 1
the theory of learning long favoured by cognitive science (and by Western educational 2
institutions), according to which effective action in the world depends on the practitioner’s 3
ﬁrst having acquired a body of knowledge in the form of rules and schemata for constructing 4
it. Learning, the process of acquisition, is thus separated from doing, the application of 5
acquired knowledge. It is implied, moreover, that a body of context-free, propositional 6
knowledge – namely a technology or, more generally, a culture – actually exists as such 7
and is available for transmission by teaching outside the context of use. Learning, in this 8
view, entails an internalisation of collective representations or, in a word, enculturation. 9
‘Understanding in practice’, by contrast, is a process of enskilment, in which learning is 20
inseparable from doing, and in which both are embedded in the context of a practical 1
engagement in the world – that is, in dwelling. According to this theory of learning, the 2
kind of know-how thus gained, ‘constituted in the settings of practice, based on rich 3
expectations generated over time about its shape, is the site of the most powerful knowl- 4
edgeability of people in the lived-in world’ (Lave 1990: 323).
By and large, discussions of the relationship between tool-using and speech have adopted 6
the unequivocally ‘logocentric’ perspective of cognitive science and structural linguistics, 7
whose ontological baseline postulates a rational subject positioned vis-à-vis an objective 8
world. The aim has then been to demonstrate a parallel, overlap or even identity between 9
cognitive structures involved in generating representations, on the one hand, of object 30
assemblies (for execution as tool-using behaviour), and on the other, of word assemblies 1
(for execution as speech). The former are glossed as ‘technology’, the latter as ‘language’. 2
The argument sketched above, however, suggests the possibility of a diametrically opposed 3
approach, which takes as its ontological starting point the inescapable condition of human 4
beings’ engagement in the world, and that foregrounds the performative and poetic aspects 5
of speech and tool-use that have been marginalised by rationalism. From the vantage point 6
of this approach, the relationship between tool-using and speech, far from being the surface 7
manifestation of a more fundamental deep-structural connection between technology and 8
language, is really one between the vocal artistry of speech and song, and the technical 9
artistry of craftsmanship. Moreover, I have found no absolute line of demarcation between 40
speech and song, nor between singing with the voice and ‘singing’ with an instrument 1
(as, for example, in ’cello-playing), nor between the latter and other forms of tool-assisted, 2
skilled artistry even of a thoroughly practical, subsistence-oriented kind. One thinks, for 3
example, of the harvester at work (see Chapter Eleven, p. 207), swinging his scythe in a 4
constant, rhythmic, dancelike movement and singing as he does so: that, to my mind, is 5
the archetypal situation of human tool-use, not the puzzle-solving scenarios beloved of 6
cognitive psychologists.

The poetics of tool use • 417 •

INTELLIGENCE AND IMAGINATION
Human beings do, of course, solve puzzles: witness the chess-player devising a strategy of
future moves, or the ’cellist working out the ﬁngering for a difﬁcult passage. How, from
the point of view of a dwelling perspective, is this kind of puzzle-solving to be understood? And how would our account differ from the rationalist argument that regards every
solution as the output of a cognitive device, an intelligence, located somewhere within
the organism? This latter argument, as we have seen, sets out from the postulate of an
original detachment of the intelligent subject, who has then to construct (or reconstruct)
the world in his or her mind, prior to bodily engagement with it. The direction in which
we proceed is precisely the reverse: postulating an original condition of engagement, of
being-in-the-world, we suppose that the practitioner has then to detach himself from the
current of his activity in order to reﬂect upon it. Only having achieved such a stance of
contemplative detachment can he begin to ask such questions as (of an object) ‘What can
this be for?’ or (of a word) ‘What might this mean?’ In answering them, he may suppose
himself to be contributing meaning or value to an external world that, in itself, is devoid
of signiﬁcance, that is merely there for people to do with it what they will. There are,
after all, many things you can do with a stone, and if, in response to my own or another’s
query, I say of that stone that it is a ‘missile’, am I not contributing my own subjective
meaning to an otherwise meaningless, occurrent object?
A being who is dwelling in the world, however, does not encounter stones. He encounters missiles, anvils, axes or whatever, depending on the project in which he is currently
engaged. They are available for him to use in much the same way as are the mouth, hands
and feet. In the game of football, we use the feet for running and kicking; we do not,
however, consider feet as feet (that is, as occurrent anatomical structures) and wonder
what to do with them. Such may be the view of the cobbler or chiropodist, but he is
playing a different game! As I have already shown in discussing the issue of how words
acquire signiﬁcance, meaning already inheres in the relational properties of the dwelt-in
world. In order to release or ‘free up’ the qualities of objects in themselves, this original
meaning has to be stripped away, reducing the ‘available’ to the ‘occurrent’.6 This is done
by distancing ourselves from, or stepping outside, the activities in which the usefulness of
these objects resides. Only by virtue of such dissociation do we come to confront the
spectre of a meaningless environment, the kind of objective world ‘out there’ that, in the
discourse of Western science, goes by the name of nature. Taking nature as a datum of
existence, we may then see ourselves as dealing with it by appropriating it symbolically,
by attaching cultural signiﬁcance to its occurrent properties. In so doing, we attempt to
recover the meaning that is initially lost through our disengagement from the current of
practical action.
What, then, are we doing when we step outside of this current? Or to rephrase the
question: what kind of activity does not involve a palpable engagement in the world? The
answer is that it is activity of the special kind we call imagining. This is what the chessplayer is up to when, sitting apparently immobile and without touching the pieces on the
board, he nevertheless proceeds to work out a strategy. Now there are three points I wish
to make about this kind of activity. The ﬁrst is that imagining is an activity: it is something people do. And as an activity it carries forward an intentionality, a quality of attention
that is embodied in the activity itself. Were it otherwise, were every instance of planning
supposed to be preﬁxed by a prior intention in the form of a plan, we would at once be
led into the absurdity of an inﬁnite regress (Ingold 1986b: 312–13). We have already

Skill
seen that skilled practice cannot be understood as the mechanical execution of preﬁgured 1
design; it is now clear that the same applies to the design process itself. Where this process 2
of imagination differs from other forms of activity, and what makes it so special, is that 3
attention is turned inwards on the self: in other words, it becomes reﬂexive. I dwell, in 4
my imagination, in a virtual world populated by the products of my own imagining.
The second point, which follows from the ﬁrst, is that whatever we call these products 6
– whether plans, strategies or representations – their forms are generated and held in place 7
only within the current of imaginative activity. The same, moreover, is true of material 8
forms generated in the practical activity of craftsmanship. It is said colloquially, yet with 9
good reason, that the craftsman casts the material into its projected form: the form, that 10
is, arises out of a practical movement depicted metaphorically as a ‘throw’ (though in the 1
case of the herdsman casting his lasso, this is quite literally true). Thus, as the musician 2
casts sound into the form of a phrase, so likewise the potter casts clay into the form of 3
a vessel. Yet unlike sound, clay congeals, and as it does so the form, generated in move- 4
ment, is ‘frozen’ in the shape of a static artefact that endures beyond the context of its 5
production. It is this, perhaps, that inclines us to think that in the making of artefacts, 6
forms pre-existing as images in the mind are simply transcribed onto the material, as 7
though the movement issued directly from the form and served only to disclose it (see 8
Chapter Eighteen, pp. 343–6, for a critique of this view). The reality is more complex, 9
since both the image of the projected form and the material artefact in which it subse- 20
quently comes to be embodied are independently generated and ‘caught’ within their 1
respective intentional movements, of imagination and practice. The problem, then, is to 2
understand the relationship between these two generative movements, a relationship that 3
might be characterised, provisionally, as rehearsal. One may, in imagination, ‘go over’ the 4
same movement as a preparation or pre-run for its practical enactment. But the enact- 5
ment no more issues from the image than does the latter from an image for imagining. 6
The third point is that imagining is the activity of a being who nevertheless dwells in 7
an actual world. However much he may be ‘wrapped up’ in his own thoughts, the thinker 8
is situated in a time and place and therefore in a relational context. The scientist may 9
indeed think himself to be an isolated, rational subject confronting the world as a spec- 30
tacle, yet were he in reality so removed from worldly existence he could not think the 1
thoughts he does. ‘We do not have to think the world in order to live in it, but we do 2
have to live in the world in order to think it’ (Ingold 1996a: 118). This is why, as I 3
mentioned earlier, the parallel between the novice practitioner, who has to work out his 4
movements in advance, and the ‘as if ’ actor whose behaviour is the output of a mental 5
constructional device, is an inexact one. The ‘as if ’ actor is the (ﬁctitious) pure subject, 6
possessed of a rational intelligence that delivers thoughts for execution. Such a subject can 7
only dwell within a space circumscribed by the intellectual puzzles it sets out to solve (as 8
against the objective world in which its solutions are applied). The novice, by contrast, 9
though one step removed from the uninterrupted engagement of the skilled practitioner, 40
nevertheless carries on his deliberations ‘against a background of involved activity’ (Dreyfus 1
1991: 74). He continues to dwell in a world that provides, above all in the presence of 2
other persons, a generous source of support for his deliberations. The same is true of the 3
scientist, who confronts nature in rather the same questioning way that the novice player 4
confronts his instrument, as a domain of occurrent phenomena whose workings one is 5
out to understand.
Here, then, we have the ﬁnal, essential difference between intelligence and imagination. 7
The former is the capacity of a being whose existence is wrapped up within a world of 118

The poetics of tool use • 419 •

puzzles, the latter is the activity of a being whose puzzle-solving is carried on within the
context of involvement in a real world of persons, objects and relations. And of all the
historical products of the human imagination, perhaps the most decisive and far-reaching
has been the idea that there exists such a thing as an ‘intelligence’, installed in the heads
of each and every one of us, and that is ultimately responsible for our activities.

Skill
CHAPTER ONE CULTURE, NATURE, ENVIRONMENT
1 For detailed ethnographic description of Cree attitudes to animals, see Feit (1973), Tanner (1979), 4
Scott (1989) and Brightman (1993). I return to the idea of animals offering themselves to human 5
hunters in Chapter Four (p. 67).
2 I return in the concluding section to the reasons why this point of observation cannot, in practice, 7
be attained.
3 The occasion was the Nineteenth Annual Korzybski Memorial Lecture, presented in New York in
January 1970, and the text was originally published in the General Semantics Bulletin of that year 9
(volume 37).
4 This was the Gildersleeve Lecture, delivered at Barnard College, New York, in March 1972. The 1
text ﬁrst appeared in Barnard Alumnae, Spring 1972, and is reprinted as Lévi-Strauss (1974).
5 Bateson developed this idea in his last work, Mind and Nature (1980: 107). There are striking
parallels here with ideas developed by two other major writers on the philosophy and psychology
of perception, Maurice Merleau-Ponty and James Gibson (see Chapter Fourteen). Merleau-Ponty, 4
in his essay on ‘Eye and mind’ (1964: 159–90), insisted on the ‘intertwining of vision and [eye] 5
movement’, neither of which could occur without the other (p. 162). Gibson, for his part, placed 6
movement at the heart of his ecological theory of visual perception, regarded as ‘a process of infor- 7
mation pickup involving the exploratory activity of looking around, getting around, and looking at
things’ (1979: 147). All three authors stressed the primacy of the perceiver’s total sensory engagement with the environment. The convergences are striking, especially bearing in mind that they 9
came from such different intellectual backgrounds. There is no evidence that Bateson ever read or 30
took the slightest note of the work of either Gibson or Merleau-Ponty. A comparison of their respec- 1
tive ideas is, however, long overdue.
6 The Pintupi, whose country borders that of the Walbiri to the southwest, adopt a rather similar
procedure. When young men are to be initiated, ‘fathers, older brothers and other close relatives
take them to sacred sites and show them rituals. They are “introduced” (nintinu) to the place. This 4
visiting and seeing the site, learning about it, become important in laying claim to control or share 5
in the control of a site’ (Myers 1986: 151). The acquisition of knowledge through initiation, whereby 6
it passes from ‘outside’ to ‘inside’, is described as ‘giving (yunginpa) knowledge to young people, as 7
revealing (yutininpa) it, or as teaching (nintininpa) it’ (pp. 242, 68). I return to the Pintupi ethno8
graphy in Chapter Three (pp. 52–4).
7 Howard Morphy appears to invoke the notion of the key in just this sense, in his account of the 9
interpretation of so-called ‘geometric’ designs in the paintings of the Yolngu, an Aboriginal people 40
of Northeast Arnhem Land. He invites us to consider a simple (and very common) motif: a circle 1
with a line running into it. The ﬁrst clue links the design with a familiar waterhole (the circle) into 2
which there drains a creek (the line). The next links it to old man kangaroo, who made the water3
hole by digging a well (the circle), using his tail as a digging stick (the line). And the next links it
to the old man’s penis (the line) emerging from the waterhole to penetrate the vagina (the circle) 4
of a lady kangaroo who was bending over to drink. Through these successive revelations, the 5
experiences of topography, subsistence activity and sexual relations are all drawn together in an 6
ongoing process of discovery (Morphy 1991: 169). Morphy, however, confuses the clue with the 7
cipher, and proceeds to describe these revelations as decodings which gradually empty the formal
design of its semantic content.

Chapter One

Notes

Notes • 421 •

These examples are taken from Janáček’s Uncollected Essays on Music, edited by Mirka Zemanová
(1989: 106, 117, 195, 224). In letters to the great love of his life, Kamila Stösslová, Janáček jotted
down the snort of his favourite domestic pig, but confessed to having some difﬁculty with notating
the ‘strange melody’ of the cock that woke him every morning (Tyrrell 1994: 22, 77).

CHAPTER TWO THE OPTIMAL FORAGER

These lines were written prior to the publication, in 1998, of an article by James L. Boone and
Eric Alden Smith. Ostensibly a critique of ‘evolutionary archaeology’, an approach that seeks to
explain change in the archaeological record as a result of the direct action of natural selection on
variation in artefacts and behaviour, the article in fact sets out to restate the contrasting position
of human evolutionary ecology. What this restatement offers, however, is an almost total retraction
of the earlier claim of evolutionary ecology to account for locally adapted foraging strategies as the
outputs of algorithms shaped by the operation of natural selection on culturally transmitted information. These strategies, Smith and Boone now argue, are not attributable to natural selection at
all, but to the operation of capacities of rational choice and decision-making that all humans have
in common and that owe their formation to ‘earlier evolutionary processes extending back thousands or millions of years’ (1998: S145). This, they go on to declare, ‘is the fundamental tenet of
evolutionary ecology’ (p. S156). If so, then evolutionary ecology has effectively capitulated to evolutionary psychology, and the difference between them is merely one of emphasis: on the phenotypic
plasticity of adaptive responses to particular environmental circumstances, as against the universal,
genotypic hardwiring of evolved human problem-solving capacities. Thus evolutionary ecology, in
its new guise, remains committed to an ecological perspective only in its insistence that the adaptive strategies it seeks to explain have not evolved !

CHAPTER THREE HUNTING AND GATHERING

Subsequent ethnographic work among the Mbuti has, it should be noted, cast considerable doubt
on the authenticity of Turnbull’s somewhat ‘romantic’ account. Thus, Grinker (1992) fails to ﬁnd
indigenous conceptions that would correspond to the feeling for the forest that Turnbull imputes
to the Mbuti. And Ichikawa (1992) observes that Mbuti attitudes towards the forest are, in reality,
decidedly ambivalent: the forest is held to be the home of destructive as well as benevolent powers.
But such ambivalence is equally characteristic of intimate relations in the human domain, which
also have their undercurrent of negativity. However by addressing the forest as ‘Father’, Ichikawa
states, Mbuti ‘are appealing to it for the benevolence normally expected from a parent’ (1992: 41).
In responding to the criticisms of Abramson (1992) and myself (Ingold 1992b), Bird-David significantly softens this contrast. Following Gudeman (1992), she stresses the pragmatic – as against the
cognitive – aspect of modelling, regarding it in the ﬁrst place as a kind of activity or performance.
Through performance, the model is actualised as lived experience. Considering the example ‘a dog
is a friend’, she points out that by bestowing the affection due to a human familiar upon her dog
– to which the dog evidently responds by showing every sign of affection for her – it actually
becomes a friend, and is not merely ‘thought of ’ as such (Bird-David 1992a: 44). To refer to the
dog as her friend is thus to draw attention to an underlying quality of relationship that can subsist
just as well in gestures towards non-human as towards human familiars. This argument, though it
comes close to agreement with that advanced in this chapter, by the same token departs signiﬁcantly from the approach of Lakoff and Johnson (1980).
As Bird-David puts it, in connection with the friendliness of her dog (see note 2, above), the dog
is not merely ‘like’ a friend, ‘it is a friend’ (1992a: 44).
This contradiction has also been noted by Edward Casey. ‘Whom are we to believe?’, he asks, ‘The
theorizing anthropologist, the arsenal of his natural attitude bristling with explanatory projectiles
that go off into space? Or the aborigine on the ground who ﬁnds this ground itself to be a coherent
collection of pre-given places – pre-given at once in his experience and in the Dreaming that sanctions this experience?’ (Casey 1996: 15).

Notes
CHAPTER FOUR

FROM TRUST TO DOMINATION

1 For more detailed reviews and analysis of the ‘savage’ in literature, see Street (1975), Berkhofer 3
(1979) and Barnard (1989).
2 I return to this comparison, and to some of the pitfalls that it harbours, in Chapter Twenty 4
(pp. 363–5).
3 In the opinion of Sir John Lubbock, writing in 1865, the comparison of savages to children ‘is not 6
only correct but also highly instructive . . . The life of each individual is the epitome of the history 7
of the race, and the gradual development of the child illustrates that of the species . . . Savages, like 8
children, have no steadiness of purpose’ (1865: 570).
4 Just what ‘being alive’ entails is a matter I explore in greater depth in Chapter Six (pp. 95–8).
5 For examples, see Marshall (1961) on Kalahari Bushmen, Turnbull (1978) on the Mbuti Pygmies, 10
Dentan (1968) and Robarchek (1989) on the Semai, Briggs (1970) on the Inuit and Howell (1989) 1
on the Chewong.
6 See, for example, Fienup-Riordan (1990: Ch. 8) on the Yup’ik Eskimos.
7 I should stress that the contrast I am drawing here is between hunting and pastoralism as ways of
relating to animals, not between hunting and pastoral societies. It is perfectly possible for the same 4
people in the same society to relate concurrently to different animals in quite different ways. The 5
Blackfoot Indians of the North American Plains, for example, were hunters in relation to the buffalo, 6
but herdsmen in relation to the horse (Ewers 1955).
8 Pernille Gooch’s recent study of the Van Gujjars, nomadic buffalo pastoralists inhabiting the forested 8
foothills of the Indian Himalayas, presents a fascinating exception to this argument, in three respects.
First, the Van Gujjars relate to their buffaloes in the same way that they relate to other animals 9
native to the forest: thus if the latter are classed as ‘wildlife’, then buffaloes are wildlife too, despite 20
their evident tameness and familiarity with humans. All are ‘at home’ in the forest world. Secondly, 1
the principle of this relationship, according to Gooch, is one not of domination but of trust. Thirdly, 2
the forest – along with its animal inhabitants – is likened not to a parent but to a child. Thus 3
people provide the environment of nurture in which trees and buffaloes grow and thrive, rather
than vice versa (Gooch 1998: 186–7, 192, 209). The key to understanding this case lies in the fact 4
that the Van Gujjar do not hunt, nor do they ever kill or eat their buffaloes – the animals are kept 5
exclusively for their milk, and eventually die of old age. On the one hand, this makes it possible 6
for Van Gujjar to extend the pastoral attitude of parental care from their buffaloes in particular to 7
the forest and its creatures in general; on the other hand, it divests the caring relationship of its 8
more coercive, authoritarian aspects. Though more cared for than caring, buffaloes retain a measure
of control over their destiny.
9 In an inﬂuential article, Nicholas Humphrey takes the idea that one could share with animals to 30
be an example of the ‘fallacious reasoning’, commonly branded as magic, in which ‘primitive and 1
not so primitive peoples’ are said to indulge. Their mistake, Humphrey tells us, is to suppose that 2
you can transact with non-human entities just as you can with human partners. In this, you are 3
bound to be disappointed, since ‘nature will not transact with man, she goes her own way regardless’ (Humphrey 1976: 313). But it is surely Humphrey’s reasoning, not that of the primitive, that 4
is fallacious. For it assumes, from the start, a separation of nature and humanity that is in reality 5
the consequence of transactional failure, not its cause.
CHAPTER FIVE THINGS, PLANTS, ANIMALS AND CHILDREN
1 Deleuze and Guattari (1988: 18) contrast the agricultural practice of sowing seeds derived from an 1
ancestral stock in ﬁelds carved out from the forest, with the horticultural practice of successive 2
planting, unearthing and replanting of cuttings or offshoots. They link the former to a peculiarly 3
Western ontology of transcendence, and to a genealogical model of relatedness: every seed is an
individual entity whose nature is ﬁxed by descent and revealed in its growth. The latter however, 4
which is characteristic of Hagen practice, is seen to instantiate a non-Western ontology of imma- 5
nence. For every cutting or offshoot is itself a section of a path of growth, one of the reticulate 6
network of paths comprising the garden as a whole. Every strand of this network, which Deleuze 7
and Guattari liken to a rhizome, is the embodiment of a relationship. I return to the contrast 118
between genealogical and relational models in Chapter Eight.

Notes • 423 •

The use of the idiom of parental nurture to talk about the growth of tuberous plants is widely
reported in Melanesian ethnography. Sabarl gardeners, for example, ‘think of their growing food as
being like children, and see themselves in the role of parents who by giving nurture now will be
nurtured by their offspring’ (Battaglia 1990: 94). And Matayans refer to their yam seed tubers, once
harvested and lifted from the ground, as sons (Gross 1998: 264).
Japanese upland foresters, according to John Knight, would see it both ways. Every tree, they say,
has two lives. In its ﬁrst life, the tree is grown in the ground. ‘Foresters’, Knight reports, ‘liken
tree-growing to child-rearing. The raising of the young tree saplings is characterised as parental
nurturance. According to one local expression, the forester should “treat the mountain as though
you are bringing up a child” ’ (Knight 1998: 199). Upon being felled, however, the tree enters its
second life, when it ‘goes to work’ as a house timber. The incorporation of the tree into the building,
after felling, is compared to the incorporation of a woman into the household after marriage. Now
it is the tree that brings up the human inhabitants of the household, just as a mother nurtures her
children. Despite having been cut down, the tree is still alive, it ‘breathes’ (1998: 205, 213).
In a review of the book in which an earlier version of this chapter appeared (Harris 1996), Peter
Rowley-Conwy picks up the phrase ‘continuous ﬁeld of relationships’, but takes it to mean something entirely different from what I intended – namely, a continuum of variation between the poles
of foraging and farming. Accordingly, he portrays me as an advocate of the view that the transition from one pole to the other was gradual, progressive and wide-ranging. This view, as he correctly
observes, was propounded by Eric Higgs and his associates some three decades ago (Higgs and
Jarman 1969), but has been increasingly called into question by studies which point to a more
irregular pattern of multiple, short-term and local transitions (Rowley-Conwy 1998: 218–19). There
is nothing, however, in the notion of a relational ﬁeld encompassing plants, animals and humans
to suggest that it cannot undergo rapid transformation in particular regions.

CHAPTER SIX A CIRCUMPOLAR NIGHT’S DREAM

Hallowell’s work was carried out in the decade 1930–40 among the people of the Berens River
band, numbering about nine hundred. These people were often known as the Saulteaux (derived
from Saulteurs, a name given them by French traders which translates as ‘people of the rapids’). In
much of his earlier work, Hallowell himself referred to them by this name (Hallowell 1955); moreover it is customarily used as a term of self-identiﬁcation by the people themselves. Many other
authors refer to the people inclusively as Ojibway. An alternative designation, ofﬁcially adopted by
the Bureau of American Ethnology, was Chippewa (ibid.: 115). However Wub-e-ke-niew (1995:
xviii), who refers to his people of Red Lake as Ahnishinahbæeótjibway (literally ‘Ojibway people’),
claims that ‘Chippewa’ was an entirely artiﬁcial category that the US Government created by lumping
them together with French Métis people in the region involved in the fur trade. Steinberg (1981)
provides a useful summary account of the history, distribution, organisation and nomenclature of
the Ojibwa/Saulteaux bands around Lake Winnipeg. For the sake of simplicity and consistency with
Hallowell’s later usage, I will continue to refer to them as Ojibwa.
All the ethnographic material in this chapter, unless stated to the contrary, is drawn either from
this article, or from the earlier collection of Hallowell’s essays, Culture and Experience (1955). Page
references will be provided only for direct quotations from these sources, or where I cite very speciﬁc
points. ‘Ojibwa ontology, behavior and world view’ will be abbreviated throughout as OO, and
Culture and Experience as CE.
From my (so far) very limited and superﬁcial reading of the ethnography on native Amazonian societies, I have been startled by the recurrence of just the same themes here too. The parallels are
extraordinary, and warrant further investigation (see, especially, Descola 1992, 1996, and Viveiros
de Castro 1998).
This is the assumption that John Kennedy (1992) makes, in branding as anthropomorphic any
attempt to attribute to animals such things as mental states, motivations, intentions and feelings.
For Kennedy, any attribution of this sort is a ‘deﬁnite mistake’, a dereliction of scientiﬁc reason,
or worse still, ‘a throw-back to primitive animism’ (1992: 9, 32). But in criticising what he sees as
the anthropomorphic bias in studies of animal behaviour, he fails to address, or even to notice, the
anthropocentric bias in his own thinking, which equates the condition of humanity with the power
of rational intelligence to overcome the determinations of nature. This bias has no empirical justiﬁcation whatever in science; it is, however, a crucial part of the ideological justiﬁcation for science.

Notes

On the distinction between anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism, see Viveiros de Castro (1998: 1
484–5, fn.11).
This is a wonderful example of what Viveiros de Castro (1998) calls ‘perspectivism’, namely the
conception ‘according to which the world is inhabited by different sorts of subjects or persons,
human or non-human, which apprehend reality from distinct points of view’ (1998: 469). These 4
apprehensions are not alternative points of view of the same world, as orthodox cultural relativism 5
would have it, but rather result from a carrying over of the same point of view into alternative real- 6
ities. Thus to be a person is to assume a particular subject-position, and every person, respectively 7
in their own sphere, will perceive the world in the same way – in the way that persons generally
do. But what they see will be different, depending on the form of life they have taken up. Thus if
beaver are food for human persons, then they are food for non-human persons also, such as for the 9
Thunder Bird and the ‘masters’ of the hawks. But what are ‘beaver’ for the birds are batrachians 10
and reptiles from the perspective of humans.
Signiﬁcantly, while spirits of the dead and grandfathers have the same dual structure, of inner essence 2
and outward form, only the former can appear as ghosts, since the latter never die (CE, pp. 179–80).
Nurit Bird-David makes an almost identical point in her analysis of the notion of devaru among
the Nayaka, hunter-gatherers of South India. A certain stone may reveal itself to be devaru if it 4
comes towards a person or, as in one reported instance, jumps up onto her lap. Whether it is 5
devaru, or just another stone, will depend on whether it engages in any kind of relationship with 6
Nayaka people. Thus ‘devaru are not limited to certain classes of things. They are certain things- 7
in-situations of whatever class or, better, certain situations’ (Bird-David 1999: S74–5).
The Cree people, neighbours of the Ojibwa who speak a closely related Algonkian language, have
a virtually identical word meaning ‘life’, pimaatisiiwin. Colin Scott (1989: 195) reports that one 9
Cree man translated the word as ‘continuous birth’ (see Chapter Three, p. 51). This translation 20
seems to resonate perfectly with Ojibwa notions.
In a discussion of the attribution of animacy to stones, J. Baird Callicott suggests that it is just as 2
reasonable to assume that all corporeal things, including animals, plants, and even stones, have an
‘associated consciousness’, as it is to assume that none do (with the singular exception of human
beings). He identiﬁes the former assumption with the ‘Indian attitude’, and the latter with the atti- 4
tude of Europeans and Euro-Americans. But in setting up this contrast, Callicott remains imprisoned 5
within his Western preconception that ‘to be “alive”, i.e., conscious, aware or possessed of spirit’ is 6
a property intrinsic to things as such, rather than thinking of life as the generative movement 7
wherein they come into being through the unfolding of wider ﬁelds of relationship (Callicott 1982:
301–2).
In his chapter on ‘language’, Wub-e-ke-niew explains that in his native Ahnishinahbæótjibway, ‘rather 9
than acting upon the world . . . one acts in concert with the other beings with whom one shares 30
Grandmother Earth . . . A person harmoniously “meets the Lake”, rather than “going to get water” ’ 1
(Wub-e-ke-niew 1995: 218).
Since the Ojibwa have no concept of the natural, Hallowell maintains, they also lack any notion
of the supernatural. It would therefore be quite wrong to interpret Ojibwa ideas, for example, about
the animacy of certain stones or the power of other-than-human persons within the framework of 4
a natural–supernatural dichotomy (OO, p.28). Åke Hultkrantz (1982) disagrees. The distinction 5
between a natural and supernatural reality, in his view, is a universal foundation for human reli- 6
gious experience. It is not, he writes, ‘a distinction in a philosophical sense, between two absolutely 7
separate worlds, but a more practical distinction between an everyday reality and a reality of another
order to which spirits and miracles belong’ (Hultkrantz 1982: 179). However, Hallowell’s point, if
I understand him right, is that the experience of other-than-human persons is one of superior power, 9
rather than one of a reality that is superior to nature. Such experience amounts to an intensiﬁca- 40
tion rather than a transcendence of everyday reality. Smith (1998: 423–4) makes a similar point in 1
a recent essay on the ontology of the Chipewyan.
As this example shows, the very openness of the Ojibwa self to the world, especially in dreams,
has its downside. For it renders the self peculiarly vulnerable to the potentially hostile intent of
other persons. This accounts for people’s chronic anxiety, vividly documented by Hallowell (CE, 4
pp. 250–90), about falling victim to sorcery and other kinds of covert attack, for the mutual suspi- 5
cion that lurks beneath the placid surface of interpersonal life, and for what – to the outsider – 6
looks like an exaggerated concern to avoid causing offence to others (OO, pp. 40, 47).
The so-called ‘shaking tent ceremony’ is common to both the Ojibwa and their neighbours, the
Cree. For detailed descriptions of the Cree ceremony, see Feit (1994) and Brightman (1993: 170–6).

Notes • 425 •

The multilingual character of the ceremony is especially clear from Brightman’s account: thus the
spirit voices issuing from the tent may speak in Cree, English, French, Saulteaux, Chipewyan, or
unknown spirit languages. Since members of the audience differ in their knowledge of these
languages, spirits may be intelligible to some listeners and not to others. Animal beings are recognisable from their intonations: ‘bears speak in a low and rumbling voice, lynxes in a hissing voice,
and ﬁsh with a gurgling intonation as if from underwater’ (Brightman 1993: 174).
A further clue to the interchangeability of hearing and vision lies in the prevalence of metaphors
of vision and sight in relation to the auditory experience of other-than-human persons in performances of the shaking tent ceremony (Hallowell 1942: 9–10). Moreover among the Cree, as Feit
notes (1994: 292), the name of the ceremony, koaspskikan, contains a linguistic root which has been
identiﬁed as meaning ‘see, vision’, along with ‘try’.
In other words, it drops the anthropocentric assumption that automatically renders as anthropomorphic any attribution of intentions and feelings to non-human beings (see footnote 4).

CHAPTER SEVEN

TOTEMISM, ANIMISM AND ANIMALS

The idea of comparing totemic systems and animic systems was proposed some years ago by Philippe
Descola (1992: 113–15), who illustrates his argument with ethnography from Amazonian Indian
societies. Following the classic studies of Lévi-Strauss (1964, 1966b), Descola conceives of totemism
as a classiﬁcatory project that seeks to model social distinctions on the basis of given discontinuities between species in nature. This conception, however, is of limited value in the ethnographic
context of Aboriginal Australia, where totemism is fundamentally about people’s connections with
the land.
Here, and in what follows, I draw extensively on Luke Taylor’s (1996) superb study of bark painting
in Western Arnhem Land. See also Carroll (1977) and Taylor (1989). I am most grateful to the
National Museum of Australia, and to Luke Taylor in particular, for advice and assistance in relation to the two Kunwinjku paintings reproduced here (Figures 7.2 and 7.3).
Morphy (1992) has discussed this point in relation to the rather similar painting tradition of the
Yolngu, whose homeland lies to the east of that of the Kunwinjku.
The classic account of this kind of depiction is Nancy Munn’s Walbiri iconography (1973b). On
more recent developments, see Crocker (1983) and Layton (1992a).
I draw here on the studies of Crawford (1977) and Layton (1985: 441–8). For an overview, see
Layton (1992b).
Heonik Kwon notes that the ‘perilous interchangeability’ of the roles of predator and prey is a
theme of common concern among indigenous hunters throughout the circumpolar north. In Siberia
as in northern North America, ‘the position of the human hunter is insecure. As soon as he succeeds
in a predatory act, the hunter falls into the position of prey’ (Kwon 1998: 119).
I am most grateful for John MacDonald, of the Igloolik Research Centre, for assistance with translating the Inuit text accompanying the drawings reproduced here as Figures 7.4 and 7.5, and for
explaining the signiﬁcance of nasaittuq. My thanks also to Michael Bravo for information on this
point.
In Chapter Six, I discuss in detail the nature of this division as it ﬁgures in Hallowell’s (1960)
account of the ontology of the Ojibwa.
For more on this, see Ray (1967), Lévi-Strauss (1983), Fienup-Riordan (1987) and Oosten (1992).
Among the Ojibwa, whose ontology I discussed in Chapter Six, the spirits of animals and other
non-human persons are not generally seen but are rather heard. Their presence may be invoked in
the midst of the human community, as in the ceremony of the ‘shaking tent’, through the intonation of their distinctive voices. If the mask, for the Inuit and Yup’ik, is the look of
other-than-human being, then likewise the spirit-voice is the sound of such being for the Ojibwa.
And so what applies to masks in the one case applies to voices in the other. The true voice of the
animal is its spirit-voice, which may bear little resemblance to the sounds or calls it ‘naturally’
makes. And when this voice is rendered audible through the efforts of a human performer, whether
in ceremony or in the recital of myth, it does not disguise but displaces the performer’s voice.
I am indebted to Eduardo Viveiros de Castro for this idea.
I return to this theme in Chapter Twenty-one.

Notes
CHAPTER EIGHT ANCESTRY, GENERATION, SUBSTANCE

See Paine (1991) for a discussion of these issues in relation to the case of Norwegians and Saami, 3
and Lane (1998) for comparable remarks on the status of Basarwa vis-à-vis Bantu-speaking popu4
lations in Botswana.
The source for this deﬁnition is the ILO Convention of 1989 on ‘Indigenous and tribal peoples in 5
independent countries’. According to Article 1.b of the Convention, people ‘are regarded as indige- 6
nous on account of their descent from populations which inhabited the country, or geographical 7
region to which the country belongs, at the time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment 8
of present state boundaries . . .’ (ILO 1989, Art 1.b).
John Barnes succinctly deﬁnes the genealogy as the ‘account of one’s descent from an ancestor or 9
ancestors by enumeration of the intermediate persons’ (1967: 101).
The distinction here, between a person’s positioning as an abstract ﬁgure on a genealogical chart 1
and their positioning as a living being in an inhabited world, corresponds to Bourdieu’s (1977: 2
37–8) between ‘ofﬁcial’ and ‘practical’ kinship, the ﬁrst conceived in exclusively genealogical terms, 3
the second as relationships ‘continuously practised, kept up, cultivated’. Bourdieu himself likens the
contrast to that between routes marked on a map, and paths in the landscape kept open by regular 4
use.
This is a paraphrase by Quinn and Holland (1987: 4) of an inﬂuential deﬁnition offered some 6
thirty years previously by Ward Goodenough. In much the same vein, Clifford Geertz wrote that 7
the information provided by culture closes the gap ‘between what our body tells us and what we 8
have to know in order to function’ (1973: 50). See Chapter Nine (pp. 159–60).
The difﬁculties arise in part because rates of change along different lines of descent are not neces- 9
sarily constant, and in part because of the possibilities of adaptive convergence. For these reasons, 20
genealogical proximity cannot automatically be inferred from taxonomic likeness. These problems 1
are discussed with regard to approaches to human diversity in historical linguistics and molecular 2
genetics by Renfrew (1992: 447–8).
It is not. The source of the metaphor may lie in Gregory Bateson’s classic, Naven, where he compares Iatmul and Australian Aboriginal kinship systems. In the Australian system people are divided 4
into a ﬁxed number of closed, bounded groups. The Iatmul community, however, comprises 5
‘an inﬁnitely proliferating and ramifying stock . . . which continually divides and sends out offspring 6
“like the rhizome of a lotus”’ (Bateson 1958: 248–9). I have suggested elsewhere (Ingold n.d.) 7
that a better image than the rhizome might be that of the fungal mycelium. In an argument that 8
parallels my own, the mycologist Alan Rayner has asked what biological science would look like
had the fungus, with its underground network of mycelial ﬁbres, rather than the animal, as a discrete 9
self-contained entity bounded by the skin, been taken as the paradigmatic instance of a life- 30
form (Rayner 1997). For my present purposes I shall stay with the image of the rhizome, since it 1
enables me to incorporate into my discussion some (though by no means all) of the ideas of Deleuze 2
and Guattari. My use of this image, however, departs signiﬁcantly from theirs, and perhaps comes 3
closer to Bateson’s original conception. For while their aim is to liberate our thinking from
the constraints of linear and hierarchical reasoning, mine is to return it to the contexts of lived 4
experience.
Bird-David actually distinguishes the idiom of parentage adopted by the Nayaka and other gatherer- 6
hunters from that of ancestry which, she argues, prevails among peoples whose livelihood is based 7
on the cultivation of crops. Whereas parents give unconditionally, relations with ancestors are based 8
on conditional reciprocity (1990: 190–1). Though signiﬁcant in the context of Bird-David’s argument, this distinction has no bearing on the appropriateness of the genealogical model, and need 9
not concern us here.
Notice that Kroeber’s tree of human culture, reproduced in Figure 8.1, is already straining in that 1
direction: it retains its arboreal form, as it were, against the odds. Ralph Linton took this even 2
further in choosing The tree of culture as the title for his massive survey of the world’s civilisations, 3
ﬁrst published in 1955. In a posthumous preface to the book, Adelin Linton explains that the title
refers ‘not to the familiar evolutionary tree with a single trunk and spreading branches, but to the 4
banyan tree of the tropics. The branches of the banyan tree cross and fuse and send down adven- 5
titious roots, which turn into supporting trunks’ (Linton 1955: v). Commenting on this passage, 6
James Fernandez argues that ‘the banyan tree suggests a circularity, if not a tensile netlike inter- 7
connectedness of parts, in human affairs, . . . that the normal tree metaphor either conceals or 118
cannot manage to convey’ (Fernandez 1998: 99). Thus arboreal imagery, contrary to what Deleuze

Notes • 427 •

and Guattari seem to think, does not have to be linear and hierarchical. It all depends on the form
of what you take to be the prototypical tree.
The signiﬁcance of the distinction between ‘entity’ and ‘site’ for understanding person and self has
been recently, and most lucidly explored by Rom Harré (1998).
Elsewhere, I have elaborated on this point in relation to the Darwinian paradigm of evolutionary
biology, which of course rests squarely on the genealogical model (Ingold 1986b: 105–6).
For help in the formulation of these ideas, I am indebted to James Leach. See also Leach (1997:
34–5) and Ingold (1999: 407–8).
Bird-David (1994: 596–7) likens the person in a hunter-gatherer community to a drop of oil ﬂoating
on the surface of a pool of water. When these drops come together, they coalesce into a larger drop.
But drops can also split up into smaller ones that may then coalesce with others.
This leaves us with the question of how the information specifying the linguistic code can be
acquired in the ﬁrst place. The only solution is to suppose that all human beings are innately
endowed, from the start, with some kind of inbuilt decoding device. Indeed the genealogical model
of cultural transmission inevitably has recourse to the positing of one or several such devices. For
a critique, see Chapter Twenty-two (pp. 397–9).
A particularly clear example of the transformation wrought by the genealogical model on huntergatherer self-perceptions lies in the changing meaning of the Eskimo term inuit (the plural form of
inuk, meaning ‘person’). In the past to be a person, an inuk, meant to be alive, to inhabit a certain
place, and to undergo growth and development within a nexus of social relations. The plural form,
inuit, referred to ‘existence’, or ‘the state of being animate’. It was not, as Henry Stewart points
out, ‘a classiﬁcatory noun, and most certainly not a collective designation for all original inhabitants of the Far North’ (Stewart n.d.: 3). Since the early 1970s, however, inuit has been explicitly
adopted as an ethnonym to be applied on the basis of common descent from a putatively aboriginal population. To be an inuk, then, is no longer to occupy a particular subject position vis-à-vis
others, but to belong as a member of a more inclusive genealogically deﬁned category.

CHAPTER NINE CULTURE, PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

Geertz included his article of 1966 in a volume of selected essays, The interpretation of cultures,
published seven years later. But he introduced the volume with a chapter in which, among other
things, he denounces Goodenough’s aforementioned deﬁnition of culture as ‘the main source of
theoretical muddlement in contemporary anthropology’. It has become, he complains, the locus classicus for a ‘school of thought [which] holds that culture is composed of psychological structures by
means of which individuals or groups of individuals guide their behavior’ (1973: 11). Sensing that
his readers may have some difﬁculty in distinguishing this view from his own, which is indeed
expressed in almost identical terms, Geertz invites us to consider a Beethoven quartet. No-one, he
declares, would equate the quartet with the score (comprising a set of instructions for the performers),
or with any particular performance of it. For the quartet is neither of these things, but the music
itself – ‘a temporally developed tonal structure, a coherent sequence of modeled sound’. Whatever
this might mean (and no-one, least of all Geertz himself, has been able to ﬁgure this out), it is
clear that if culture is analogous to music in this sense, it is nothing like the ‘instructions . . . for
the governing of behavior’ of the 1966 article. Rather than facing up to a blatant contradiction in
his thinking, Geertz prefers, as Bradd Shore puts it, ‘to write his way out of it’ (Shore 1996: 34).
It would not be unreasonable to conclude that if anyone has been a source of theoretical muddlement in anthropology, it is Geertz himself (see Strauss 1992: 5–7, Shore 1996: 32–5, 50–1).
The concept of habitus is not original to Bourdieu. It was introduced to anthropology by Marcel
Mauss in his study, dating from 1934, of techniques of the body, to refer to the repertoire of culturally patterned postures and gestures to be found in any particular society (Mauss 1979: 101).
Claudia Strauss completely misunderstands what Bourdieu means by habitus when she describes it
as just another species of cultural model, comprising a set of mental structures, unconsciously
extracted from practice, internalised through informal learning, and applied in novel situations. She
fails to realise that in placing the habitus at the centre of his theoretical project, Bourdieu’s purpose
is to demolish the oppositions between mind and world, and between knowledge and practice, upon
which the whole programme of cognitive anthropology is founded (1992: 9). The same error is
reproduced by D’Andrade (1995: 147–8).
In Chapter Two (pp. 37–8) we established this point with regard to the practice of hunting.

Notes

The contrasting terms are drawn, by analogy, from ‘phonetics’ and ‘phonemics’ in linguistics. See 1
also Chapter Three, p. 41.
Gibson was by no means consistent on this point, and it has been a continuing source of dispute
among his followers. The following passage, however, appears unequivocal:

The observer may or may not perceive or attend to the affordance, according to his needs, but 5
the affordance, being invariant, is always there to be perceived. An affordance is not bestowed
upon an object by a need of an observer and his act of perceiving it. The object offers what it 6
does because of what it is.
(Gibson 1979: 139) 8
A critique of this view, from a more phenomenologically inspired standpoint, is presented by Varela, 9
Thompson and Rosch (1991: 203–4). In their approach to cognition as ‘embodied action’, the 10
environment of the perceiver exists only as it is enacted in and through a history of ‘structural 1
coupling’, in which person and environment are strictly co-determined.
7 The afﬁnity, here, between the approaches to perception and action of Merleau-Ponty and Gibson
is striking – all the more so because they came from such different intellectual backgrounds. They
were one in insisting upon the centrality of movement to visual perception. This convergence is 4
further explored in Chapter Fourteen. Gibson never referred to Merleau-Ponty’s work, but there is 5
anecdotal evidence that he had read the Phenomenology of perception, and that he approved of it 6
(Heij and Tamboer n.d.).

1 Approaches from ecological psychology and phenomenology are reviewed in Chapter Nine. For the 1
developmentalist challenge to neo-Darwinism, see Chapter Twenty-one.
2 Characterising human beings, by contrast to apes, as ‘thing users’, Francis Evans notes how the
human capacity to use things in diverse ways calls for an ability not only to abstract the qualities
of objects – such as hardness, heaviness and shape – from the objects themselves, but also to relate 4
these qualities to a certain project. ‘A stick becomes different things according to desire: digger, 5
pointer, walking aid, club – it is our perception, not the stick that changes. Thing user . . . has to 6
make a mental pattern, akin to a gestalt perception, of what it wants to do’ (Evans 1998: 195). 7
3 I return to this parallel between the dynamics of organic and technical change in Chapter Twenty
(pp. 369–72).
4 Animal behaviourists do not, of course, rule out the possibility that conduct may be intentionally 9
motivated. But they argue that intentions are but proximate causes of acts whose ultimate cause lies 30
in tendencies or dispositions established through natural selection.
5 For a discussion of the implications of Heidegger’s concept of dwelling for architecture, see Norberg- 2
Schulz (1985).
6 In Chapter Twenty-two I show that on the same grounds, it is equally illusory to seek the origins
of language.
7 I return to this point in the next chapter (pp. 206–7).
CHAPTER ELEVEN THE TEMPORALITY OF THE LANDSCAPE
1 Heonik Kwon (pers. comm.) makes the important point that unlike native dwellers, archaeologists 9
do not incorporate into their own practice the modes of environmental engagement of the charac- 40
ters of whom they tell. That is to say, the peoples of the past whose lives are revealed through 1
excavation were not themselves excavators. On remembering as a way of perceiving the environ- 2
ment, see Chapter Eight (pp. 147–8).
2 I am referring to land, here, in the speciﬁc sense entailed in the genealogical model (see Chapter
Eight). In the alternative sense entailed in the relational model, land and landscape are much closer 4
in meaning.
3 This contrast is further explored in Chapter Fourteen, where it is linked to a distinction between 6
wayﬁnding (journeying from place to place in a region) and navigation (plotting a course from one 7
location to another in space).
4 For an exemplary analysis of ‘the rhythmic structures of economic life’, see Guyer (1988).
CHAPTER TEN BUILDING, DWELLING, LIVING

Notes • 429 •

For further conﬁrmation of this point, again with reference to Australian Aboriginal ethnography,
see Chapter Seven (p. 128).
Barbara Adam proposes a rather similar project, arguing that the kind of knowing entailed in what
she calls the ‘landscape perspective’ needs to be extended through an attention to ‘timescape’,
requiring us ‘to develop an analogous receptiveness to temporal interdependencies and absences, and
to grasp environmental phenomena as complex temporal, contextually speciﬁc wholes’ (Adam 1998:
54).
David Lowenthal contrasts the perception, respectively, of works of art and of landscapes in similar
terms. ‘Works of art . . . are detached from the observer, framed in space and time, quite distinct
from their milieux. But landscapes surround the observer, merging continuously with other landscapes to the horizon; the absence of a set frame challenges the viewer to create his own perspectives’
(Lowenthal 1978: 375). This, of course, begs the question of how the perception of the landscape
is reproduced in the art of painting. Indeed in seeking to represent, on canvas, the experience of
dwelling, the landscape painter has to cultivate much the same duplicity as the ethnographer whose
medium is the written word. Both are required to reﬂect, from a position of studied detachment,
upon their own experience of engagement in the world (Ingold 1997).
In this regard, trees may be said to have a social life. However a recent volume, entitled The social
life of trees, paradoxically took as its starting point a question that would deny to trees any such
life. Contributors to the volume were asked to consider: ‘To which symbolic ends have trees been
used?’ (Rival 1998: xiii). This is to suppose that the social life being symbolised is human, and that
trees have no part in it.
Note that the distinction between coevalness and duration, represented by the corn and the tree,
is not at all the same as the classic Saussurian dichotomy between synchrony and diachrony: the
former belongs to the perspective of the A-series rather than the B-series, to the temporality of the
landscape, not to its chronology (Ingold 1986b: 151).
On the idea of the key to meaning, as a clue rather than a cipher, see Chapter One (p. 22).

CHAPTER TWELVE

GLOBES AND SPHERES

The alleged opposition between visual and aural perception is the subject of Chapter Fourteen.
The artist Paul Klee wrote, in his notebooks, of ‘our faltering existence on the outer crust of the
earth’ (Klee 1961: 5). Yet Klee’s perspective was anything but a global one. His concern was rather
to show how tenuous and superﬁcial is the conceit that we could ever arrest the movement of the
world or subordinate it to our own purposes.
I return to this conception of the earth’s surface in the next chapter, where I show that it depends
upon the specialised mode of apprehension of the cartographer or navigator (Chapter Thirteen,
pp. 240–1).
Cooper distinguishes these two senses of environment by using capital letters for the former and
lower case letters for the latter. Thus ‘The Environment’ is the object of modern scientiﬁc and
geopolitical discourse, whereas ‘the environment’ comprises my familiar surroundings. The ﬁrst is
something that every living creature is in, the second is something that every creature has (1992:
167–9).

CHAPTER THIRTEEN MAPS, WAYFINDING AND NAVIGATION

In the literature, it is more usual to bring traditional Micronesian seafaring skills under the general
rubric of ‘navigation’. I wish to avoid this, for reasons that will become clear later. In brief, I shall
show that unlike their modern Western counterparts, Micronesian mariners were engaged in
wayﬁnding as opposed to navigation.
Pandya suggests that people in Western societies generally proceed in the reverse order, ﬁrst marking
places at their respective locations, and then drawing in the connecting lines (Pandya 1990: 784).
As I shall show, this contrast is probably exaggerated. Asked to draw an informal sketch map, for
example to indicate the route to a friend’s house, the Westerner may well proceed in the same order
as the Ongee, starting with movements, despite his or her familiarity with the cartographic principles embodied in the modern, topographic map.

Notes

André Leroi-Gourhan (1993: 190) brings the production of traces of this kind under the general 1
rubric of graphism. As he shows, graphism is deeply embedded within contexts of oral narrative, 2
and may be as old as the accompaniment of speech by gesture – long antedating the advent of
writing proper.
This has been taken one step further, as Thomas Widlok notes, with the development of the so- 4
called ‘Global Positioning System’ (GPS), a satellite-supported device that enables the user to obtain, 5
at any moment, a precise locational ﬁx according to a universal set of coordinates. ‘Both a map and 6
a GPS depend on a history of human-environment interactions (observations, measurements, trian- 7
gulations) from which the experiential aspects of the humans involved have been systematically
eliminated to leave nothing but formalized, de-personalized procedures’ (Widlok 1997: 326).
It is probably for this reason, as Benjamin Orlove (1993: 29–30) points out, that historians of 9
cartography have focused on how people draw maps, almost to the exclusion of any concern with 10
how people draw on maps. This bias has weighty political implications. Precisely because the topo- 1
graphic map renders invisible the movements, or ways of life, of the native inhabitants of a country, 2
it can be a potent instrument of colonial expropriation.
This is not to deny that in their use of instruments, European navigators may rely just as much
on ad hoc improvisation, based on current perception and past experience, as do Micronesian mariners 4
in their handling of the boat itself (Suchman 1987: viii-ix).
I return to this issue of the status of material surfaces in Chapter Eighteen (pp. 339–41), in relation 6
to the making of artefacts.

For an excellent discussion of this point, see Rée (1999: 42–5). He concludes that it is precisely in 1
its inhabiting a world of ephemeral sounds rather than solid objects that hearing parts company 2
from seeing: ‘you do not hear things in the sound as you see them in the light’ (p.43).
The same appears to be true of the apprehension of birds among the Kaluli of Papua New Guinea,
who inhabit a densely forested environment. During his ﬁeldwork among the Kaluli, Steven Feld 4
found that their avian taxonomy was, ﬁrst and foremost, a classiﬁcation of sounds rather than living 5
things. To Feld’s persistent inquiries, his Kaluli companion, Jubi, retorted: ‘Listen – to you they 6
are birds, to me they are voices in the forest’. Reﬂecting on this comment, Feld observes that ‘birds 7
are “voices” because Kaluli recognise and acknowledge their existence primarily through sound’ (Feld
1982: 45).
One of the leading advocates of this view of visual perception has been Richard Gregory. ‘There 9
seems to be no sudden break’, Gregory writes, ‘between perceiving an object and guessing an object. 30
If all perceiving of objects requires some guessing, we may think of sensory stimulation as providing 1
data for hypotheses concerning the state of the external world. The selected hypotheses, following 2
this view, are perceptions’ (1973: 61–3). And by the same token, ‘illusions are failed hypotheses’
(p. 74, original emphases).
Heidegger, in particular, strove to regain this sense of belonging by replaying dominant visual 4
metaphors in aural terms, and frequently invoked the kinship, in the German language, between 5
Hören, Horchen and Gehören – hearing, harkening and belonging (Caputo 1985: 255).
In his essay on ‘the notion of person, the notion of “self”’, Marcel Mauss discusses the etymology 7
of the Latin persona, and suggests that it may have been of Etruscan origin, perhaps originally
borrowed from Greek. The idea of its derivation from personare, he thinks, was a retrospective inven9
tion (Mauss 1979: 78–9).
An intriguing variation on the same idea comes from the Japanese philosopher Yanagida Kunio 40
(1875–1962), the acknowledged founder of Japanese folklore studies. According to Kunio, ‘both 1
speech and writing exist as means for expressing one’s thoughts, but, at present, writing is not so 2
close to thought as speech is. If speech is able to express eight thoughts out of ten, writing is only
able to express six’ (cited in Ivy 1995: 7).
The inspiration for this move comes from the philosophy of Merleau-Ponty, especially his essay 4
‘Eye and mind’ (Merleau-Ponty 1964a, see Stoller 1989: 37–40). I discuss Merleau-Ponty’s ideas 5
at much greater length later on in this chapter.
For helpful reviews of this philosophical lineage, see Jay (1993a: 21–82) and Synnott (1993: 128–55). 7
Descartes does qualify the analogy in one respect. You cannot direct light rays towards objects in
the environment exactly as the blind man can direct his stick. This is possible, Descartes thought,

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

STOP, LOOK AND LISTEN

Notes • 431 •

only for creatures such as cats, which can see in the dark by illuminating objects with rays shining
from their own eyes (1988: 59). The idea that cats’ eyes are like twin torches in the head was all
that was left, by Descartes’ day, of the once widely accepted notion – originally propounded by
Euclid in his Optica (c. 300 BC) – that in all vision, rays of light are emitted from the eyes rather
than reﬂected into them (Hagen 1986: 300–4).
Rorty is therefore wrong to claim that ‘in the Cartesian model, the intellect inspects entities modeled
on retinal images’ (Rorty, 1980: 45). Descartes was very explicit that the job of the intellect was
not to inspect but to construct, that this construction did not depend on any resemblance between
the data on which it operates and the retinal image, and that any representations in the mind are
products, not precursors, of its constructive activity. On this point, see Houlgate (1993: 102).
As Judovitz points out, ‘Descartes’s paradoxical reappropriation of vision by reason . . . corresponds
to an act of denunciation of its phenomenal and experiential character’ (1993: 78).
The following deﬁnition of intuition, from Descartes’ ‘Rules for the direction of our native intelligence’ of 1628, may serve as an example of this usage: ‘intuition is the indubitable conception of
a clear and attentive mind which proceeds solely from the light of reason’ (1988: 3).
Gibson has a particular problem with the sun and moon, along with other celestial bodies. For as
he elsewhere concedes, the information that would specify their form and composition is just not
available to the technologically unaided, terrestrial observer, who cannot move around them. As
objects, therefore, they are not visible to the eye (1979: 259). Nor can sunlight or moonlight be
seen ‘as such’. How, then, can the sun or moon be seen at all?
On this point, Gibson chooses to take issue with Ronchi, whose views I have reviewed above. While
he agrees with Ronchi that optics, as a science of vision, must be anchored on the eye, he holds
that light depends on the presence of the eye not for its existence, but for its relevance. Its existence is a physical datum, its relevance is an ecological one (Gibson 1966: 222).
According to Cohen and Stewart (1994: 154–6), the illusion of vision is precisely that of supposing
that you are ‘looking out of your head through a window’, or ‘out of holes in your head where
your eyes should be’. The brain, they say, has to work very hard to create this illusion. But it is
certainly not an illusion that I have ever experienced, nor has anyone else to my knowledge.
Thus as Jay points out, Merleau-Ponty did not accept, as an ontological a priori, the radical cleavage
between the ‘real light’ (lumen) of the physicists and the ‘phenomenal light’ (lux) of naive consciousness. For in his view, physical science ‘grew out of natural perception, rather than being its antithesis
or corrective’ (Jay 1993b: 163).
Another way of putting this is to say that we should rediscover the seer that is in all of us, and
that lies concealed behind our assumed role as spectators. The seer’s way of seeing, as David Levin
writes, ‘is more primordial than our everyday way: its ecstatic openness, . . . though not understood,
and not consciously practised, by more “ordinary” mortals, in fact underlies all human perception’
(1988: 462).
Paul Klee, to whose art Merleau-Ponty makes frequent reference, encapsulated these points in his
‘Creative Credo’ of 1920. ‘Art does not reproduce the visible but makes visible . . . The pictorial
work springs from movement, it is itself ﬁxated movement, and it is grasped in movement (eye
muscles)’ (Klee 1961: 76, 78).
Oliver Sacks documents a modern-day example of this phenomenon. It concerns a patient, Virgil,
who after being blind for forty-ﬁve years, underwent an operation to restore his sight. Some time
after the operation, he told Sacks that at the ﬁrst moment, when his bandages were removed, ‘he
had no idea what he was seeing. There was light, there was movement, there was color, all mixed
up, all meaningless, a blur’. Commenting on this, Sacks notes that ‘when we open our eyes each
morning, it is upon a world we have spent a lifetime learning to see. We are not given the world:
we make it through incessant experience, categorization, memory, reconnection. But when Virgil
opened his eyes . . . there was no world of experience and meaning awaiting him. He saw, but what
he saw had no coherence’ (Sacks 1993: 61).
Levin makes a similar point, in somewhat more elaborate terms: ‘the seer is seen and sees himself
as seen, seen through what he sees. The seer can feel his seeing as it is felt, or received, by the
other, the one who sees’ (1988: 333).
Juhani Pallasmaa elaborates on this point with regard to the acoustic properties of architecture:
One can . . . recall the acoustic harshness of an uninhabited and unfurnished house as compared
to the affability of a lived-in home, in which sound is refracted and softened by the numerous
surfaces of the objects of personal life. Every building or space has its characteristic sound of

Notes
intimacy or monumentality, invitation or rejection, hospitality or hostility. A space is conceived 1
and appreciated through its echo as much as through its visual shape, but the acoustic percept 2
usually remains an unconscious background experience.
(Pallasmaa 1996: 35)

As an example of this prejudice, Armstrong, Stokoe and Wilcox cite an inﬂuential textbook in 5
linguistics by John Lyons, in which it is claimed that ‘sign language’, ‘body language’ or ‘the language
of bees’ would be considered by most people as a metaphorical use of the word ‘language’ (Lyons 6
1981: 2, see Armstrong, Stokoe and Wilcox 1995: 65). Brenda Farnell (1995: 31–8) has shown 7
how the denigration of gesture, its association with humanity in its primitive or animal state, is a 8
concomitant of the very same evolutionary bias that has led generations of Western scholars to take 9
writing as the measure of civilisation. The resulting exclusion of sign languages from linguistics, as 10
she points out, has severely impeded the proper recognition of the signed languages of the deaf,
and research into their structure.
‘Par exemple, dans une forêt, j’ai senti à plusieurs reprises que ce n’était pas moi qui regardais la 2
forêt. J’ai senti, certains jours, que c’étaient les arbres qui me regardaient, qui me parlaient. Moi, 3
j’étais là . . . écoutant’ (Charbonnier 1959: 143). This passage is cited by Merleau-Ponty in his ‘Eye 4
and mind’, but is introduced with the words: ‘As André Marchand says, after Klee . . .’ (Merleau- 5
Ponty 1964a: 167). Presumably, Merleau-Ponty meant that Marchand’s words echoed the sentiments
that Klee had often expressed, though in other terms. However the passage from Charbonnier’s
interview with Marchand is reproduced once again in Paul Stoller’s essay, ‘Eye, mind and world in 7
anthropology’ (Stoller 1989: 38), where it is attributed directly to Klee (cited by Marchand, in 8
Charbonnier, cited by Merleau-Ponty)!
This point is established, with speciﬁc reference to Yup’ik and Inuit masks, in Chapter Seven 20
(pp. 123–4).
For example it is well established, according to Sacks, ‘that in blind people who read Braille the
reading ﬁnger has an exceptionally large representation in the tactile parts of the cerebral cortex’ 2
(1993: 70). In a representation of the sensory homunculus, therefore, this ﬁnger would appear 3
grossly enlarged.
The idea that it is possible to enumerate the senses has been cogently criticised by Seremetakis. 5
‘Enumerated sensory capacities and the corresponding segmentation of material experience into 6
specialized semantic domains’, she writes, ‘may freeze the actual ﬂuidity of sensory crossing
and mutual metaphorization of one sense by another . . . Enumeration thus imposes an objectifying
grid that distorts or effaces the manner in which a culture senses the senses’. Moreover, the notion 8
that in any speciﬁc culture, a certain balance or ratio may be struck between the senses implies that 9
each may be reduced to a common denominator which is itself ‘natural’ or ‘pre-cultural’ (Seremetakis 30
1994: 126).
Levin spells out this view in a passage of incomparable verbosity. ‘In fact’, he writes, ‘the ﬁeld of
visibility yields itself much more readily than do all the other ﬁelds of sense to the kind of structuring process which wilfully re-presents whatever presents itself, so that every presence manifesting 3
in the ﬁeld of vision is essentially reduced to the ontology of a mere thing’ (Levin 1988: 65).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN SOCIETY, NATURE AND TECHNOLOGY
1 Leslie White (1959: 18–28) offers a classic statement of this position; see also Harris (1968: 232). 8
2 This idea of technical classiﬁcation seems, in many ways, to anticipate the notion of the ‘constel- 9
lation of knowledge’ subsequently developed, inter alia, by Wynn (1993: 396–403) and Keller and 40
Keller (1996: 89–107). The constellation is an idiosyncratic collection of various bits and pieces of 1
knowledge – aesthetic, stylistic, functional, procedural, ﬁnancial – peculiar to each individual artisan 2
(rather than shared) and assembled speciﬁcally for the task at hand (rather than forming part of an
enduring tradition).
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN ON WEAVING A BASKET
1 To adopt an architectural term, the coherence of the basket is based upon the principle of tenseg118
rity, according to which a system can stabilise itself mechanically by distributing and balancing

Notes • 433 •

counteracting forces of compression and tension throughout the structure. Signiﬁcantly, tensegrity
structures are common to both artefacts and living organisms, and are encountered in the latter at
every level from the cytoskeletal architecture of the cell to the bones, muscles, tendons and ligaments of the whole body (Ingber 1998).
This prioritisation of design over execution betrays a ranking of intellectual over physical labour
that, as we saw in Chapter Sixteen, is one of the hallmarks of Western modernity. It divides the
scientist from the technician, the engineer from the operative, the architect from the builder, and
the author from the secretary.
In a wonderful article on the building of the great cathedral of Chartres, in the thirteenth century,
David Turnbull (1993b) shows that this most magniﬁcent of human artefacts was preceded by no
plan whatsoever. The building took shape gradually, over a considerable period of time, through
the labour of many groups of workers with diverse skills, whose activities were loosely co-ordinated
by the use of templates, string and constructive geometry.
I do not intend by this to reinstate the time-worn opposition between practical utility and symbolic
meaning. The notion of utility implied by this opposition is an impoverished one that sets up a
radical division between the acting subject and the object used, and reduces skilled practice to purely
mechanical relations of cause and effect. In speaking of the absorption of artefacts into the lifeactivity of their users my aim is to emphasise, to the contrary, the inseparability of persons and
objects in real-life contexts of accustomed (that is, usual) practice. The usefulness of an object, then,
lies not in its possession of utility but in its partaking of the habituality of everyday life (Gosden
1994: 11).
Among the Bunu, a Yoruba-speaking people of central Nigeria, this idea is expressed in their weaving
of lengths of white cloth:
Cloths are often removed [from the loom] without cutting, accentuating the endless quality of
these pieces. When eventually the unwoven warp is cut in order to use the cloth, the fringes
are left, again suggesting continuity rather than the ﬁniteness of cut and hemmed edges.
(Renne 1991: 715)

CHAPTER NINETEEN OF STRING BAGS AND BIRDS’ NESTS

This shift in the meaning of technology, from a systematic mode of inquiry to the generative logic
of practice, remained more or less conﬁned to the Anglophone world. In France, technology
continues to this day to mean ‘the study of techniques’. For this reason, the word technique has
retained its connotation of skilled craftsmanship. And French scholars have taken the lead in developing an anthropological approach to craft skills (Sigaut 1985).

CHAPTER TWENTY THE DYNAMICS OF TECHNICAL CHANGE

Marx is referring, in this passage, to the principle thesis of Giambattista Vico, in his New Science
of 1725. Vico had berated philosophers for having wasted so much effort in studying the world of
nature which, having been made by God, ultimately lies beyond human comprehension, at the
expense of the study of things which owe their origination to the human mind and which philosophers – being human too – could hope to understand.
For a review of the contributions of Butler and Pitt-Rivers, see Basalla (1988: 15–21). On evolutionary archaeology, which is but one of several recent approaches that have sought to apply
Darwinian principles in the explanation of technical change, see O’Brien (1996). For a critique, see
Boone and Smith (1998).
This general conclusion even applies to the ‘invention’ of the alphabet, often described as the most
perfect system ever devised for representing the sounds of speech, and as the goal towards which
the evolution of writing has naturally progressed. David Olson, however, has shown that the development of the alphabet was a contingent consequence of attempts to put a script adapted for use
in one language – namely Semitic, in which vocalic differences were relatively insigniﬁcant – to use
in another – namely Greek, where they were highly signiﬁcant (Olson 1994: 84).

Notes
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE ‘PEOPLE LIKE US’

1 From her studies of skeletal remains from the Neolithic village of Abu Hureyra, in what is now 3
northern Syria, Theya Molleson was able to deduce that the village’s female inhabitants had spent
long hours kneeling on the ground while grinding grain on a saddle quern. Patterns of wear on the 4
big toes and knees, and bulges in the bones of the upper arm and forearm at the points of attach- 5
ment of what would have been strongly developed muscles, are entirely consistent with this 6
interpretation. It is tempting to regard these marks of activity upon the skeleton as deformities or 7
abnormalities (Molleson 1994: 62–3). Yet the bones of the skeleton can grow and take shape only 8
within a body that is active in the world; hence one can deﬁne the ‘normal’ skeleton only in relation to ‘normal’ activities. Why should the notched kneecap that comes from prolonged squatting 9
be regarded as abnormal when, for the great majority of the human population, this is the usual 10
position of rest? It is only perceived by us as an abnormality since, having been brought up in a 1
society in which it is usual to sit on chairs, we ﬁnd having to squat for any length of time acutely 2
stressful. There can, then, be no such thing as the standard form of the human skeleton.
2 I develop this argument further in the following chapter (pp. 397–8).
3 The story of this confusion, which – if anything – is still more prevalent today than in those heady 4
days when the structure of DNA was ﬁrst unravelled, is superbly documented by Lily Kay (1998), 5
and I have drawn on her account here.
4 One of the most bizarre examples of this kind of thinking comes from a recent book, widely hailed 7
as a masterpiece in evolutionary psychological circles, by Donald E. Brown. Entitled Human univer- 8
sals, the book offers a comprehensive description of what Brown calls ‘Universal People’ (UP). The
UP are characterised by a compendium of traits that ‘all people, all societies, all cultures, and all 9
languages have in common’ (Brown 1991: 130). These traits are said to add up to what is popu- 20
larly known as human nature, whose evolution is conﬁdently attributed to natural selection, and 1
whose ultimate foundation lies in the genes. Since no human population has ever existed that 2
remotely resembles the UP, it is difﬁcult to see how they could have evolved. In fact what Brown 3
presents, in the guise of a suite of universal characteristics, is a thinly veiled version of the Western
model of the person.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO SPEECH, WRITING AND ‘LANGUAGE ORIGINS’
1 This is the kind of circularity that Jacques Derrida is getting at when he asks what a science of
writing would be like, given that the very ideas of science and scientiﬁc objectivity depend on 9
writing. ‘The science of writing should . . . look for its object at the roots of scientiﬁcity. The history 30
of writing should turn back toward the origin of historicity’. But can there be a ‘science of the 1
possibility of science’, or a ‘history of the possibility of history’? (Derrida 1974: 27).
2 This conclusion was anticipated by V. N. Vološinov in his remarkable study Marxism and the philos- 3
ophy of language, ﬁrst published in Russian in 1929. Language, Vološinov argued, is not tossed like
a ball from generation to generation, but moves together with, and is indeed inseparable from, the 4
actual current of speech:
Language cannot properly be said to be handed down – it endures, but it endures as a continuous process of becoming. Individuals do not receive a ready-made language at all, rather, they 7
enter upon the stream of verbal communication; indeed, only in this stream does their conscious- 8
ness ﬁrst begin to operate. . . . People do not ‘accept’ their native language – it is in their native 9
language that they ﬁrst reach awareness.
(Vološinov 1973: 81)
3 Intriguingly, in the languages of the Gonja and LoDagaa, both non-literate societies of northern 2
Ghana, there is no word for ‘word’ (Goody 1977: 115).
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE THE POETICS OF TOOL USE
1 Whether the people of any known society have ever been ‘modern’, in the strict sense, is rather 7
doubtful (Latour 1993). We may therefore have to admit that ‘modern society’ is a ﬁction of the 118
same order as the economists’ ‘economic man’ or the ‘rational individual’ of political science.

Notes • 435 •

One issue arising from this concerns the nature of the difference between writing and musical notation. It seems reasonable to suppose that this difference reﬂects the way in which the distinction is
conventionally drawn between speech and song. Thus musical notation leads us to a realm of sound,
writing to the words behind the sound. But if speech and song are fundamentally indistinguishable, then the same must be true of writing and notation. While a discussion of this issue is beyond
the scope of the present chapter, it does have important implications as regards the history of writing.
For if the distinction between writing and musical notation, like that between speech and song, has
arisen in the course of history, we cannot assume that it has been there from the start. Any history
of writing, therefore, must be a history of notation as well.
I take this idea from the linguistic philosophy of Maurice Merleau-Ponty. ‘Strictly speaking’, MerleauPonty writes, ‘there are no conventional signs, . . . there are only words into which the history of
a whole language has been compressed, and which effect communication with no absolute guarantee, dogged as they are by incredible linguistic hazards’ (1962: 188). We ﬁnd in the writings of
Emile Durkheim an apparent precedent for this appreciation of the way word meanings are freighted
with the sedimentations of the past. In their making, Durkheim argued, ‘a multitude of minds have
associated, united and combined their ideas and sentiments; for them, long generations have accumulated their experience and their knowledge’ (1976[1915]: 16). Yet despite the superﬁcial similarity,
these thinkers were poles apart in their conclusions. What for Merleau-Ponty is hazardous and
uncertain had, for Durkheim, all the certainty of pre-established and unquestioned tradition. The
history that Merleau-Ponty identiﬁes with the ongoing current of speech itself was reiﬁed, in
Durkheim’s conception, as an object – an already completed past – that weighs down upon the
individual in the name of society.
See Bourdieu (1977: 94) and Ingold (1986b: 94) for closely comparable arguments regarding the
anthropological derivation of ‘culture’ from observations of practice, and Chapter Twenty-one (pp.
382–3) for the parallel derivation, in biology, of the genotype.
Edmund Carpenter makes a similar point in a study of the relation between speaking, thinking and
carving among the Aivilik Eskimo (Inuit) of Southampton Island. There is, in Eskimo speech, no
separation of prose and poetry: ‘all Eskimo speech has a musical quality and for heightened emotional
expressions the speaker moves easily into song’ (Carpenter 1966: 212).
The terms are Heidegger’s; for an excellent discussion of how he uses them, see Dreyfus (1991:
Ch. 4); see also Chapter Nine (pp. 168–9).

Skill
Abramson, A. 1992. Comment on Nurit Bird-David, ‘Beyond “The Original Afﬂuent Society” ’. Current
Anthropology 33(1): 34–5.
Adam, B. 1998. Timescapes of modernity: the environment and invisible hazards. London: Routledge.
Adams, F. D. 1938. The birth and death of the geological sciences. London: Billière, Tindall and Cox.
Adams, R. McC. 1996. Paths of ﬁre: an anthropologist’s inquiry into Western technology. Princeton, N.J.: 6
Princeton University Press.
Adorno, T. 1981. In search of Wagner, trans. R. Livingstone. London: New Left Books.
Alexander, C. 1964. Notes on the synthesis of form. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Alpers, S. 1983. The art of describing: Dutch art in the seventeenth century. London: Penguin.
Anderson, D. 2000. Identity and ecology in Arctic Siberia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aristotle 1938. De Interpretatione, trans. H. P. Cook. London: Loeb Classical Library.
Armstrong, D. F., W. C. Stokoe and S. E. Wilcox 1995. Gesture and the nature of language. Cambridge: 2
Cambridge University Press.
Atran, S. 1990. Cognitive foundations of natural history: towards an anthropology of science. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Austin, J. L. 1962. How to do things with words. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Bachelard, G. 1964. The poetics of space. Boston: Beacon Press.
Bacon, F. 1965. Francis Bacon: a selection of his works, ed. S. Warhaft. Toronto: Macmillan.
Bakhtin, M. M. 1981. The dialogic imagination: four essays, trans. C. Emerson and M. Holquist, ed. M.
Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Barkow, J. H., L. Cosmides and J. Tooby (eds) 1992. The adapted mind: evolutionary psychology and the 9
generation of culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barnard, A. 1989. The lost world of Laurens van der Post? Current Anthropology 30: 104–14.
Barnes, J. A. 1967. Genealogies. In The craft of social anthropology, ed. A. L. Epstein. London: Tavistock. 2
Basalla, G. 1988. The evolution of technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basso, K. 1984. ‘Stalking with stories’: names, places, and moral narratives among the Western Apache.
In Text, play and story: the construction and reconstruction of self and society, ed. E. M. Bruner. 4
Washington, D.C.: American Ethnological Society, pp. 19–55.
Bateson, G. 1958. Naven: a survey of the problems suggested by a composite picture of the culture of a New 6
Guinea tribe drawn from three points of view (second edition). Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University 7
Press (original edition, 1936).
—— 1973. Steps to an ecology of mind. London: Fontana.
—— 1980. Mind and nature: a necessary unity. London: Fontana/Collins.
Battaglia, D. 1990. On the bones of the serpent: person, memory, and mortality in Sabarl Island society. 40
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Belyea, B. 1996. Inland journeys, native maps. Cartographica 33: 1–16.
Benveniste, E. 1969. Le vocabulaire de institutions indo-européennes, Vol. 1. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Berger, J. 1972. Ways of seeing. London: BBC and Penguin Books.
Bergson, H. 1911. Creative evolution, trans. A. Mitchell. London: Macmillan.
Berkhofer, R. F. Jr. 1979. The White Man’s Indian: images of the American Indian from Columbus to the 5
present. New York: Vintage.
Bernstein, N. A. 1996. On dexterity and its development. In Dexterity and its development, eds M. Latash 7
and M. T. Turvey. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 3–244.
Béteille, A. 1998. The idea of indigenous people. Current Anthropology 39: 187–91.

Chapter One

References

References • 437 •

Bettinger, R. L. 1991. Hunter-gatherers: archaeological and evolutionary theory. New York: Plenum Press.
Binford, L. R. 1983. Working at archaeology. London: Academic Press.
Bird-David, N. 1990. The giving environment: another perspective on the economic system of gathererhunters. Current Anthropology 31: 189–96.
—— 1992a. Beyond ‘The Original Afﬂuent Society’: a culturalist reformulation. Current Anthropology
33: 25–47.
—— 1992b Beyond ‘the hunting and gathering mode of subsistence’: culture-sensitive observations on
the Nayaka and other modern hunter-gatherers. Man (N.S.) 27: 19–44.
—— 1994. Sociality and immediacy: or, past and present conversations on bands. Man (N.S.) 29: 583–603.
—— 1999. ‘Animism’ revisited: personhood, environment, and relational epistemology. Current
Anthropology 40 (Supplement): S67–S91.
Bjerkli, B. 1996. Land use, traditionalism and rights. Acta Borealia 1: 3–21.
Black, M. B. 1977a. Ojibwa taxonomy and percept ambiguity. Ethos 5: 90–118.
—— 1977b. Ojibwa power belief system. In The anthropology of power: ethnographic studies from Asia,
Oceania, and the New World, eds R. D. Fogelson and R. N. Adams. New York: Academic Press,
pp. 141–51.
Blier, S. P. 1987. The anatomy of architecture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bloch, M. 1991. Language, anthropology and cognitive science. Man (N.S.) 26: 183–98.
Bloomﬁeld, L. 1933. Language. New York: Holt.
Boas, F. 1940. Race, language and culture. New York: Macmillan.
—— 1955. Primitive art. New York: Dover Publications (original 1927).
Bock, K. 1980. Human nature and history. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bohm, D. 1980. Wholeness and the implicate order. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bökönyi, S. 1969. Archaeological problems and methods of recognising animal domestication. In The
domestication and exploitation of plants and animals, eds P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby. London:
Duckworth, pp. 219–29.
—— 1989. Deﬁnitions of animal domestication. In The walking larder: patterns of domestication,
pastoralism and predation, ed. J. Clutton-Brock. London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 22–7.
Boone, J. L. and E. A. Smith 1998. Is it evolution yet? A critique of evolutionary archaeology. Current
Anthropology 39 (Supplement): S141–-S173.
Botscharow, L. J. 1990. Paleolithic semiotics: behavioral analogs to speech in Acheulean sites. In The
life of symbols, eds M. L. Foster and L. J. Botscharow. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Bouquet, M. 1993. Reclaiming English kinship. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
—— 1995. Exhibiting knowledge: the trees of Dubois, Haeckel, Jesse and Rivers at the Pithecanthropus
centennial exhibition. In Shifting contexts: transformations in anthropological knowledge, ed. M. Strathern.
London: Routledge, pp. 31–55.
—— 1996. Family trees and their afﬁnities: the visual imperative of the genealogical diagram. Journal
of the Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.) 2: 43–66.
Bourdieu, P. 1963. The attitude of the Algerian peasant toward time. In Mediterranean countrymen, ed.
J. Pitt-Rivers. Paris: Mouton.
—— 1977. Outline of a theory of practice, trans. R. Nice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— 1990. The logic of practice. Oxford: Polity Press.
Bourgeois, A. P. (ed.) 1994. Ojibwa narratives of Charles and Charlotte Kawbawgam and Jacques LePique,
1893–1895 (recorded with notes by H. H. Kidder). Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Braidwood, R. J. 1957 Prehistoric men, 3rd edition. Chicago Natural History Museum Popular Series,
Anthropology, 37.
Briggs, J. 1970. Never in anger: portrait of an Eskimo family. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Brightman, R. 1993. Grateful prey: Rock Cree human–animal relationships. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Brookﬁeld, H. C. 1969. On the environment as perceived. Progress in Geography 1: 53–80.
Brown, D. E. 1991. Human universals. New York: McGraw Hill.
Bruzina, R. 1982. Art and architecture, ancient and modern. Research in Philosophy and Technology 5:
163–87.
Burford, A. 1972. Craftsmen in Greek and Roman society. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Burns, T. 1964. Technology. In A dictionary of the social sciences, eds. J. Gould and W. L. Kolb. London:
Tavistock.
Callicott, J. B. 1982. Traditional American Indian and Western European attitudes toward nature: an
overview. Environmental Ethics 4: 293–318.

References
Caputo, J. D. 1985. The thought of being and the conversation of mankind: the case of Heidegger and 1
Rorty. In Hermeneutics and praxis, ed. R. Hollinger. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame 2
Press.
Cardwell, D. S. L. 1973. Technology. In A dictionary of the history of ideas, ed. P. P. Wiener. New York:
Scribner’s.
Carpenter, E. 1966. Image making in arctic art. In Sign, image and symbol, ed. G. Kepes. London: Studio 5
Vista, pp. 206–25.
—— 1973. Eskimo realities. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Carpenter, E. and M. McLuhan 1960. Acoustic space. In Explorations in communication: an anthology, 8
eds E. Carpenter and M. McLuhan. London: Beacon Press, pp. 65–70.
Carrier, J. 1992. Occidentalism: the world turned upside down. American Ethnologist 19: 195–212.
Carroll, P. J. 1977. Mimi from Western Arnhem Land. In Form in indigenous art: schematisation in the 10
art of Aboriginal Australia and prehistoric Europe, ed. P. J. Ucko. Canberra: Australian Institute of 1
Aboriginal Studies, pp. 119–30.
Carruthers, M. 1990. The book of memory: a study of memory in medieval culture. Cambridge: Cambridge 3
University Press.
Casey, E. S. 1996. How to get from space to place in a fairly short stretch of time: phenomenological
prolegomena. In Senses of place, eds S. Feld and K. H. Basso. Santa Fe, N.Mex.: School of American 5
Research Press.
Certeau, M. de 1984. The practice of everyday life. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press.
Chapman, D. 1991. Vision, instruction and action. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Charbonnier, G. 1959. Le monologue du peintre. Paris: René Julliard.
Chaussonnet, V. 1988. Needles and animals: women’s magic. In Crossroads of continents: cultures of Siberia
and Alaska, eds W. W. Fitzhugh and A. Crowell. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press,
pp. 209–26.
Childe, V. G. 1942. What happened in history. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Chomsky, N. 1968. Language and mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Clanchy, M. T. 1979. From memory to written record: England 1066–1307. London: Edwin Arnold.
Clark, A. 1997. Being there: putting brain, body and the world together again. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 5
Clark, J. 1983. The Aboriginal people of Tasmania. Hobart: Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery.
Classen, C. 1993. Worlds of sense: exploring the senses in history and across cultures. London: Routledge. 6
—— 1997. Foundations for an anthropology of the senses. International Social Science Journal 153: 7
401–12.
Clutton-Brock, J. 1994. The unnatural world: behavioural aspects of humans and animals in the process 9
of domestication. In Animals and human society: changing perspectives, eds A. Manning and J. Serpell. 30
London: Routledge, pp. 23–35.
Cohen, G. A. 1978. Karl Marx’s theory of history: a defence. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cohen, J. and I. Stewart 1994. The collapse of chaos: discovering simplicity in a complex world. 2
Harmondsworth: Viking.
Coleman, R. 1988. The art of work: an epitaph to skill. London: Pluto Press.
Collias, N. E. and E. C. Collias 1984. Nest building and bird behavior. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 5
University Press.
Collins, S. 1985. Categories, concepts or predicaments? Remarks on Mauss’s use of philosophical terminology. In The category of the person: anthropology, philosophy, history, eds M. Carruthers, S. Collins 7
and S. Lukes, pp. 46–82. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Connerton, P. 1989. How societies remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cooper, D. E. 1992. The idea of environment. In The environment in question: ethics and global issues, 40
eds D. E. Cooper and J. A. Palmer. London: Routledge, pp. 165–80.
Cosgrove, D. 1989. Geography is everywhere: culture and symbolism in human landscapes. In Horizons
in human geography, eds D. Gregory and R. Walford. Basingstoke: Macmillan, pp. 118–35.
Cotterell, B. and J. Kamminga 1990. Mechanisms of pre-industrial technology: an introduction to the 3
mechanics of ancient and traditional material culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cottrell, W. F. 1939. Of time and the railroader. American Sociological Review 4: 190–8.
Coulmas, F. 1989. The writing systems of the world. Oxford: Blackwell.
Crawford, I. M. The relationship of Bradshaw and Wandjina art in north-west Kimberley. In Form in 7
indigenous art: schematisation in the art of Aboriginal Australia and prehistoric Europe, ed. P. J. Ucko.
Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

References • 439 •

Cribb, R. 1991. Nomads in archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crocker, A. (ed.) 1983. Papunya: Aboriginal paintings from the Central Australian Desert. Alice Springs:
Aboriginal Artists Agency Ltd and Papunya Tula Artists Pty Ltd.
Csordas, T. 1990. Embodiment as a paradigm for anthropology. Ethos 18: 5–47.
Daes, E.-I. 1997. Protection of the heritage of indigenous people (Human Rights Study Series 10). New
York and Geneva: United Nations.
D’Andrade, R. G. 1981. The cultural part of cognition. Cognitive Science 5: 179–95.
—— 1984. Cultural meaning systems. In Culture theory: essays on mind, self and emotion, eds R. A.
Shweder and R. A. LeVine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 88–119.
—— 1990. Some propositions about the relations between culture and human cognition. In Cultural
psychology: essays on comparative human development, eds J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder and G. Herdt.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 65–129.
—— 1992. Schemas and motivation. In Human motives and cultural models, eds R. G. D’Andrade and
C. Strauss. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 23–44.
—— 1995. The development of cognitive anthropology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Daniels, S. and D. Cosgrove 1988. Introduction: iconography and landscape. In The iconography of landscape, eds D. Cosgrove and S. Daniels. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–10.
Darwin, C. 1860. Journal of researches during the voyage of HMS ‘Beagle’, 2nd edition. London: Collins.
—— 1862. On the various contrivances by which British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects. London:
John Murray.
—— 1871. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. London: John Murray.
—— 1875. The variation of animals and plants under domestication, 2nd edition. London: John Murray.
Davies, D. 1988. The evocative symbolism of trees. In The iconography of landscape, eds D. Cosgrove
and S. Daniels. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 32–42.
Dawkins, R. 1982. The extended phenotype. San Francisco: Freeman.
De Casper, A. and M. Spence 1986. Prenatal maternal speech inﬂuences newborns’ perception of speech
sounds. Infant Behavior and Development 9: 13–50.
DeFrancis, J. 1989. Visible speech: the diverse oneness of writing systems. Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.
Deleuze, G. and F. Guattari 1988. A thousand plateaus: capitalism and schizophrenia (trans. B. Massumi).
London: Athlone Press.
Dent, C. H. 1990. An ecological approach to language development: an alternative functionalism.
Developmental Psychobiology 23: 679–703.
Dentan, R. K. 1968. The Semai: a nonviolent people of Malaya. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Derrida, J. 1974. Of grammatology, trans. G. C. Spivak. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Descartes, R. 1988. Descartes: selected philosophical writings, trans. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff and D.
Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Descola, P. 1992. Societies of nature and the nature of society. In Conceptualizing society, ed. A. Kuper.
London: Routledge, pp. 107–26.
—— 1994. In the society of nature: a native ecology in Amazonia, trans. N. Scott. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
—— 1996a. Constructing natures: symbolic ecology and social practice. In Nature and society: anthropological perspectives, eds P. Descola and G. Pálsson. London: Routledge, pp. 82–102.
—— 1996b. The spears of twilight: life and death in the Amazon jungle, trans. J. Lloyd. London: Harper
Collins.
Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and danger. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
—— 1970. Natural symbols: explorations in cosmology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Dreyfus, H. L. 1991. Being-in-the-world: a commentary on Heidegger’s ‘Being and Time, Division I’.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. 1992. Introduction to the MIT Press edition. In What computers still can’t do. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, pp. ix-lii.
Dreyfus, H. L. and S. E. Dreyfus 1986. Mind over machine. New York: Free Press.
—— 1987. The mistaken psychological assumptions underlying the belief in expert systems. In Cognitive
psychology in question, eds A. Costall and A. Still. Brighton: Harvester Press, pp. 17–31.
Drucker, P. F. 1970. Technology, management and society. London: Heinemann.
Ducos, P. 1978. ‘Domestication’ deﬁned and methodological approaches to its recognition in faunal
assemblages. In Approaches to faunal analysis in the Middle East, eds R. H. Meadow and M. A. Zeder.
Harvard University: Peabody Museum Bulletin 2, pp. 53–6.

References
—— 1989. Deﬁning domestication: a clariﬁcation. In The walking larder: patterns of domestication, 1
pastoralism and predation, ed. J Clutton-Brock. London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 28–30.
Dumont, L. 1986. Essays on individualism: modern ideology in anthropological perspective. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Dunbar, R. 1987. Darwinizing man: a commentary. In Human reproductive behavior: a Darwinian perspec- 4
tive, eds L. L. Betzig, M. Borgerhoff Mulder and P. Turke. New York: Cambridge University Press, 5
pp. 161–9.
Durham, W. H. 1991. Coevolution: genes, culture and human diversity. Stanford: Stanford University 7
Press.
Durkheim, E. 1976 [1915]. The elementary forms of the religious life, trans J. W. Swain, 2nd edn. London:
Allen and Unwin.
Durkheim, E. 1982 [1895]. The rules of sociological method and selected texts on sociology and its method, 10
ed. S. Lukes, trans. W. D. Halls. London: Macmillan.
Durkheim, E. amd M. Mauss 1963 [1903]. Primitive classiﬁcation. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 2
Edelman, B. 1993. Acting cool and being safe: the deﬁnition of skill in a Swedish railway yard. In Beyond 3
boundaries: understanding, translation and anthropological discourse, ed. G. Pálsson. Oxford: Berg.
Edney, M. 1993. Cartography without ‘progress’: reinterpreting the nature and historical development
of mapmaking. Cartographica 30: 54–68.
Ellen, R. F. 1982. Environment, subsistence and system: the ecology of small-scale social formations. Cambridge: 6
Cambridge University Press.
Endicott, K. 1979. Batek Negrito religion. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Engels, F. 1934. Dialectics of nature, trans. C. Dutton. Moscow: Progress.
Evans, F. T. 1998. Two legs, thing using and talking: the origins of the creative engineering mind.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Society 12: 185–213.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ewers, J. C. 1955. The horse in Blackfoot Indian culture. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American 2
Ethnology, Bulletin 159. Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Fabian, J. 1983. Time and the other: how anthropology makes its object. New York: Columbia University 4
Press.
Farnell, B. 1995. Do you see what I mean? Plains Indian sign talk and the embodiment of action. Austin,
Tex: University of Texas Press.
Feibleman, J. K. 1966. Technology and skills. Technology and Culture 7: 318–28.
Feit, H. 1973. The ethnoecology of the Waswanipi Cree: or how hunters can manage their resources. 8
In Cultural ecology: readings on the Canadian Indians and Eskimos, ed. B. Cox. Toronto: McClelland 9
and Stewart, pp. 115–25.
—— 1994. Dreaming of animals: the Waswanipi Cree shaking tent ceremony in relation to environ1
ment, hunting and missionisation. In Circumpolar religion and ecology: an anthropology of the North,
eds T. Irimoto and T. Yamada. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, pp. 289–316.
Feld, S. 1982. Sound and sentiment: birds, weeping, poetics and song in Kaluli expression. Philadelphia: 3
University of Pennsylvania Press.
—— 1996. Waterfalls of song: an acoustemology of place resounding in Bosavi, Papua New Guinea. 5
In Senses of place, eds S. Feld and K. H. Basso. Santa Fe, N.Mex.: School of American Research, 6
pp. 91–135.
Fernandez, J. W. 1998. Trees of knowledge of self and other in culture: on models for the moral imag- 7
ination. In The social life of trees: anthropological perspectives on tree symbolism, ed. L. Rival. Oxford: 8
Berg.
Fienup-Riordan, A. 1987. The mask: the eye of the dance. Arctic Anthropology 24: 40–55.
—— 1990. Eskimo essays: Yup’ik lives and how we see them. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 1
—— 1994. Boundaries and passages: rule and ritual in Yup’ik Eskimo oral tradition. Norman, Okla.:
University of Oklahoma Press.
Firth, R. 1939. Primitive Polynesian economy. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— 1964. Capital, saving and credit in peasant societies: a viewpoint from economic anthropology. In 4
Capital, savings and credit in peasant societies, eds R. Firth and B. S. Yamey. London: Allen & Unwin, 5
pp. 15–34.
Fitzhugh, W. W. 1988. Comparative art of the North Paciﬁc rim. In Crossroads of continents: cultures of 7
Siberia and Alaska, eds W. W. Fitzhugh and A. Crowell. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press, pp. 294–312.

References • 441 •

Flew, A. (ed.) 1964. Body, mind, and death. London: Crowell-Collier.
Foley, R. 1985. Optimality theory in anthropology. Man (N.S.) 20: 222–42.
—— 1987. Another unique species: patterns in human evolutionary ecology. London: Longman.
French, M. J. 1988. Invention and evolution: design in nature and engineering. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Friedman, J. 1974. Marxism, structuralism and vulgar materialism. Man (N.S.)9: 444–69.
Frisch, K. von 1975. Animal architecture. London: Hutchinson.
Gambetta, D. (ed.) 1988. Trust: making and breaking co-operative relations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gamst, F. C. 1980. The hoghead: an industrial ethnology of the locomotive engineer. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.
Gatewood, J. B. 1985. Actions speak louder than words. In Directions in cognitive anthropology, ed.
J. W. Dougherty. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, pp. 199–219.
Gebhart-Sayer, A. 1985. The geometric designs of the Shipibo-Conibo in ritual context. Journal of Latin
American Lore 11: 143–75.
Geertz, C. 1964. The transition to humanity. In Horizons of anthropology, ed. S. Tax. Chicago: Aldine.
—— 1973. The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
—— 1984. ‘From the native’s point of view’: on the nature of anthropological understanding. In Culture
theory: essays on mind, self and emotion, eds R. A. Shweder and R. A. LeVine. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 123–36.
Gell, A. 1979. The Umeda language-poem. Canberra Anthropology 2(1): 44–62.
—— 1985. How to read a map: remarks on the practical logic of navigation. Man (N.S.)20: 271–86.
—— 1992a. The anthropology of time: cultural constructions of temporal maps amd images. Oxford: Berg.
—— 1992b. The technology of enchantment and the enchantment of technology. In Anthropology, art
and aesthetics, eds J. Coote and A. Shelton. Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 40–63.
—— 1995. The language of the forest: landscape and phonological iconism in Umeda. In The anthropology of landscape: perspectives on place and space, eds E. Hirsch and M. O’Hanlon. Oxford: Clarendon,
pp. 232–54.
Ghiselin, M. T. 1969. The triumph of the Darwinian method. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gibson, J. J. 1966. The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
—— 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
—— 1982. Reasons for realism: selected essays of James J. Gibson, eds E. Reed and R. Jones. Hillsdale,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gibson, T. 1985. The sharing of substance versus the sharing of activity among the Buid. Man (N.S.)
20: 391–411.
Gibson, W. S. 1977. Bruegel. London: Thames and Hudson.
Glacken, C. J. 1967. Traces on the Rhodian shore. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gladwin, T. 1964. Culture and logical process. In Explorations in cultural anthropology, ed. W. H.
Goodenough. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 167–77.
Godelier, M. 1972. Rationality and irrationality in economics. London: New Left Books.
—— 1980. Aide-mémoire for a survey of work and its representations. Current Anthropology 21: 832–5.
—— 1986. The mental and the material, trans. M. Thom. London: Verso.
Gooch, P. 1998. At the tail of the buffalo: Van Gujjar pastoralists between the forest and the world arena.
Lund: Lund Monographs in Social Anthropology 6.
Goodman, N. 1978. Ways of worldmaking. Brighton: Harvester Press.
Goodman, P. 1971. Speaking and language: defence of poetry. London: Wildwood House.
Goodwin, B. C. 1982. Biology without Darwinian spectacles. Biologist 29: 108–12.
—— 1988. Organisms and minds: the dialectics of the animal–human interface in biology. In What is
an animal?, ed. T. Ingold. London: Unwin Hyman.
Goody, J. 1977. The domestication of the savage mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gosden, C. 1994. Social being and time. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gould, J. L. and C. G. Gould 1988. The honey bee. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Gould, P. and R. White 1974. Mental maps. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gould, R. A. 1970. Spears and spear-throwers of the Western Desert Aborigines of Australia. American
Museum Novitates 2403: 1–42.
Gould, S. J. and E. S. Vrba 1982. Exaptation – a missing term in the science of form. Palaeobiology 8: 4–15.
Gow, P. 1990. Could Sangama read? The origin of writing among the Piro of Eastern Peru. History and
Anthropology 5: 87–103.

References
Gregory, R. 1973. The confounded eye. In Illusion in nature and art, eds R. L. Gregory and E. H. 1
Gombrich. New York: Scribners, pp. 49–95.
Grifﬁn, D. R. 1976. The question of animal awareness. New York: Rockefeller University Press.
Grifﬁn, D. R. 1984. Animal thinking. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Grinker, R. R. 1992. Comment on Nurit Bird-David, ‘Beyond “The Original Afﬂuent Society”’. Current 4
Anthropology 33(1): 39.
Gross, C. 1998. Following traces, creating remains: relatedness and temporality in the upper Awara, Papua 6
New Guinea. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Manchester.
Groves, C. P. and J. Sabater Pi 1985. From ape’s nest to human ﬁx point. Man (N.S.) 20: 22–47.
Gudeman, S. 1986. Economics as culture: models and metaphors of livelihood. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
—— 1992. Comment on Nurit Bird-David, ‘Beyond “The Original Afﬂuent Society” ’. Current 10
Anthropology 33(1): 39–40.
Gudeman, S. and A. Rivera 1990. Conversations in Colombia: the domestic economy in life and text. 2
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Guss, D. M. 1989. To weave and sing: art, symbol and narrative in the South American rain forest. Berkeley,
Calif.: University of California Press.
Guyer, J. 1988. The multiplication of labor: gender and agricultural change in modern Africa. Current 5
Anthropology 29: 247–72.
Hagen, M. A. 1986. Varieties of realism: geometries of representational art. Cambridge: Cambridge 7
University Press.
Hallowell, A. I. 1942. The role of conjuring in Saulteaux society. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 9
Press.
—— 1955. Culture and experience. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
—— 1960. Ojibwa ontology, behavior and world view. In Culture in history: essays in honor of Paul 1
Radin, ed. S. Diamond. New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 19–52.
—— 1976. The role of dreams in Ojibwa culture (1966). In Contributions to anthropology: selected papers 3
of A. Irving Hallowell, eds R. D. Fogelson, F. Eggan, M. E. Spiro, G. W. Stocking, A. F. C. Wallace 4
and W. E. Washburn. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 449–74.
Hallyn, F. 1993. The poetic structure of the world: Copernicus and Kepler, trans. D. M. Leslie. New York:
Zone.
Hamilton, A. 1980. Dual social systems: technology, labour and women’s secret rites in the eastern 7
Western Desert of Australia. Oceania 51: 4–19.
Harley, J. B. 1989. Deconstructing the map. Cartographica 26: 1–20.
Harré, R. 1998. The singular self: an introduction to the psychology of personhood. London: Sage.
Harris, D. R. (ed.) 1996. The origins and spread of agriculture and pastoralism. London: UCL Press.
Harris, M. 1968. The rise of anthropological theory. New York: Crowell.
Harris, R. 1980. The language-makers. London: Duckworth.
Hastrup, K. 1989. Nature as historical space. Folk 31: 5–20.
Hediger, H. 1977. Nest and home. Folia Primatologica 28: 170–87.
Heft, H. 1996.The ecological approach to wayﬁnding: a Gibsonian perspective. In The construction of 5
cognitive maps, ed. J. Portugali. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, pp. 105–32.
Heidegger, M. 1971. Poetry, language, thought, trans A. Hofstadter. New York: Harper and Row.
Heij, P. and J. Tamboer n.d. Embodied intentionality: the signiﬁcance of Merleau-Ponty’s embodied 7
intentionality for the foundations of Gibson’s ecological psychology. Paper presented at the Workshop 8
on Situated Action, International Society for Ecological Psychology, Manchester, UK, 23–24 9
September 1991.
Heilbroner, R. L. 1967. Do machines make history? Technology and Culture 8: 335–45.
Hewes, G. W. 1976. The current status of the gestural theory of language origins. In The origins and
evolution of language and speech, eds S. R. Harnad, H. D. Steklis and J. Lancaster. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 280, pp. 482–504.
Higgs, E. and H. Jarman 1969. The origins of agriculture: a reconsideration. Antiquity 43: 31–41.
Hill, M. H. 1985. Bound to the environment: towards a phenomenology of sightlessness. In Dwelling, 5
place and environment, eds D. Seamon and R. Mugerauer. New York: Columbia University Press, 6
pp. 99–111.
Hinde, R. A. 1991. A biologist looks at anthropology. Man (N.S.) 25: 583–608.
Ho, M-W. 1989. Reanimating nature: the integration of science with human experience. Beshara 8: 16–25. 118

References • 443 •

—— 1991. The role of action in evolution: evolution by process and the ecological approach to perception. Cultural Dynamics 4(3): 336–54.
Ho, M-W. and P. T. Saunders (eds) 1984. Beyond neo-Darwinism: introduction to the new evolutionary
paradigm. London: Academic Press.
Hodges, H. 1964. Artefacts: an introduction to early materials and technology. London: John Baker.
Hornborg, A. 1992. Machine fetishism, value, and the image of unlimited good: towards a thermodynamics of imperialism. Man (N.S.) 27: 1–16.
Houlgate, S. 1993. Vision, reﬂection and openness: the ‘hegemony of vision’ from a Hegelian point of
view. In Modernity and the hegemony of vision, ed. D. M. Levin. Berkeley, Calif.: University of
California Press, pp. 87–123.
Howell, S. 1989. ‘To be angry is not to be human, but to be fearful is’: Chewong concepts of human
nature. In Societies at peace: anthropological perspectives, eds. S. Howell and R. Willis. London:
Routledge, pp. 45–59.
—— 1996. Nature in culture or culture in nature? Chewong ideas of ‘humans’ and other species. In
Nature and society: anthropological perspectives, eds P. Descola and G. Pálsson. London: Routledge.
Howells, W. 1967. Mankind in the making: the story of human evolution. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Howes, D. 1991a. Introduction: ‘to summon all the senses’. In The varieties of sensory experience: a sourcebook in the anthropology of the senses, ed. D. Howes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 3–21.
—— 1991b. Sensorial anthropology. In The varieties of sensory experience: a sourcebook in the anthropology
of the senses, ed. D. Howes. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 167–91.
Hull, J. 1997. On sight and insight: a journey into the world of blindness. Oxford: Oneworld Publications.
Hultkrantz, Å. 1982. Religion and experience of nature among North American hunting Indians. In The
hunters: their culture and way of life, eds Å. Hultkrantz and Ø. Vorren (Tromsø Museum Skrifter,
Vol. XVIII). Tromsø, Oslo, Bergen: Universitetsforlaget, pp. 163–86.
Humphrey, N. 1976. The social function of intellect. In Growing points in ethology, eds P. Bateson and
R. A. Hinde. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 303–17.
Hutchins, E. 1995. Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Ichikawa, M. 1992. Comment on Nurit Bird-David, ‘Beyond “The Original Afﬂuent Society” ’. Current
Anthropology 33(1): 40–41.
Ihde, D. 1976. Listening and voice: a phenomenology of sound. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Ingber, D. E. 1998. The architecture of life. Scientiﬁc American 278(1): 30–39.
Inglis, F. 1977. Nation and community: a landscape and its morality. Sociological Review 25: 489–514.
Ingold, T. 1980. Hunters, pastoralists and ranchers: reindeer economies and their transformations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
—— 1983. The architect and the bee: reﬂections on the work of animals and men. Man (N.S.) 18: 1–20.
—— 1986a. The appropriation of nature: essays on human ecology and social relations. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
—— 1986b. Evolution and social life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— 1988a. Notes on the foraging mode of production. In Hunters and gatherers I: history, evolution
and social change, eds T. Ingold, D. Riches and J. Woodburn. Oxford: Berg.
—— 1988b. The animal in the study of humanity. In What is an animal?, ed. T. Ingold. London:
Unwin Hyman.
—— 1988c. Introduction. In What is an animal?, ed. T. Ingold. London: Unwin Hyman.
—— 1989. The social and environmental relations of human beings and other animals. In Comparative
socioecology, eds V. Standen and R. A. Foley. Oxford: Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
—— 1990. An anthropologist looks at biology. Man (N.S.) 25: 208–29.
—— 1991. Becoming persons: consciousness and sociality in human evolution. Cultural Dynamics 4:
355–78.
—— 1992a. Culture and the perception of the environment. In Bush base: forest farm. Culture, environment and development, eds E. Croll and D. Parkin. London: Routledge, pp. 39–56.
—— 1992b. Comment on Nurit Bird-David, ‘Beyond “The Original Afﬂuent Society” ’. Current
Anthropology 33(1): 41–2.
—— 1992c. Foraging for data, camping with theories: hunter-gatherers and nomadic pastoralists in
archaeology and anthropology. Antiquity 66: 790–803.
—— 1993a. The art of translation in a continuous world. In Beyond boundaries: understanding, translation and anthropological discourse, ed. G. Pálsson. Oxford: Berg, pp. 210–30.
—— 1993b. The reindeerman’s lasso. In Technological choices: transformation in material cultures since
the Neolithic, ed. P Lemmonier. London: Routledge, pp. 108–25.

References
—— 1996a. Human worlds are culturally constructed: against the motion (I). In Key debates in anthro- 1
pology, ed. T. Ingold. London: Routledge, pp. 112–18.
—— 1996b. Social relations, human ecology and the evolution of culture: an exploration of concepts
and deﬁnitions. In Handbook of human symbolic evolution, eds A. Lock and C. R. Peters. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, pp. 178–203.
—— 1997. The painting is not the terrain: maps, pictures and the dwelt-in world (comment on T. 5
Lemaire, ‘Archaeology between the invention and the destruction of the landscape’). Archaeological 6
Dialogues 4(1): 29–31.
—— 1998. Evolution of society. In Evolution: society, science and the universe, ed. A. C. Fabian.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 79–99.
—— 1999. On the social relations of the hunter-gatherer band. In The Cambridge encyclopedia of hunters 9
and gatherers, eds R. B. Lee and R. Daly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 399–410.
—— n.d. Two reﬂections on ecological knowledge. Unpublished paper presented at the conference on 1
‘Nature Knowledge’, Instituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, Venice, December 1997.
International Labour Organisation 1989. Indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries.
Convention 169. Geneva: ILO.
Ivy, M. 1995. Discourses of the vanishing: modernity, phantasm, Japan. Chicago: University of Chicago 4
Press.
Jackson, M. 1983. Thinking through the body: an essay on understanding metaphor. Social Analysis 14: 6
127–48.
—— 1989. Paths toward a clearing: radical empiricism and ethnographic inquiry. Bloomington, Ind.:
Indiana University Press.
Jacob, F. 1977. Evolution and tinkering. Science 196: 1161–6.
James, W. 1892. Psychology. New York: Henry Holt.
Janáček, L. 1989. Janáček’s uncollected essays on music, trans. and ed. M. Zemanová. London: Marion 1
Boyars.
Jarman, H. N. 1972. The origins of wheat and barley cultivation. In Papers in economic prehistory, ed.
E. S. Higgs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jay, M. 1993a. Downcast eyes: the denigration of vision in twentieth-century French thought. Berkeley, CA: 4
University of California Press.
—— 1993b. Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, and the search for a new ontology of sight. In Modernity and the 6
hegemony of vision, ed. D. M. Levin. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, pp. 143–85.
Jenks, C. 1995. The centrality of the eye in Western culture: an introduction. In Visual culture, ed.
C. Jenks. London: Routledge, pp. 1–25.
Johnson-Laird, D. N. 1988. The computer and the mind: an introduction to cognitive science. London: 9
Fontana.
Jonas, H. 1966. The phenomenon of life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jones, R. 1977. The Tasmanian paradox. In Stone tools as cultural markers, ed. R. V. S. Wright. Canberra: 2
Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, pp. 189–204.
Judovitz, D. 1993. Vision, representation, and the technology of Descartes. In Modernity and the hege4
mony of vision, ed. D. M. Levin. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, pp. 63–86.
Kandel, E. R. and R. D. Hawkins 1992. The biological basis of learning and individuality. Scientiﬁc 5
American 267: 53–60.
Kant, I. 1933. Immanuel Kant’s critique of pure reason, trans. N. K. Smith. London: Macmillan.
Kaplan, H. and K. Hill 1992. The evolutionary ecology of food acquisition. In Evolutionary ecology and
human behavior, eds E. A. Smith and B. Winterhalder. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, pp. 167–201.
Kay, L. E. 1998. A book of life? How the genome became an information system and DNA a language. 9
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 41: 504–28.
Keller, C. M. and J. D. Keller 1996. Cognition and tool use: the blacksmith at work. Cambridge: Cambridge 1
University Press.
Kemnitzer, L. S. 1977. Another view of time and the railroader. Anthropological Quarterly 50: 25–9.
Kennedy, J. S. 1992. The new anthropomorphism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klee, P. 1961. Notebooks, Volume 1: the thinking eye. London: Lund Humphries.
Kluckhohn, C. 1949. Mirror for man. New York: McGraw Hill.
Knight, J. 1998. The second life of trees: family forestry in upland Japan. In The social life of trees: 6
anthropological perspectives on tree symbolism, ed. L. Rival. Oxford: Berg, pp. 197–218.
Kroeber, A. L. 1948. Anthropology (revised edition). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
—— 1952 [1917]. The nature of culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

References • 445 •

Kroeber, A. L. and C. Kluckhohn 1952. Culture: a critical review of concepts and deﬁnitions. Papers of
the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, vol. XLVII, no.
1. Cambridge, Mass.
Kubler, G. 1962. The shape of time: remarks on the history of things. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Kwon, H. 1998. The saddle and the sledge: hunting as comparative narrative in Siberia and beyond.
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.)4: 115–27.
Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson 1980. Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lane, P. J. 1998. Indigenous or autochthonous? Establishing a role for archaeology in the negotiation
of Basarwa identity. In Indigenous peoples in modern nation-states, ed. S. Saugestad. University of
Tromso, Faculty of Social Science, Occasional Papers Series A, 90.
Langer, S. K. 1953. Feeling and form: a theory of art. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
—— 1957. Philosophy in a new key. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Latash, M. 1996. The Bernstein problem: how does the central nervous system make its choices? In
Dexterity and its development, eds M. Latash and M. T. Turvey, pp. 277–303. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Latour, B. 1993. We have never been modern, trans. C. Porter. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Lave, J. 1988. Cognition in practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— 1990. The culture of acquisition and the practice of understanding. In Cultural psychology: essays
on comparative human development, eds J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder and G. Herdt. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 309–27.
Lawrence, D. L. and S. M. Low 1990. The built environment and spatial form. Annual Review of
Anthropology 19: 453–505.
Lawrence, R. J. 1987. What makes a house a home? Environment and Behavior 19: 154–68.
Layton, E. T. 1974. Technology as knowledge. Technology and culture 15: 31–41.
Layton, R. 1985. The cultural context of hunter-gatherer rock art. Man (N.S.) 20: 434–53.
—— 1992a. Traditional and contemporary art of Aboriginal Australia: two case studies. In Anthropology,
art and aesthetics, eds J. Coote and A. Shelton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 137–59.
—— 1992b. Australian rock art: a new synthesis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leach, E. R. 1954. Political systems of highland Burma. London: Athlone.
—— 1964. Anthropological aspects of language: animal categories and verbal abuse. In New directions
in the study of language, ed. E. H. Lennenberg. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 23–63.
—— 1966. Ritualization in man. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B,
vol. 251: 403–8.
—— 1976. Culture and communication: the logic by which symbols are connected. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Leach, J. 1997. The creative land: kinship and landscape in Madang Province, Papua New Guinea.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Manchester.
Leakey, M. D. 1971. Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lemonnier, P. 1986. The study of material culture today: towards an anthropology of technical systems.
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 5: 147–86.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 1993. Gesture and Speech, trans. A. Bostock Berger, intr. R. White. Cambridge, Mass.
and London: MIT Press.
Lestel, D. 1998. How chimpanzees have domesticated humans: towards an anthropology of human–
animal communication. Anthropology Today 14(3): 12–15.
Levin, D. M. 1988. The opening of vision: nihilism and the postmodern situation. London: Routledge.
—— 1993. Introduction. In Modernity and the hegemony of vision, ed. D. M. Levin. Berkeley, Calif:
University of California Press, pp. 1–29.
Lévi-Strauss, C. 1964. Totemism, trans. R. Needham. London: Merlin Press.
—— 1966a. Overture to ‘Le cru et le cuit’. Yale French Studies 36/7: 41–65.
—— 1966b. The savage mind. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
—— 1974. Structuralism and ecology. Social Science Information 12(1): 7–23.
—— 1983. The way of the masks, trans. S. Modelski. London: Jonathan Cape.
Lewis, G. M. 1993. Metrics, geometries, signs, and language: sources of cartographic miscommunication
between native and Euro-American cultures in North America. Cartographica 30: 98–106.
Lewontin, R. C. 1982. Organism and environment. In Learning, development and culture, ed. H. C.
Plotkin. Chichester: Wiley, pp. 151–70.
—— 1983. Gene, organism and environment. In Evolution from molecules to men, ed. D. S. Bendall.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

References
—— 1992. The dream of the human genome. The New York Review, May 28th 1992, pp. 31–40.
Lieberman, P. 1985. Comment on S. T. Parker, ‘A socio-technical model for the evolution of language’. 2
Current Anthropology 26: 628.
Linton, A. 1955. Preface. In R. Linton, The tree of culture. New York: Knopf, pp. v-viii.
Lock, A. J. 1980. The guided reinvention of language. London: Academic Press.
Lovejoy, C. O. 1988. Evolution of human walking. Scientiﬁc American 259: 82–9.
Lovelock, J. E. 1979. Gaia: a new look at life on earth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lowenthal, D. 1978. Finding valued landscapes. Progress in Human Geography 2: 373–418.
—— 1996. The past is a foreign country: for the motion (1). In Key debates in anthropology, ed. 8
T. Ingold. London: Routledge, pp. 206–12.
Lubbock, J. 1865. Prehistoric times as illustrated by ancient remains and the manners and customs of modern
savages. London: Williams and Norgate.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. Chichester: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. 1988. Familiarity, conﬁdence, trust: problems and alternatives. In Trust: making and 2
breaking co-operative relations, ed. D. Gambetta. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 94–107.
Lye, T.-P. 1997. Knowledge, forest, and hunter-gatherer movement: the Batek of Pahang, Malaysia. 4
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Hawai’i.
Lyons, J. 1981. Language and linguistics: an introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacArthur, R. H. and E. R. Pianka 1966. On optimal use of a patchy environment. American Naturalist 6
100: 603–9.
MacCormack, C. 1980. Nature, culture and gender: a critique. In Nature, culture and gender, eds 8
C. MacCormack and M. Strathern. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacKenzie, D. 1984. Marx and the machine. Technology and Culture 25: 473–502.
MacKenzie, M. 1991. Androgynous objects: string bags and gender in central New Guinea. Chur: Harwood
Academic.
Malinowski, B. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Margolis, J. 1978. Culture and technology. Research in Philosophy and Technology 1: 23–37.
Marshall, L. 1961. Sharing, talking and giving: relief of social tensions among !Kung Bushmen. Africa 4
31: 231–49.
Marx, K. 1930 [1867]. Capital, vol. I, trans. E. and C. Paul from 4th German edition of Das Kapital
(1890). London: Dent.
—— 1963 [1869]. Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. New York: International Publishers.
—— 1964. Pre-capitalist economic formations, trans. J. Cohen, ed. E. J. Hobsbawm. London: Lawrence 8
and Wishart.
—— 1964. The economic and political manuscripts of 1884, trans. M. Milligan, ed. D. J. Struik. New 30
York: International Publishers.
—— 1970 [1859]. A contribution to the critique of political economy. Moscow: Progress.
—— 1973. Grundrisse, trans. M. Nicolaus. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Mauss, M. 1954 [1925]. The gift, trans. I. Cunnison. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— 1979. Sociology and psychology: essays. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— 1985. A category of the human mind: the notion of person; the notion of self, trans. W. D. Halls. 5
In The category of the person: anthropology, philosophy, history, eds M. Carruthers, S. Collins and 6
S. Lukes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–25.
—— 1990 [1950] The gift, trans. W. D. Halls. London: Routledge.
Mauss, M. and H. Beuchat 1979. Seasonal variations of the Eskimo, trans. James J. Fox. London: Routledge 8
& Kegan Paul (ﬁrst published, 1904–5).
Mayr, E. 1976 [1961]. Cause and effect in biology. In Evolution and the diversity of life: selected essays. 40
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, pp. 359–71.
McGinn, R. E. 1978. What is technology? Research in Philosophy and Technology 1: 179–97.
McGrew, W. C. 1992. Chimpanzee material culture: implications for human evolution. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McLuhan, M. 1962. The Gutenberg Galaxy: the making of typographic man. Toronto: University of Toronto 4
Press.
Mead, G. H. 1977 [1938]. The process of mind in nature. In George Herbert Mead on Social Psychology, 6
ed. A. Strauss. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 85–111.
Mech, L. D. 1970. The wolf. Garden City: Natural History Press.
Medawar, P. 1967. The art of the soluble. London: Methuen.

References • 447 •

Meggitt, M. J. 1962. Desert people: a study of the Walbiri Aborigines of Central Australia. Sydney: Angus
& Robertson.
Mellaart, J. 1975. The Neolithic of the Near East. London: Thames and Hudson.
Meillassoux, C. 1972. From reproduction to production. Economy and Society 1: 93–105.
Meinig, D. W. 1979a. The beholding eye: ten versions of the same scene. In The interpretation of ordinary landscapes, ed. D. W. Meinig. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 33–48.
—— 1979b. Introduction. In The interpretation of ordinary landscapes, ed. D. W. Meinig. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 1–7.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1962. Phenomenology of perception, trans. C. Smith. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— 1964a. Eye and mind, trans. C. Dallery. In The primacy of perception, and other essays on phenomenological psychology, the philosophy of art, history and politics, ed. J. M. Edie. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, pp. 159–90.
—— 1964b. The child’s relations with others, trans. W. Cobb. In The primacy of perception, and other
essays on phenomenological psychology, the philosophy of art, history and politics, ed. J. M. Edie. Evanston,
Ill: Northwestern University Press, pp. 96–155.
Merrill, R. S. 1968. The study of technology. In International encyclopaedia of the social sciences, ed.
D. L. Sills. New York: Crowell Collier Macmillan, Vol. 15, pp. 576–89.
Michaels, C. F. and C. Carello 1981. Direct perception. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mitcham, C. 1978. Types of technology. Research in Philosophy and Technology 1: 229–94.
—— 1979. Philosophy and the history of technology. In The history and philosophy of technology, eds
G. Bugliarello and D. B. Doner. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Molleson, T. 1994. The eloquent bones of Abu Hureyra. Scientiﬁc American 271: 60–65.
Monmonier, M. 1991. How to lie with maps. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Monod, J. 1972. Chance and necessity, trans. A. Wainhouse. London: Collins.
Morgan, L. H. 1868. The American beaver and his works. New York: Burt Franklin.
Morphy, H. 1991. Ancestral connections: art and an Aboriginal system of knowledge. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
—— 1992. From dull to brilliant: the aesthetics of spiritual power among the Yolngu. In Anthropology,
art and aesthetics, eds J. Coote and A. Shelton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 181–208.
Morris, B. 1995. Woodland and village: reﬂections on the ‘animal estate’ in rural Malawi. Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.) 1: 301–15.
Morton, J. 1995. The organic remains: remarks on the constitution and development of people. In
Persons, bodies, selves, emotions, eds J. Morton and M. Macintyre. Special issue of Social Analysis,
No. 37. Department of Anthropology, University of Adelaide, pp. 101–18.
Mumford, L. 1946. Technics and civilization. London: Routledge.
—— 1966. Technics and the nature of man. Technology and Culture 7: 303–17.
—— 1967. The myth of the machine: technics and human development. London: Secker and Warburg.
Munn, N. 1970. The transformation of subjects into objects in Walbiri and Pitjantjatjara myth. In
Australian Aboriginal anthropology: modern studies in the social anthropology of the Australian Aborigines,
ed. R. M. Berndt. Perth: University of Western Australia Press.
—— 1973a. The spatial presentation of cosmic order in Walbiri iconography. In Primitive art and society,
ed. J. A. W. Forge. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 193–220.
—— 1973b. Walbiri iconography: graphic representation and cultural symbolism in a Central Australian
society. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Myers, F. R. 1986. Pintupi country, Pintupi self: sentiment, place, and politics among Western Desert
Aborigines. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Myers, R. E. 1976. Comparative neurology of vocalization and speech: proof of a dichotomy. In Origins
and evolution of language and speech, eds S. R. Harnad, H. D. Steklis and J. Lancaster. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 280, pp. 745–57.
Nelson, E. W. 1983. The Eskimo about Bering Strait. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
[Originally published as pp. 3–518 in the 18th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,
1896–97, Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Ofﬁce]
Nelson, R. K. 1983. Make prayers to the raven: a Koyukon view of the northern forest. Chicago, Ill:
University of Chicago Press.
Nilsson, M. P. 1920. Primitive time reckoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Norberg-Schulz, C. 1985. The concept of dwelling: on the way to ﬁgurative architecture. New York: Rizzoli
International.

References
Oatley, K. G. 1977. Inference, navigation and cognitive maps. In Thinking: readings in cognitive science, 1
eds P. N. Johnson-Laird and P. C. Wason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 537–47. 2
O’Brien, M. J. (ed.) 1996. Evolutionary archaeology: theory and application. Salt Lake City: University of
Utah Press.
Olson, D. R. 1994. The world on paper: the conceptual and cognitive implications of writing and reading. 4
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ong, W. 1982. Orality and literacy: the technologizing of the word. London: Methuen.
Oosten, J. 1992. Representing the spirits: the masks of the Alaskan Inuit. In Anthropology, art and 7
aesthetics, eds J. Coote and A. Shelton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 113–34.
Orlove, B. 1993. The ethnography of maps: the cultural and social contexts of cartographic representa9
tion in Peru. Cartographica 30: 29–46.
Oswalt, W. H. 1976. An anthropological analysis of food-getting technology. New York: John Wiley.
Oyama, S. 1985. The ontogeny of information: developmental systems and evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge 1
University Press.
—— 1989. Ontogeny and the central dogma: do we need the concept of genetic programming in order
to have an evolutionary perspective? In Systems in development: the Minnesota Symposia on child
psychology, Vol. 22, eds M. Gunnar and E. Thelen. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Paine, R. 1991. The claim of aboriginality: Saami in Norway. In The ecology of choice and symbol: essays 5
in honour of Fredrik Barth, eds R. Gronhaug, G. Haaland and G. Henriksen. Bergen: Alma Mater. 6
Pallasmaa, J. 1996. The eyes of the skin: architecture and the senses. London: Academy Editions.
Pálsson, G. 1991. Coastal economies, cultural accounts: human ecology and Icelandic discourse. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
—— 1994. Enskilment at sea. Man (N.S.) 29: 901–27.
Pandya, V. 1990. Movement and space: Andamanese cartography. American Ethnologist 17: 775–97.
Pearson, M. P. and C. Richards 1994. Ordering the world: perceptions of architecture, space and time. 1
In Architecture and order: approaches to social space, eds M. P. Pearson and C. Richards. London: 2
Routledge, pp. 1–37.
Pfaffenberger, B. 1988. Fetishised objects and humanised nature: towards an anthropology of technology.
Man (N.S.)23: 236–52.
—— 1992. Social anthropology of technology. Annual Review of Anthropology 21: 491–516.
Pittendrigh, C. S. 1958. Adaptation, natural selection and behavior. In Behavior and evolution, eds A. 6
Roe and G. G. Simpson. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, pp. 390–416.
Plato 1973. Phaedrus and Letters VII and VIII, trans. W. Hamilton. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Polanyi, K. 1957. The economy as an instituted process. In Trade and markets in the early empires, eds
K. Polanyi, C. Arensberg and H. Pearson. Glencoe: The Free Press, pp. 243–70.
Poncelet, J-V. 1844. Traité de mécanique industrielle. Liége: A. Leroux.
Powell, M. A. 1981. Three problems in the history of cuneiform writing: origins, direction of the script, 1
literacy. Visible Language 15: 419–40.
Premack, D. and A. J. Premack 1994. Why animals have neither culture nor history. In Companion ency3
clopedia of anthropology: humanity, culture and social life, ed. T. Ingold. London: Routledge, pp. 350–65.
Price, J. A. 1975. Sharing: the integration of intimate economies. Anthropologica 17: 3–27.
Putnam, W. C. 1964. Geology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pye, D. 1964. The nature of design. London: Studio Vista.
—— 1968. The nature and art of workmanship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quinn, N. and D. Holland 1987. Culture and cognition. In Cultural models in language and thought,
eds D. Holland and N. Quinn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–40.
Rapoport, A. 1994. Spatial organisation and the built environment. In Companion encyclopedia of anthro- 9
pology: humanity, culture and social life, ed. T. Ingold. London: Routledge, pp. 460–502.
Rappaport, R. A. 1968. Pigs for the ancestors. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Ray, D. J. 1967. Eskimo masks: art and ceremony (with photographs by A. A. Blaker). Seattle: University 2
of Washington Press.
Rayner, A. 1997. Degrees of freedom: living in dynamic boundaries. London: Imperial College Press.
Reason, D. 1987. A hard singing of country. In The unpainted landscape, with contributions by S. Cutts 4
et al. London: Coracle Press, pp. 24–87.
Rée, J. 1999. I see a voice: a philosophical history of language, deafness and the senses. London: Harper 6
Collins.
Reed, E. 1987. James Gibson’s ecological approach to cognition. In Cognitive psychology in question, eds
A. Costall and A. Still. Brighton: Harvester Press, pp. 142–73.

References • 449 •

—— 1988a. The affordances of the animate environment: social science from the ecological point of
view. In What is an animal?, ed. T. Ingold. London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 110–26.
—— 1988b. James J. Gibson and the psychology of perception. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Reed, E. S. and B. Bril 1996. The primacy of action in development. In Dexterity and its development,
ed. M. Latash and M. T. Turvey. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 431–51.
Renfrew, C. 1992. Archaeology, genetics and linguistic diversity. Man (N.S.) 27: 445–78.
Renne, E. P. 1991. Water, spirits and plain white cloth. Man (N.S.) 26: 709–22.
Reuleaux, F. 1876. The kinematics of machinery: outlines of a theory of machines. London: Macmillan.
Reynolds, P. C. 1993. The complementation theory of language and tool use. In Tools, language and
cognition in human evolution, eds K. R. Gibson and T. Ingold. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 407–28.
Richards, P. 1974. Kant’s geography and mental maps. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers
(N.S.) 11: 1–16.
—— 1996. Human worlds are culturally constructed: against the motion (2). In Key debates in anthropology, ed. T. Ingold. London: Routledge.
Richerson, P. J. and R. Boyd 1978. A dual inheritance model of the human evolutionary process, I:
Basic postulates and a simple model. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 1: 127–54.
—— 1992. Cultural inheritance and evolutionary ecology. In Evolutionary ecology and human behavior,
eds E. A. Smith and B. Winterhalder. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, pp. 61–92.
Ridington, R. 1982. Technology, world view and adaptive strategy in a northern hunting society.
Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 19: 469–81.
Rival, L. 1993. The growth of family trees: understanding Huaorani perceptions of the forest. Man (N.S.)
28: 635–52.
—— (ed.) 1998. The social life of trees: anthropological perspectives on tree symbolism. Oxford: Berg.
Robarchek, C. A. 1989. Hobbesian and Rousseauan images of man: autonomy and individualism in a
peaceful society. In Societies at peace: anthropological perspectives, eds S. Howell and R. Willis. London:
Routledge, pp. 31–44.
Robinson, A. H. and B. B. Petchenik 1976. The nature of maps: essays towards understanding maps and
mapping. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rodaway, P. 1994. Sensuous geographies: body, sense and place. London: Routledge.
Romanyshyn, R. D. 1989. Technology as symptom and dream. London: Routledge.
Ronchi, V. 1957. Optics: the science of vision, trans. E. Rosen. New York: Dover.
Rooley, A. 1990. Performance: revealing the Orpheus within. Shaftesbury, Dorset: Element Books.
Rorty, R. 1980. Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Oxford: Blackwell.
Rouse, J. 1987. Knowledge and power: toward a political philosophy of science. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press.
Rousselot, J-L., W. W. Fitzhugh and A. Crowell 1988. Maritime economies of the North Paciﬁc rim.
In Crossroads of continents: cultures of Siberia and Alaska, eds. W. W. Fitzhugh and A. Crowell.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, pp. 151–72.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1998. The origins and spread of agriculture and pastoralism – are the grey horses
dead? International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 8: 218–24.
Rubin, D. 1988. Go for the skill. In Remembering reconsidered: ecological and traditional approaches to
the study of memory, eds U. Neisser and E. Winograd. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
374–82.
Rundstrom, R. A. 1990. A cultural interpretation of Inuit map accuracy. Geographical Review 80: 155–68.
—— 1993. The role of ethics, mapping, and the meaning of place in relations between Indians and
Whites in the United States. Cartographica 30: 21–8.
Rykwert, J. 1972. On Adam’s House in Paradise: the idea of the primitive hut in architectural history. New
York: Museum of Modern Art.
—— 1991. House and home. Social Research 58: 51–62.
Sacks, O. 1993. To see and not to see. The New Yorker, May 10, 1993: 59–73.
Sahlins, M. D. 1968. Tribesmen. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
—— 1969. Economic anthropology and anthropological economics. Social Science Information 8: 13–33.
—— 1972. Stone age economics. London: Tavistock.
—— 1976. Culture and practical reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Saladin d’Anglure, B. 1979. Inuit and caribou (Inuit texts and illustrations concerning caribou, collected
by B. Saladin d’Anglure). Inuksiutiit Allaniagait 2, Association Inuksiutiit Katimajiit, Département
d’Anthropologie, Université Laval, Quebec, Canada.

References
—— 1990. Nanook, super-male: the polar bear in the imaginary space and social time of the Inuit of 1
the Canadian Arctic. In Signifying animals: human meaning in the natural world, ed. R. Wills. London: 2
Unwin Hyman, pp. 178–95.
Sampson, G. 1985. Writing systems: a linguistic introduction. London: Hutchinson.
Saugestad, S. 1998. The inconvenient indigenous: remote area development in Botswana, donor assistance, 4
and the First People of the Kalahari. University of Tromsø, Faculty of Social Sciences.
Saussure, F. de 1959. Course in general linguistics, eds C. Bally and A. Sechehaye, trans. W. Baskin. New 6
York: The Philosophical Library.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. and D. M. Rumbaugh 1993. The emergence of language. In Tools, language 8
and cognition in human evolution, eds K. R. Gibson and T. Ingold. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Schafer, R. M. 1985. Acoustic space. In Dwelling, place and environment, eds D. Seamon and 10
R. Mugerauer. New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 87–98.
Schneider, D. M. 1968. American kinship: a cultural account. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schneider, H. K. 1974. Economic Man. New York: Free Press.
Schutz, A. 1951. Making music together: a study in social relationship. Social Research 18: 76–97.
—— 1970. On phenomenology and social relations, ed. H. R. Wagner. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Scott, C. 1989. Knowledge construction among Cree hunters: metaphors and literal understanding. 6
Journal de la Société des Américanistes 75: 193–208.
—— 1996. Science for the West, myth for the rest? The case of James Bay Cree knowledge construc- 8
tion. In Naked science: anthropological inquiry into boundaries, power, and knowledge, ed. L. Nader. 9
London: Routledge.
Seeger, A. 1975. The meaning of body ornaments: a Suya example. Ethnology 14: 211–24.
—— 1987. Why Suyá sing: a musical anthropology of an Amazonian people. Cambridge: Cambridge 1
University Press.
Seremetakis, C. N. 1994. Implications. In The senses still: perception and memory as material culture in 3
modernity. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, pp. 123–45.
Shaw, W. H. 1979. ‘The handmill gives you the feudal lord’: Marx’s technological determinism. History 5
and Theory 18: 155–76.
Shore, B. 1996. Culture in mind: cognition, culture and the problem of meaning. New York: Oxford 6
University Press.
Shotter, J. 1974 The development of personal powers. In The integration of the child into a social world, 8
ed. M. P. M. Richards. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— 1991. A poetics of relational forms: the sociality of everyday social life. Cultural Dynamics 4: 30
379–96.
Shweder, R. 1990. Cultural psychology – what is it? In Cultural psychology: essays on comparative human
development, eds J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder and G. Herdt. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2
Sigaut, F. 1985. More (and enough!) on technology. History and Technology 2: 115–32.
—— 1993. How can we analyse and describe technical actions? In The use of tools by humans and non- 4
human primates, eds A. Berthelet and J. Chavaillon. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 381–97.
—— 1994. Technology. In Companion encyclopedia of anthropology: humanity, culture and social life, ed. 6
T. Ingold. London: Routledge.
Singer, C., E. J. Holmyard and A. R. Hall (eds) 1954–58. A history of technology. Oxford: Clarendon. 7
Smith, D. M. 1998. An Athapaskan way of knowing: Chipewyan ontology. American Ethnologist 25: 8
412–32.
Smith, E. A. and B. Winterhalder 1992. Natural selection and decision making: some fundamental prin- 40
ciples. In Evolutionary ecology and human behavior, eds E. A. Smith and B. Winterhalder. New York: 1
Aldine de Gruyter, pp. 25–60.
Smith, E. Baldwin 1950. The dome: a study in the history of ideas. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.
Sorokin, P. A. and R. K. Merton 1937. Social time: a methodological and functional analysis. American 4
Journal of Sociology 42: 615–29.
Sperber, D. 1985. On anthropological knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— 1996. Explaining culture: a naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stanner, W. E. H. 1965. The dreaming. In Reader in comparative religion, eds W. A. Lessa and E. Z.
Vogt. New York: Harper & Row.

References • 451 •

Starkey, K. 1988. Time and work organisation: a theoretical and empirical analysis. In The rhythms of
society, eds M. Young and T. Schuller. London: Routledge.
Steinberg, J. H. 1981. Saulteaux of Lake Winnipeg. In Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 6,
Subarctic, ed. J. Helm, pp. 244–55. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.
Stewart, H. n.d. Ethnonyms and images: genesis of the ‘Inuit’ and image manipulation. Unpublished
paper, presented at the Eighth International Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies, Osaka,
Japan, October 1998.
Stoller, P. 1989. The taste of ethnographic things: the senses in anthropology. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Strathern, A. and M. Strathern 1971. Self-decoration in Mount Hagen, London: Duckworth.
Strathern, M. 1980. No nature, no culture: the Hagen case. In Nature, culture and gender, eds C.
MacCormack and M. Strathern. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Strauss, C. 1992. Models and motives. In Human motives and cultural models, eds R. G. D’Andrade and
C. Strauss. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–20.
Stravinsky, I. 1936. An autobiography. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Street, B. V. 1975. The savage in the literature: representations of ‘primitive’ society in English ﬁction,
1858–1920. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— 1984. Literacy in theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Suchman, L. 1987. Plans and situated actions: the problem of human–machine communication. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sullivan, T. and D. Gill 1975. If you could see what I hear. New York: Harper & Row,
Symons, D. 1992. On the use and misuse of Darwinism in the study of human behavior. In The adapted
mind: evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture, eds J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides and
J. Tooby. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 137–59.
Synnott, A. 1993. The body social: symbolism, self and society. London: Routledge.
Tani, Y. 1996. Domestic animal as serf: ideologies of nature in the Mediterranean and the Middle East.
In Redeﬁning nature: ecology, culture and domestication, eds R. Ellen and K. Fukui. Oxford: Berg, pp.
387–415.
Tanner, A. 1979. Bringing home animals: religious ideology and mode of production of the Mistassini Cree
hunters. New York: St Martin’s Press; London: Hurst.
Tapper, R. 1988. Animality, humanity, morality, society. In What is an animal?, ed. T Ingold. London:
Unwin Hyman, pp. 47–62.
Taylor, L. 1989. Seeing the ‘inside’: Kunwinjku paintings and the symbol of the divided body. In Animals
into art, ed. H. Morphy. London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 371–89.
—— 1996. Seeing the inside: bark painting in Western Arnhem Land. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Tedlock, B. and D. Tedlock 1985. Text and textile: language and technology in the arts of the Quiché
Maya. Journal of Anthropological Research 41: 121–46.
Thelen, E. 1995. Motor development: a new synthesis. American Psychologist 50: 79–95.
Thomas, W. L., C. O. Sauer, M. Bates and L. Mumford (eds) 1956. Man’s role in changing the face of
the earth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Thompson, D. W. 1961. On growth and form, abridged edition, ed. J. T. Bonner. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press (original 1917).
Thompson, E. P. 1967. Time, work-discipline and industrial capitalism. Past and Present 38: 56–97.
Tolman, E. C. 1948. Cognitive maps in mice and men. The Psychological Review 55: 189–208.
Tolman, E. C., B. F. Ritchie and D. Kalish 1946. Studies in spatial learning, I: Orientation and the
short-cut. Journal of Experimental Psychology 36.
Tooby, J and L. Cosmides 1992. The psychological foundations of culture. In The adapted mind: evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture, eds J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides and J. Tooby. New
York: Oxford University Press, pp. 19–136.
Toulmin, S. 1981. Human adaptation. In The Philosophy of Evolution, eds U. Jensen and R. Harré.
Brighton: Harvester Press, pp. 176–95.
Trevarthen, C. and K. Logotheti 1989. Child in society, society in children: the nature of basic trust.
In Societies at peace, eds S. Howell and R. Willis. London: Routledge.
Tuan, Y-F. 1979. Thought and landscape: the eye and the mind’s eye. In The interpretation of ordinary
landscapes, ed. D. W. Meinig. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 89–102.
Turnbull, C. M. 1965. Wayward servants: the two worlds of the African Pygmies. London: Eyre &
Spottiswoode.

References
—— 1978. The politics of non-aggression (Zaire). In Learning non-aggression: the experience of non-literate 1
societies, ed. A. Montagu. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Turnbull, D. 1989. Maps are territories: science is an atlas. Geelong: Deakin University Press.
—— 1991. Mapping the world in the mind: an investigation of the unwritten knowledge of Micronesian
navigators. Geelong: Deakin University Press.
—— 1993a. Local knowledge and comparative scientiﬁc traditions. Knowledge and Policy 6: 29–54.
—— 1993b. The ad hoc collective work of building Gothic cathedrals with templates, string and geom- 6
etry. Science, Technology and Human Values 18: 315–40.
—— 1996. Constructing knowledge spaces and locating sites of resistance in the modern cartographic
transformation. In Social cartography: mapping ways of seeing social and educational change, ed. R. G.
Paulston. New York: Garland, pp. 53–79.
Turner, L. M. 1979. Ethnology of the Ungava Distrist, Hudson Bay Territory: Indians and Eskimos in the 10
Quebec-Labrador Peninsula. Québec, Canada: Presses Coméditex. [Originally published as pp. 165–350 1
in the 11th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 1889–90, Washington, D.C.: 2
Government Printing Ofﬁce]
Tyler, S. A. 1969. Introduction. In Cognitive anthropology, ed. S. A. Tyler. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston, pp. 1–23.
Tylor, E. B. 1871. Primitive culture. London: John Murray.
Tyrrell, J. 1994. Intimate letters: Leoš Janáček to Kamila Stösslová, ed. and trans. J. Tyrrell. London: 6
Faber & Faber.
Uexküll, J. von 1957. A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: a picture book of invisible worlds.
In Instinctive behavior: the development of a modern concept, ed. C. H. Schiller. New York: International
Universities Press.
United Nations 1997. The rights of indigenous peoples (Human Rights Fact Sheet 9). New York and 20
Geneva: United Nations.
van Beek, W. E. A. and P. M. Banga 1992. The Dogon and their trees. In Bush base: forest farm. Culture, 2
environment and development, eds E. Croll and D. Parkin. London: Routledge.
Varela, F. J., E. Thompson and E. Rosch 1991. The embodied mind: cognitive science and human expe4
rience. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Vernant, J. P. 1983. Myth and thought among the Greeks. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Vico, G. 1948 [1744]. The New Science of Giambattista Vico, ed. and trans. T. G. Bergin and M. H. 6
Fisch. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Viollet-le-Duc, E. 1990. The architectural theory of Viollet-le-Duc: readings and commentary, ed. M. F.
Hearn. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Viveiros de Castro, E. 1998. Cosmological deixis and Amerindian perspectivism. Journal of the Royal 9
Anthropological Institute (N.S.)4: 469–88.
Vološinov, V. N. 1973. Marxism and the philosophy of language, trans. L. Matejka and I. R. Titunik. 1
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
von Bertalanffy, L. 1955. An essay on the relativity of categories. Philosophy of Science 22: 243–63.
Wadel, C. 1979. The hidden work of everyday life. In Social anthropology of work, ed. S. Wallman (ASA
Monograph 19). London: Tavistock.
Wagner, R. 1986. Symbols that stand for themselves. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Walter, E. V. 1969. Terror and resistance. New York: Oxford University Press.
Weber, M. 1947. The theory of social and economic organization, trans. A. M. Henderson, ed. T. Parsons. 7
New York: Oxford University Press.
Weiner, J. F. 1991. The empty place: poetry, space and being among the Foi of Papua New Guinea.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
White, L. A. 1959. The evolution of culture. New York: McGraw Hill.
White, L. Jr. 1962. Medieval technology and social change. Oxford: Clarendon.
Whitehead, A. N. 1929. Process and reality: an essay in cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2
Whitehead, A. N. 1938. Science and the modern world. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Whitehouse, H. 1996. Jungles and computers: neuronal group selection and the epidemiology of repre4
sentations. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.) 2: 99–116.
Widlok, T. 1997. Orientation in the wild: the shared cognition of the Hai|om Bushpeople. Journal of 5
the Royal Anthropological Institute (N.S.) 3: 317–22.
Wikan, U. 1992. Beyond words: the power of resonance. American Ethnologist 19: 460–82.
Williams, N. M. and E. S. Hunn (eds) 1982. Resource managers: North American and Australian hunter118
gatherers. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

References • 453 •

Williams, R. 1972. Ideas of nature. In Ecology, the shaping enquiry, ed. J. Benthall. London: Longman.
—— 1976. Keywords. London: Fontana.
Willis, R. 1990. Introduction. In Signifying animals: human meaning in the natural world, ed. R. Willis.
London: Unwin Hyman.
Wilson, P. J. 1988. The domestication of the human species. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Winner, L. 1977. Autonomous technology: technics-out-of-control as a theme in political thought. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Winterhalder, B. 1981a. Foraging strategies in the boreal forest: an analysis of Cree hunting and gathering. In Hunter-gatherer foraging strategies: ethnographic and archeological analyses, eds B. Winterhalder
and E. A. Smith. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 66–98.
—— 1981b. Optimal foraging strategies and hunter-gatherer research in anthropology: theory and models.
In Hunter-gatherer foraging strategies: ethnographic and archeological analyses, eds B. Winterhalder and
E. A. Smith. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13–35.
Winterhalder, B. and E. A. Smith 1981. Preface. In Hunter-gatherer foraging strategies: ethnographic and
archeological analyses, eds B. Winterhalder and E. A. Smith. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—— 1992. Evolutionary ecology and the social sciences. In Evolutionary ecology and human behavior,
eds E. A. Smith and B. Winterhalder. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, pp. 3–23.
Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolf, E. 1988. Inventing society. American Ethnologist 15: 752–61.
—— 1994. Perilous ideas: race, culture, people. Current Anthropology 35: 1–12.
Wood, D. 1992. The power of maps. New York: Guilford Press.
—— 1993a. The ﬁne line between mapping and mapmaking. Cartographica 30: 50–60.
—— 1993b. What makes a map a map? Cartographica 30: 81–6.
Woodburn, J. 1980. Hunters and gatherers today and reconstruction of the past. In Soviet and Western
anthropology, ed. E Gellner. London: Duckworth.
—— 1982. Egalitarian societies. Man (N.S.) 17: 431–51.
—— 1988. African hunter-gatherer social organisation: is it best understood as a product of encapsulation? In Hunters and gatherers, I: history, evolution and social change, eds T. Ingold, D. Riches and
J. Woodburn. Oxford: Berg, pp. 31–64.
Wright, D. 1990. Deafness: a personal account, new edition. London: Faber and Faber.
Wub-e-ke-niew 1995. We have the right to exist. New York City: Black Thistle Press.
Wynn, T. 1993. Layers of thinking in tool behaviour. In Tools, language and cognition in human evolution, eds K. R. Gibson and T. Ingold. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 389–406.
—— 1994. Tools and tool behaviour. In Companion encyclopedia of anthropology: humanity, culture and
social life, ed. T. Ingold. London: Routledge, pp. 133–61.
Young, M. 1988. The metronomic society: natural rhythms and human timetables. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Zuckerkandl, V. 1956. Sound and symbol: music and the external world, trans. W. R. Trask. Bollingen
Series XLIV. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Zukow-Goldring, P. 1997. A social ecological realist approach to the emergence of the lexicon: educating
attention to amodal invariants in gesture and speech. In Evolving explanations of development: ecological
approaches to organism-environment systems, eds C. Dent-Read and P. Zukow-Goldring. Washington,
D.C.: American Psychological Association.

Skill

Index

aboriginal peoples, deﬁnition of 132
Achuar, of the Upper Amazon 81, 82, 85–6
action: and attention 414–15; vs. interaction
167, 199–200, 307; and perception 166,
301, 303–4, 351, 356, 358
adaptation 154, 207–8, 214; vs. adaptiveness
33–4, 38; vs. exaptation 176; populational
vs. calculative 33
Adorno, T. 253, 277
affordance, concept of 166–8, 194
agency 47, 102–3
agriculture, vs. horticulture 422; see also
cultivation; farming
air 339–40
Aleut, of Alaska 126
alphabet 433
ancestral beings 21, 52–3, 57, 113–14, 118–21,
127–30, 144, 228
ancestry 12, 132–5, 139, 140–2, 146; vs.
parenting 43, 426
animacy 11, 96–8, 102, 107, 116, 200, 424; of
the land 149; see also life
animality, vs. humanity, see humanity
animals: depiction of 11, 111–12, 115; and
machines 306–8; as persons 51–2, 90–92; see
also bear; beaver; bees; birds; buffaloes;
caribou; chimpanzees; domestication; eagle;
human–animal relations; hunting; pets;
predator–prey relationship; primates; rats;
reindeer; salmon; seal; whale; wolf
animism 11, 106, 112–15, 121–3, 128–31
anthropocentrism 109, 155, 218, 256, 423–4,
anthropology 157, 171, 189, 313, 322; of art,
350–1; vs. biology 14; of the body 169–70;
cognitive 153, 160–3, 170; cultural 157,
159–60, 214, 284; economic 314–15; vs.
philosophy 286; of the senses 155, 250–3,
269, 273, 281, 283–6; social 157–9, 172 (vs.
biological 1–2, 173); of technology 314–15,
350–1
anthropomorphism 45, 49–50, 91, 107–8,
423–4, 425

Apache, of Arizona 207–8
apprenticeship 37, 415; see also learning
archaeology 154, 189–90, 208; evolutionary
369, 421, 433
architecture 154, 172, 179–84, 188, 216, 354, 6
372; vs. building 295; human vs. animal
174–5, 182–3, 340
Aristotle 96, 210, 247, 254
ars 329–30, 349, 351
art 11–12, 111–12, 119, 130–1; vs. craft 350; 20
and landscape 202, 429; and language 351;
and maps 235; meaning of 22, 349, 351; vs. 2
technology 5–6, 289–90, 295, 329–30, 333, 3
337, 349–51, 401, 413; writing as 402–3
artefacts 199, 349–50; animacy of 96–7; vs.
artiﬁce 319, 369; vs. artworks 350, 401;
forms of 88, 341–3, 345–6, 354, 356, 360, 6
372, 418; vs. instruments 299; manufacture 7
of 77, 80–1, 85, 87–8, 199, 345, 418; as
material culture 340; vs. organisms 85, 290,
339, 343–4, 371–2; as symbols 346–7
artisan: vs. artist 349–50, 401; vs. farmer 80–1, 30
326; vs. operative 295–6; use of tools by
309, 335
attention: and action 414–15; education of 22, 3
37, 146, 167, 190, 213, 354 , 416
Australian Aboriginal people 6, 10–11, 20–1,
26, 52, 54, 56, 111–13, 119–20, 127–8,
130–1, 141–2, 144, 181, 313; of Tasmania 6
363–5, 366–7; of the Western Desert 367–8; 7
see also Kunwinjku, Luritja, Pintupi,
Pitjantjatjara, Walbiri, Yolngu
autopoiesis 345
availableness, vs. occurrentness 168–9, 177,
407, 417
Bachelard, G. 203–4, 205
Bacon, F. 77, 80, 85, 87
baskets and basketry 290, 339, 341–2, 345–6
Batek, of Malaysia 43, 144–5, 148
Bateson, G. 3, 9, 16–19, 171, 352–3, 420, 426 6
bear 91, 93–4, 100–1, 107, 109, 114, 125
beaver 92, 94; lodges of 174–5, 181, 186

Index • 455 •

bees, hives of 340; navigation of 222
behaviourism 163, 165, 220–1
beings, vs. things 89–90, 97, 107, 249, 253,
Bernstein, N. 353
bilum, see string bags
biodiversity 155, 217
biology 4, 19, 50–1, 108, 214; vs. anthropology
14; concept of 383; vs. culture 153, 170,
187, 292, 351, 360, 374, 379, 385, 387,
389, 391; developmental 4, 173;
evolutionary 89, 373, 383–4, 394; vs.
genetics 376, 383; vs. linguistics 382–3, 387
bipedal locomotion, see walking
bird’s-eye view 191, 227, 230, 236, 241
Bird-David, N. 43–4, 47, 58–9, 69–70, 140,
145, 421, 424
birds 92–3, 127, 245, 278–9, 430; see also
weaverbirds
blindness 18, 254–5, 265, 270–5, 277, 285, vs.
deafness 246; and hearing 245; and touch
258–9, 262
Boas, F. 159, 313, 342, 345
body: as clothing 93–4, 100, 123–5, 129; as
container 100; development of 360, 376,
379; and landscape 193; vs. machine 301,
305; vs. mind, see mind-body dualism; vs.
organism 170; painting of 128–9; as subject
of perception 169–70; techniques of 5, 352,
379, 401, 403; in totemism and animism
boundaries 205; and place 192–3, 196, 204
Bourdieu, P. 162, 167, 170, 225, 239, 382,
409, 426
Boyacá (Colombia), farmers of 81
brain 376, 389, 410, 415; vs. mind 17–18,
255, 283
bricolage 371
Bruegel, Pieter (the Elder) 154, 190, 201
buffaloes 422
building 154, 185–6, 187–8, 199, 206; vs.
architecture 295; church as 205–7; and trees
187, 205–6, 423
building perspective 155, 178–81, 185, 347; vs.
dwelling perspective 42, 57, 153–4, 173,
188, 199, 290, 347–8
camps: of hunter-gatherers 179–81, 182–3; of
nomadic pastoralists 181
capacities: human 231–2, 363–5, 387, 390,
404–6 (of language, see language); notion of
366; as properties of developmental systems
377–8, 399; of speech and writing 376–7
capitalist production 300, 309–10, 314, 323,
330; temporal logic of 326–8, 331
caribou 13–14, 24–5, 116–17, 121–2, 125;
hoodless 122–4; see also reindeer

Carpenter, E. 126, 249–50, 253
Cartesianism 165, 168–70, 172–3, 258, 260,
263, 283, 287, 308, 415; see also Descartes;
mind/body dualism
cartography 155, 191–2, 195, 224, 226–7,
229–30, 234–5, 240, 242; vs. landscape art
carving 11–12, 111, 123, 126, 128–31, 249
causation: personal vs. mechanical 49, 72–3,
289–90, 314, 320; proximate vs. ultimate
384, 428
change: vs. continuity 147, 369; as human
transformation of nature 215; social vs.
technological 313; technical 291, 362–3,
Certeau, M. de 230, 233–4
Chewong, of Malaysia 140
Childe, V. G. 78
children 11, 82–3, 86–7, 91–2, 186, 221–2,
384; see also parenting
chimpanzees 363–4, 366, 377–8; see also
primates, non-human
Chipewyan, of northwestern Canada 105
chronology 194–7; see also clock; temporality;
time
chronotope 205
circumpolar North, peoples of 5, 90, 112–14,
121, 123, 126–30; see also Aleut, Chipewyan,
Cree, Inuit, Koyukon, Ojibwa,Yup’ik
civilisation 10, 130; vs. (primitive) savagery 62,
64–5, 78, 182, 312, 364, 388–9, 422
Classen, C. 283–5
classiﬁcation 160–1; technological vs. scientiﬁc
317; see also taxonomy
clock 195–7, 323, 326, 328–9, 331–3, 335; see
also temporality; time
clothing 94, 100, 124–5, 129
cognition 161–2; see also cognitive science;
knowledge
cognitive science 153, 163–6, 168, 170–1, 394,
406, 414, 416
cognitive style 282, 286
collection: vs. production 10, 58, 63, 77–8, 82,
87, 215; see also foraging; hunting and
gathering
Collias, N. E. and E. C. 351, 358–60
colonisation 135, 139, 150–1, 214, 217
commodity perspective, vs. dwelling perspective
329, 332–3, 337–8
communication: vs. resonance 410; verbal 103,
381, 408–10
complementarity, thesis of 2–4
complexity: vs. exteriority 289, 319, 321; socialcultural 312–13; technological 366, 374
concepts 158, 192, 408–9
connectionism 165
conservation, environmental 67–9, 155

Index
construction: vs. co-option 175–6; cultural 153,
169, 172, 208, 282; vs. design 295; vs.
engagement 10, 42–3, 55, 95–6, 213, 283;
see also building
consumption, vs. production 84, 205, 215,
326, 329
co-operation 309–10, 318, 327, 333
co-option, vs. construction 175–6
copying 386, 395–6; and making 357–8,
cosmology 14, 21, 56, 84, 154–5, 210–11,
218, 256, 294; mechanistic 289, 314, 321;
vs. technology 155, 216–17
Cottrell, W. F. 334–6
craft, vs. art 350
craftsmanship 292–6, 299–300, 307–8, 316,
324, 349, 352, 411, 416, 418; vs. technology
407, 413
Cree of northern Canada: concept of life 51,
142, 424; relations with animals 10, 13–14,
24, 26, 48–52, 57, 67, 72, 143, 420;
subsistence strategies of 29, 34–5
Cro-Magnon man 373, 376–7, 388–9
Csordas, T. 170, 283
cultivation 82–3, 85–7, 422; see also agriculture;
farming
cultural construction 153, 169, 172, 208, 282;
of nature 40–2, 47, 49, 52, 55, 57, 59, 76,
95, 168, 178, 191, 347
cultural learning 164; vs. genetic transmission
2, 30, 36–7, 164, 186, 292, 360, 386, 393;
see also enskilment; learning; transmission
cultural models 161–3, 165
culture: vs. behaviour 159; capacity for 379,
387; as a map 224, 225–6; vs. materiality
340–1 (see also material culture); notion of
37, 40–1, 64, 93, 137–8, 159, 197, 228,
296, 321, 361, 387, 416; and technology
298, 321
dance 128, 299, 410
Darwin, C. 62–5, 109, 176, 291, 362, 370–1,
388, 390, 392–3, 404
Darwinian theory 4, 19, 28, 32–4, 38–9, 366,
371–2, 379, 388, 395–6, 406; see also
selection, natural
deafness 268, 270, 274–6; vs. blindness 246,
death 93, 143
Descartes, R. 3, 254–7, 260–1, 263, 294, 410,
430–1; see also Cartesianism
descent, genealogical 109, 132–3, 135–9, 142,
Descola, P. 81–2, 106–8, 113, 136, 425
design 340, 343–4, 354, 372; vs. construction
295; vs. execution 174–5, 186, 289, 418,

determinism: techno-environmental 320;
technological 294
development: of environment 20, 186; vs.
evolution 379–80, 384–5; of language
capacity 377, 398–9; of persons 3–4, 36; of
skills 291–2, 360, 366, 379; of walking and
cycling 375; see also growth; learning
developmental system 3–4, 38, 366, 375, 379,
383–5, 390, 396
dexterity 291, 299, 347, 353, 356, 360; vs.
clumsiness 356–7
diversity: cultural vs. biological 217; difference
as 138–9, 217; vs. positionality 149;
technological 369
DNA molecule 96, 98, 344, 363, 380–3, 395
Dogon, of Mali 81, 83–4, 86
dome 216
domestication 77–9, 86, 312; of animals 10,
61–5, 73–5, 307–8; deﬁnitions of 64, 85
domination 10, 70, 72–5, 320, 422
Douglas, M. 153, 158–60, 169
drawing 11, 111, 120, 350; of Renaissance
draftsmen 281; vs. weaving 241; see also
inscription
dreaming 11, 91, 93, 99, 100–2, 141
Dreaming, Australian Aboriginal concept of 21,
52–8, 113, 118, 120, 142, 213, 228
dualism, see mind/body dualism
duration 195; vs. coevalness 205, 429
Durkheim, E. 153, 157–8, 195–7, 317–18,
322, 435
dwelling perspective 5, 42, 185–7, 189, 206,
208, 230, 331–2, 409, 417–18; vs. building
perspective 42, 57, 153–4, 173, 188, 199,
290, 347–8; vs. commodity perspective 329,
332–3, 337–8
dwellings: of hunter-gatherers 180; of nomadic
pastoralists 181

eagle 93, 101, 109
ears 244–5, 248, 257, 266, 274–5; see also
hearing; listening; sound
earth: as instrument of labour 84; as sphere
154–5, 210–13, 216, 218; surface of 54,
130, 198, 205, 209–17, 240–2
echolocation 272, 274
ecocentrism 155, 218
ecological relations, vs. social relations 3, 5, 60, 40
107, 172
ecology 173; vs. art 130; cultural 154, 207–8,
350; evolutionary 10, 27, 33–7, 421; of life
16, 18–19; of mind 16, 18–19, 153, 171;
sentient 10, 25
economic man 28–9, 32, 38
economics 27, 29, 32–3, 46, 329
economy, concept of 314–15
embodiment: notion of 193, 204; paradigm of

Index • 457 •

170; of perception 169; of resonances 200; of
skills 291–2, 375
emic and etic accounts 14, 20, 41, 168, 178,
191, 428
emotion: expression of 410–11; vs. reason 410
enculturation 36–7, 55, 416; see also learning
engagement 10–11, 27, 103, 154, 168, 186,
230; vs. construction 10, 42–3, 55, 95–6,
213, 283; vs. detachment 11, 15, 60, 68–9,
75–6, 168, 216
Engels, F. 63, 77–8, 81
engineering 344, 372; vs. technology 295
enskilment 5, 357; vs. enculturation 36–7, 55,
416; see also learning
environment: built 154, 172, 174; concept of
20, 154, 168, 172, 176, 193, 429; formation
of 100; global 209, 212, 214; human vs.
non-human 172–4; vs. landscape 193;
natural vs. artiﬁcial 56–7, 79, 174, 181, 215;
vs. nature 20, 167, 218; speciﬁcation of 19
ethics 25
ethnoscience 160
evolution, vs. history 5, 78, 109, 181–2, 185–7,
231, 291–2, 362–6, 373–6, 385, 388–90,
392, 404; see also biology; Darwinian theory;
selection, natural
evolutionism, vs. relativism 313; see also
progress
experience 11, 98–100, 105, 108, 158, 161,
167; in dreams 100–1; ‘hands on’ 37, 166,
291; of light and sound 245, 250, 257–8,
264–8, 279–81; weaving the strands of 286
expert systems 164, 415
expertise, vs. genius 295
externalisation (exteriorisation): vs.
complexiﬁcation 289, 314; of technical
operations 301, 311, 313
eyes 244–5, 248, 253, 257, 261–2, 266, 281;
in eye-to-eye contact 272, 275, 278; and
mind 254–7; of spirits 125, 253, 277–8; see
also light; vision
Fabian, J. 205
face 123–4, 129, 278; in lip-reading 275, 281;
vs. voice 246–7, 272, 278
facial vision 273–4
farming 43, 56, 58, 62, 70, 78–9, 134–5, 179;
see also agriculture; cultivation
feeling 23–5, 103, 147, 161, 196, 353, 356–7,
410–11, 414; and hearing 246; and
intentionality 411, 413; see also touch
Feit, H. 48–9, 72
ﬁeldwork, anthropological 147, 157, 167
ﬁgurines, animal 126–7
Firth, R. 27, 298
foraging 28–9, 34–5, 58; see also hunting and
gathering

force: ﬁeld of 342, 345, 347; physical 73
form: growth of 88, 341–3, 345–6, 372; vs.
process 19, 112, 173, 186–7, 193, 198, 290,
343, 346, 356; and rhythm 342, 345–6; vs.
substance 16, 19, 41, 339–40, 345
Franklin, B. 328
freedom, vs. necessity 290, 329–30, 337, 350
functionality, of skilled practice 291, 352
Galileo 1, 294, 297
gardens, cultivation of 82–3
gathering 82, vs. cultivation 85–7; see also
hunting and gathering
Geertz, C. 153, 159–60, 163, 173, 178, 379,
386, 426, 427
Gell, A. 194, 223–5, 235–7, 239–40, 250–3,
276, 413
genealogical model 12, 108, 133, 134–9, 142,
145–7, 149–51, 155, 422
geneaology 135–6, 139, 426
generation 12, 132, 135–7, 142–3
genes 186, 214, 339, 344–5, 372, 381–2; vs.
words 381, 387
genetic preformation, doctrine of 50, 214, 395
genetics 137, 139, 394; vs. biology 376, 383
genome 2, 380–2, 384–5, 387, 395
genotype 19, 339, 343, 354, 362, 366, 372,
379–87, 389–90, 395–6; vs. ‘culture-type’
386; vs. phenotype, see phenotype
geography 192; human 208
gesture 169–70; coupled to perception 301,
303–4; in mapping 231–4; in signing 275–6;
verbal vs. musical 409–10; in writing 403–4
ghosts 93, 105, 424
Gibson, J. J. 2–3, 165, 166–8, 173, 203,
226–7, 238, 258, 260–5, 278, 286, 340,
354, 416, 420, 428, 431
gifts: exchange of 333 (vs. marketing of
commodities 329, 333, 337, 350); and tools
global environmental change 209, 215
global perspective, vs. local 55, 211–12,
215–16, 226–7, 229
Global Positioning System (GPS) 430
globe, image of 154–5, 209–17
Godelier, M. 78–9, 81, 87, 179
Goodenough, W. 159–60
Goodwin, B. 344
grandfathers, ‘other-than-human’ 92–3, 99,
104, 109, 141, 424
graphism 403, 430
Greece, Ancient 81, 324, 326, 335, 349, 351
growth: of artefacts 290, 339, 345, 372; and
form 88, 341–3, 345–6, 372; of knowledge
145–8, 229; vs. making, see making; of
organisms 147; of persons 144, 146–7; see
also development

Index
Gudeman, S. 44–7, 49, 80, 81, 84
habitation, vs. occupation 139, 149, 150, 155,
185, 214, 216
habituality, vs. utility 433
habitus 162, 427
Hadza, of Tanzania 66
Hageners (people of Mount Hagen region,
Papua New Guinea) 81–3, 86, 129
Hallowell, A. I. 11, 72, 75–6, 90–110, 141,
228, 233, 240, 278, 423–4
handling, of tools 289, 301, 307, 332, 411
harpoon 366–7
Harris, R. 399, 403–4, 412
hearing 243–5, 249–51, 261, 277; by the deaf
274–5; vs. listening 24, 244, 277; vs. touch
273–4; vs. vision, see vision; see also ears;
sound
Heidegger, M. 6, 154, 168–9, 173, 185–6,
199, 244–5, 347–8, 430
history: vs. chronology 194; as colonial
conquest 135, 151; deﬁned 363, 366, 384;
vs. evolution, see evolution; as human
transformation of nature 10, 78–80, 215,
326; vs. land 139, 150; and machines 294,
311, 332; vs. nature 20, 87, 133, 134–5,
214; of technology (vs. organic evolution)
291, 362–3, 365–6, 369–70, 404; of things
175–6
home 182, vs. house 185; meaning of 330–2
Homo 388, erectus 373, 377, habilis 365, 377,
sapiens 365, 373, 389
house: human 174–5, 179, 181, 182–3, 187,
340; vs. home 185; vs. tent 181
householding 330–1
Howes, D. 252, 281–5
Hull, J. 270–3, 275, 285
human–animal relations 10, 14, 48–52, 61–3,
67–76, 82, 121, 125, 142–3, see also animals;
domestication; hunting; predator–prey
relationship
humanity 373, 388, 391; vs. animality 48–50,
61–5, 78, 91, 111, 172; vs. nature 1, 6, 11,
15, 20, 29, 63–4, 67–8, 74–80, 130, 155,
191, 193, 214, 312, 320, 422
hunting 10, 13–14, 24–5, 29–33, 48–52, 55–7,
67, 69, 71–2, 82, 113–14, 117–18, 121,
142–3, 145, 190, 199; vs. animal husbandry
85–6; and carving 126, 249; and hearing
251; instruments of 320; and painting
118–19; 126; as progeneration 142; see also
human–animal relations; hunting and
gathering
hunting and gathering 9–11, 27–9, 38, 40–5,
57–9, 61–71, 111, 144, 147; vs. farming 43,
56, 58, 62, 70, 78–9, 134–5, 179; and
‘original afﬂuence’ 65–6, 336; as technical

activities 313, 318; see also gathering; hunting 1
hut 182–4
Hutchins, E. 235–6
Huxley, T. H. 389
iconism: gestural 276; phonological 251, 409
identity: production of 323; tasks as index
of 325, 332; techniques as ingredients of
illusions, optical 246, 430
image, vs. map 223–4
imagination 111, 207, 292, 295, 340; vs.
intelligence 407, 417–19
imitation 37, 353
immediate-return vs. delayed-return systems 66,
indexicality, of maps and images 223–6
Indians of North America 6, mapping by
233–4
indigenous peoples 12, 15, 132–3, 139, 147,
150–1
individuals: vs. persons 318, 411; vs. society, see
society
industry, capitalist 289; see also capitalist
production
information theory 380–1
innate-acquired dichotomy 37, 291–2, 351,
358, 360–1, 366, 375–8, 394–8
innovation 369; see also invention
inscription: vs. incorporation 87, 193, 198,
403; and mapping 232–3, 241; vs.
transcription 231–2, 234, 403–4; vs.
visibility 276; see also drawing
instinct: vs. intelligence 6, 25, 109; for speech
392, 404
instruments 320; animals as 307; vs. artefacts
299; musical 250, 277, 303, 402, 413–16;
see also tools
integration, vertical vs. lateral modes of 227,
intelligence 4, 103, 165, 184, 292–3, 382,
406–7, 417–19; and creativity 407; vs.
imagination 407, 417–19; vs. instinct 6, 25,
109; vs. intuition 25; and language 406; vs.
skill 299, 349, 415; symbolic 298
intentional worlds 40–2, 44, 52, 59, 177
intentionality 103, 172, 178, 384; of bodily
movement 170; and feeling 411, 413; of
imagining 417; of skilled practice 291, 352,
354–5, 415
interaction, vs. action 167, 199–200, 307
interactionism (gene-environment) 384, 395
International Labour Organisation 132–3
intersubjectivity 47, 159, 172, 191, 207, 247,
272–3
intuition 25, 316; and hearing 245
inuit, derivation of 427

Index • 459 •

Inuit (Eskimo): of Alaska 123, 128–9, 131;
hunting by 253; mapping by 232–4; of
northern Quebec 116–17, 121–2, 127; of
Southampton Island 126, 249, 435; tools of
366–8
invention 370–1
Jackson, M. 50, 167, 169–70
Janácek, L. 23–4, 26
Jay, M. 285–6
Jonas, H. 258–9, 260–1, 264–5, 271, 277
judgement, in skilled practice 291, 347, 353,
360, 416
Jung, C. 16
Kaluli, of Papua New Guinea 430
kangaroo 114, 116–21
Kant, I. 212
kinship: anthropological understanding of
108–9, 135, 140–1, 144, 149–50, 351; with
the forest 43–4; vs. technology 313, 319
Klee, P. 429, 431
Kluckhohn, C. 159
knotting 357–8, 360
know-how 299–300; see also knowledge
knowledge 25, 57, 108, 164, 190; economy of
46–7, 80; growth of 145–8, 229; as hearing
251; ‘how’ vs. ‘that’ 316; indigenous 13, 16,
95, 217, 228; vs. information 21; localness of
228–9; and movement 229–30, 239;
personal vs. propositional 25, 99;
representational theory of 282–3; scientiﬁc
vs. technological 297; and sensory perception
243, 283; skill as 316, 368–9; technology as
298–300, 316; see also knowledge
Koyukon, of Alaska 54–8, 68, 75, 148, 277
Kroeber, A. 134, 159, 181
Kunwinjku (Aboriginal people of Western
Arnhem Land, Australia) 115, 117, 119, 121,
128–9
labour 84, 194–5, 297, 299, 307–8;
commodiﬁcation of 326–8; intellectual vs.
manual 350; organisation of 300, 309–10;
vs. taskscape 327
land 12, 132–3, 138–9, 149–50, 154; vs.
landscape 190–1, 194, 195; relations to 11,
landscape 189; and art 202, 429; concept of
154, 190–3; vs. environment 193; formation
53–4, 87, 120, 199, 204; vs. land 190–1,
194, 195; meaning encoded in 21; and
painting 118–19, 429; perception of 10,
52–58, 207, 251; spirit inhabitants of 140–1;
vs. taskscape 154, 190, 195, 199–200, 204
Langer, S. 22–3, 197, 200, 408
language 146–7, 158, 192, 247–8, 284, 292,

399, 411–12; and art 351; capacity for
376–8, 392–4, 412; competence vs.
performance in 399; and intelligence 406;
learning 387, 397–400 (see also language
acquisition device); and music 248, 407–10,
413; origins 292, 392–3, 400, 404, 410; vs.
particular languages 292, 378, 392–3, 397–8;
signed 245, 275–6, 432; and technology 5,
298, 406–7, 416; see also speech
language acquisition device 36, 378, 394,
396–8, 412, 427; see also language
Lapland 13
lasso 367–8, 414, 418
Lave, J. 162, 416
Leach, E. R. 152, 158–9, 317–18
learning: cultural, see cultural learning; vs. doing
416; as enskilment 5, 36–7, 55, 357, 416; by
guided rediscovery 146, 356, 387, 401; as
intergenerational transmission 21, 353, 356,
386, 394, 416 (see also transmission); as
internalisation 162, 356–7, 416; perceptual
21–2, 37, 55–6, 147, 166–7; social vs.
individual 36, 138, 386; vs. teaching 298; see
also apprenticeship; development
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 301, 403, 430
Lévi-Strauss, C. 9, 16–18, 230, 371
life 60, 89, 97–8, 102, 108, 113, 149, 173,
200, 210, 242; ecology of 16, 18–19;
meaning of 50–1; see also animacy
light 244–5, 249, 254–8, 260–5, 268–9, 279,
286, 431; see also eyes; vision
linguistics 399–400, 406, 409, 412; vs. biology
382–3, 387; see also language; speech
Linnaeus, C. 388–9
listening 196, 245, 274; vs. hearing 24, 244,
277; as looking 278; to music 245, 277, 283;
see also ears; sound
literacy 376–7, 400; vs. orality 249–50; and
printing 248, 292, 399–400; see also writing
local perspective, vs. global 155, 211–12,
215–16, 226–7, 229
location, vs. place 219, 227, 237–9
locomotive drivers, see railway workers
looking 124, 245, 258, 274; as listening 278;
vs. seeing 244, 277; see also eyes; vision;
watching
loom 346
looping, techniques of 354–7
Luritja (Aboriginal people of the Australian
Central Desert) 119
machines 296, 323; and animals 306–8; and
bodies 301, 305; completeness of 304–6;
coping with, vs. operation of 290, 332–3,
335; deﬁned 305; and history 294, 311, 332;
vs. organisms 308; rise of 289; vs. tools
300–4, 315–16, 318, 402; see also technology

Index
McGrew, W. 363–4, 366
MacKenzie, M. 351, 354–8, 361
McLuhan, M. 248–50, 275–6
magic, vs. religion 317
making: vs. construction 175; and copying
357–8, 372; as cultural ordering of nature
178; vs. growing 10, 77, 81, 85–8, 234–5,
290, 339, 341, 343, 345, 372; meaning of
294–5, 340, 347, 354; production as 77,
80–1, 85; and technology 297, 363; vs. using
199, 299, 309, 354, 361; vs. weaving 290,
339, 346–8, 403
Malinowski, B. 27
manufacture: of artefacts 77, 80–1, 85, 87–8,
199, 345, 418; industrial 323; vs.
machinofacture 300, 308–11
mapmaking: vs. mapping, see mapping; vs.
map-using 155, 230, 236
mapping 155, 232–5; as knowing 220; vs.
mapmaking 220, 231–2, 234–5, 241; and
writing 231, 233, 403; see also inscription;
navigation; wayﬁnding
maps 155, 213, 219, 415; cognitive 192, 219,
220–3, 226–7, 230, 234, 237; deﬁned
223–4, 240, 408; indexicality or nonindexicality of 223–6; and paintings 118;
‘scientiﬁc’ 230; and stories 56; see also
mapmaking; mapping; navigation;
wayﬁnding
Marx, K. 6, 74, 80, 84, 291, 299, 301–3,
307–11, 318, 327, 331–3, 340, 362, 369,
masks 123–5, 127–9
masters, of animals 93, 115, 125, 127, 141
material culture 290, 319, 340, 346, 363; see
also culture; materiality
materiality: vs. culture 340–1; kinds of 79, 87;
vs. mental representations 6, 79, 98–9, 284,
311, 351; vs. sociality 311
Mauss, M. 315, 317, 330, 333, 352, 379, 403,
411, 427, 430
Mbuti Pygmies 43, 421
mechanical determination, vs. skilled constraint
303, 306, 308
mechanics 295, vs. semiotics 317, 351
mechanism, vs. vitalism 96
memory 12, 92, 132–3, 137–8, 146–8;
autobiographical 101; vs. remembering 103,
138, 147–8, 189; and writing 233
Merleau-Ponty, M. 6, 186, 207, 258, 272; on
imitation in children 358; phenomenology of
168–70, 173; on speech and song 24, 147,
410, 435; on time 196; on vision 226–7,
262–5, 266–8, 278, 420, 428
metamorphosis 11, 91, 93–5, 101, 106, 123,
metaphor 44–5, 50, 56, 76, 91, 361; of choice

32; complex structure vs. complex process
220, 230; of key 22, 208, 420; of map
223–4; vs. metonymy 91, 129, 284; sensory
283–5
Micronesia, mariners of 225, 230, 234, 239–40 4
mimih spirits 117–19, 121, 127
mind: vs. nature 9, 11, 16–19, 42, 89, 107,
206, 212, 286, 340; and world 99, 101, 103, 7
108, 213, 257, 381–2, 391, 408, 415
mind/body dualism 3, 5, 16–17, 41, 47, 50–1,
103, 165–6, 170–2, 227, 258, 260, 283,
300, 319, 350, 410; in Plato 352; see also
Cartesianism
Mitcham, C. 294, 297, 299–300, 303,
315–16
models of vs. for 298
modern humans 292, 373–4, 389–90; see also
modernity
modernity 6–7, 111, 134, 136, 289, 333, 404; 6
anatomical 292, 373, 388–9 (vs. socio7
cultural 374); art and technology in 351;
building and dwelling in 185; debasement of
craft in 350, 352; vs. tradition 15; and vision 9
202, 252–3, 286–7; see also science; Western 20
thought
money 195, 327; and time 327–8, 337
Morgan, L. H. 174, 388
morphogenetic ﬁeld 344–5, 372
motion: mechanical 289; reciprocating vs.
rotary 303–4, 374
movement: and being alive 98, 142, 146, 148, 6
242 (see also animacy) ; between places 155, 7
192, 204, 220, 227–30, 232, 234; essential
to perception 18, 99, 166, 203, 254,
259–60, 274; and formation of artefacts 205, 9
342, 345, 354, 356, 360, 418; and formation 30
of landscape 53–4, 199, 204; and formation 1
of taskscape 197; and knowledge 229–30,
239; in looping 356; reproduction of 358,
372; tuning of 353, 357, 415; in weaving
342, 346
Mumford, L. 299–300, 303, 305, 308, 328
muscles, human 203–4, 296, 301, 303–7, 309, 6
342, 353, 376
music 23, 154, 196–7, 238–9, 245, 248, 267,
277; vs. language 248, 407–10, 413; vs.
painting 154, 197–8, 269, 278; and poetry
408, 413; of the spheres 210
musical instruments 250, 277, 303, 402,
413–16
Myers, F. 52–8
myth 92, 100, 141, 230; vs. science 61; see also
stories and storytelling
narrative, see stories and storytelling
natural selection, see selection, natural
naturalism, of Western thought 107

Index • 461 •

nature: concept of 20, 40–1, 99, 154, 191, 312,
417; conquest of 10, 82; vs. environment 20,
167, 218; vs. history 20, 87, 133, 134–5,
214; human 64, 137, 157, 283, 366, 389; vs.
humanity, see humanity; vs. landscape 191;
mechanistic view of 295, 320; vs. mind, see
mind; vs. nurture 384, 399; vs. reason, see
reason; vs. society, see society
nature–culture dichotomy 40–2, 47, 49, 51, 79,
111, 130, 135, 177, 179, 185, 197
navigation 155, 222, 224, 230, 235–6, 408; vs.
wayﬁnding 219, 231, 236–7, 239–40; see also
mapping
Nayaka, of Tamil Nadu, South India 43, 140,
Nelson, R. K. 54–5, 68, 75, 148, 277
nests: of great apes 182–3; of weaverbirds 291,
351, 358–61
Nuer, of southern Sudan 197, 324, 337
nurture, spheres of 144, 148–9
observation 37, 356; vs. conjecture 295; vs.
imitation 353; vs. participation 108, 244,
249, 253; paths of 226–7, 229, 233, 238–40,
261; vs. speculation 256, 265
occupation, vs. habitation 139, 149, 150, 155,
185, 214, 216
occurrentness, vs. availableness 168–9, 177,
407, 417
ocularcentrism 155, 245–6, 253
Ojibwa (Saulteaux) of northern Canada 11, 72,
75–6, 90–110, 112, 141, 144, 228, 233,
240, 278–9, 423, 424
Olduvai Gorge 184, 365
Ong, W. 248–50, 275–6, 401–2
Ongees, of Little Andaman 228
ontogeny, vs. phylogeny 372, 379, 385; see also
development
operative 315, 332; vs. artisan 295–6; violinist
as 402
optics 256–7, 286
Optics, of Descartes 254–5, 256
optimal foraging theory 10, 28–34
orality 248–9, 400; vs. gestural communication
275–6; vs. literacy 249–50
organism 89–90, 384–5; vs. artefact 85, 290,
339, 343–4, 371–2; vs. body 170; growth of
147; house as 187; vs. machine 308; vs.
person 2–5, 45–6, 48, 50–1, 59, 63, 90,
172; world as 200
orientation 219; bodily 261
origins: of modern humans 134, 137, 154,
184–7, 291–2, 363, 389–90, 404–5; of
language, see language
Oyama, S. 383, 396, 399
painting 11–12, 111, 116–21, 126, 128–31,

350; Bruegel’s The harvesters 202–3;
ﬁgure–ground reversal in 120; vs. music 154,
197–8, 269, 278; as performance 128, 198;
and vision 265, 267, 269, 279
palaeoanthropology 291, 373
parenting 43–5, 82, 141, 423, 426; see also
ancestry; children
participation: vs. observation 108, 244, 249,
253; vision as a mode of 265, 278
past, vs. present 136–7, 143, 146, 151, 196; see
also history; temporality; time
pastoralism 10, 61, 72–6, 422
paths: of Ancestral travel, 52–3, 56, 120, 141,
228; of observation 226–7, 229, 233,
238–40, 261; of persons 53, 144, 147–8,
193, 204; see also tracks
perception 159, 243–4; and action 166, 301,
303–4, 351, 356, 358; coupling of, to
technical gesture 301, 303–4; direct vs.
indirect 255, 258, 260; ecological approach
to 2–4, 163, 166–8, 254, 260, 420;
temporality of 258–9, 271, 274; see also
movement
‘person’, etymological derivation of 246, 272,
personhood 11, 48–51, 95; interiorisation of
411; structure of 92, 100
persons: animals as 51–2, 90–2; generation of
133, 135–6, 139, 142–5, 149; vs. individuals
318, 411; vs. organisms, see organism; paths
of, see paths; ‘other-than-human’ 72, 92,
141, 144; withdrawal of, from production
318, 328; see also self
perspective (in art) 15
perspectivism 424
pets 90–1
phenomenology 153, 163, 168–71, 173
phenotype: vs. genotype 36, 175, 354, 362,
379–86, 395; extended 175, 186
phylogeny 108, 134; vs. ontogeny 372, 379,
385; see also evolution
physics 256–7, 262
Physiocracy 80–1, 84
picture, landscape viewed as 202; vs. map 223,
pigs 83, 85–6
Pintupi (Aboriginal people of the Australian
Central Desert) 52–8, 420
Piro, of Peru 281
Pitjantjatjara (Aboriginal people of the
Australian Western Desert) 141
places: and boundaries 192–3, 196, 204;
constitution of 149, 192, 204–6; histories of
219, 237; vs. locations 219, 227, 237–9;
meanings of 54, 192; movement between, see
movement; and paths 53–4, 141, 145, 193,
204, 228; and time 237–8

Index
planting 83
Plato 96, 210, 244, 247, 254, 352
poetics of dwelling 11, 26, 102, 110
poetry 408, 412–13
populational thinking, vs. relational 3–4
posture: signiﬁcance of 169; in writing 403
pottery: wheel-thrown 302–4, 306, 418; coiled
341–2, 345
practice theory 153, 162–3, 167
predator–prey relationship, depiction of 62,
121, 425; see also hunting
present, vs. past 136–7, 143, 146, 151, 196, see
also history; temporality; time
prestation 329–30, 333
primates, non-human 182, 389, 410; see also
chimpanzees
prime-mover (in machinery) 305, 308
print technology, impact of 248; see also
literacy, writing
process, vs. form 19, 112, 173, 186–7, 193,
198, 290, 343, 346, 356
procreation 137; vs. progeneration 142–4,
148–50
procurement, notion of 58–9
production: vs. collection 10, 58, 63, 77–8, 82,
85, 87, 215; vs. consumption 84, 205, 215,
326, 329; as making 77, 80–1, 85; technical
forces of 289, 295, 311 (vs. social relations
318)
programmes, vs. processors 163, 165, 394
progress: evolutionary 388; historical 374, 388,
390; technological 312–13, 362–5, 366
psychic unity, doctrine of 388–9
psychology 2, 157, 162–3, 165; vs.
anthropology 171; cognitive 4, 220 (see also
cognitive science); ecological 3–4, 153,
165–8, 173, 220; evolutionary 34, 36, 38,
421; vs. sociology 157, 159
Pythagoras 210, 212
Quiché Maya, of Guatemala 404
race, concept of 137
racism 364, 389, 391
railway workers 323, 333–7
rain 271–2
rationality 33; formal vs. substantive 28, 31
rats, in maze experiments 220–1, 223
reason: claim to supremacy of 15, 109, 312,
388, 406, 410; vs. emotion 410–11; vs.
nature 10, 15, 19, 25–9, 38, 80, 108–9, 383,
388–91; and vision 245–6
rebus principle 371
Reed, E. 165, 167, 199–200, 307
region, concept of 155, 219, 226–7, 229–30,
235, 237
rehearsal 418

reindeer 64; herding of 13, 25, 76, 367, 414;
see also caribou
relatedness, vs. relationship 136, 139, 144,
148–9
relational ﬁeld, notion of 149, 187, 193, 345,
385, 391, 423
relational model 12, 133, 140–50, 422; of the
self 103
relational thinking, vs. populational 3–4
relationship, vs. relatedness 136, 139, 144,
148–9
relativism 15, 55, 76, 164; vs. evolutionism 313
religion, vs. magic 317
remembering, vs. memory 103, 138, 147–8,
replication, vs. novelty 329, 369; vs.
reproduction 372
representations: collective 158–9, 167, 284,
290; vs. revelation 118, 130, 281; vs.
sensations 157–8, 166, 283; vs. traces 233,
reproduction: of movement 358, 372; vs.
replication 372
resonance 24, 154, 196–201, 204, 206–7, 325;
vs. communication 410
Reuleaux, F. 304–6, 308, 370
revelation: vs. control 72–3, 290, 320–1; vs.
decoding 9, 18, 20–2, 24, 208, 420; in
dreams 101; vs. representation 118, 130, 281
rhizome 140, 142, 144–5, 149, 426
rhythm 154, 197, 199–201, 204, 207, 210,
325; and form 342, 345–6; of householding
Ridington, R. 72
Rome, classical 73, 349, 351
Rousseau, J. J. 247
rules: of thumb 35–6, 311, 357; transmission
and application of 351, 356–8, 386–7

Sahlins, M. D. 41, 45–6, 65–7, 70–1, 189,
318, 324, 336–7
salmon 125, 129
Saulteaux, see Ojibwa
Saussure, F. de 21, 192, 195, 247–9, 267, 280, 7
science 1, 11, 25, 38, 89–90, 96, 101, 108–10,
155, 169, 173, 295, 388, 410, 418; vs.
indigenous knowledge 13–16, 95, 217, 228; 40
and local practices 229; logocentrism of 383; 1
vs. myth 61; and technology 294–6, 297,
317; and vision 245–6; see also modernity;
Western thought
Scott, C. 48–52, 142
scribes, work of 401, 403
seal 125–6
seasons 200, 201, 206
Seeger, A. 250–2, 281

Index • 463 •

selection: natural 2, 4, 30–1, 63, 163, 175,
184–6, 214, 231, 291, 340, 362, 371–2,
380, 384–5, 393–6, 406 (vs. cultural 343,
345; vs. rational choice 10, 27–8, 32–3, 38,
421); artiﬁcial 64, 77, 85, 369; intentional
175–6, 370; see also Darwinian theory
self: dreaming experiences of 100–1; formation
of 99–100; understandings of 11, 103;
Western model of 100; see also persons
semiotics, vs. mechanics 317, 351
sensation, vs. representation 157–8, 166, 283
senses: anthropology of 155, 250–3, 269, 273,
281, 283–6; and human nature 283;
integration of 262; as perceptual systems
260–1; see also hearing; touch; vision
sensory homunculus 283–4, 432
sensory model 283
sentences 412, 415
shamanism 93, 114–15, 123, 128, 252, 279–82
sharing 65–7, 70–2, 75–6, 318; cosmic
economy of 44–5, 48, 69; of meaning 408–9
sheep, herding of 74
shell, of mollusc or gastropod 174–5, 290,
342–3, 344–6
Shipibo-Conibo Indians, of Peru 279–80, 282
showing 21–2
sight, see vision
sign, linguistic 21, 192, 381, 408–9; see also
language, signed
skeleton, human 376, 434
skill 147, 162, 289, 299, 351; acquisition of
36–7, 131, 162, 353–4, 356–8, 360,
415–16; dimensions of 291, 347, 352–4,
401; ecological approach to 353; as
embodied knowledge 291–2; in foraging 35;
human vs. non-human 291, 360–1; vs.
intelligence 299, 349, 415; as knowledgeable
practice 316; as properties of organism 5,
360; as property of persons 289; and
technique 315; see also intentionality;
judgement; knowledge
skilled constraint, vs. mechanical determination
303, 306, 308
sky, perception of 264, 267
slavery 73–4, 307–8, 320, 352
smell, sense of 251, 254, 278, 281
social relations: vs. ecological relations 3, 5, 60,
107, 172; vs. technical relations 289–90,
314, 317–19, 321–2, 369, 406
sociality 167, 196, 409; deﬁnition of 52; vs.
materiality 311
society: concept of 312; vs. economy 314; vs.
individual 157–8, 171, 252, 284, 317; vs.
nature 44–8, 59–60, 70, 74–5, 80, 87,
154–5, 216, 290, 312, 314, 321, vs.
technology, see technology
sociology 157, 159

song 292–3, 407–8, 413; shamanic 279–80; vs.
speech, see speech
Songhay, of Niger 250, 252–3
sorcery 93, 100–1, 250, 252, 424
soul 92, 105, 113, 254–6, 352
sound 23–4, 103–5, 192, 198, 244–50, 257–9,
268, 274–5, 277, 279, 407; image of 248,
267, 280, 407; musical vs. verbal 248, 408;
see also ears; hearing
space: acoustic vs. visual 249, 266–7, 271;
concept of 54–5, 154, 191–2, 195; locations
in 219, 238; vs. region 219, 227, 230, 237;
vs. time 238, 274
spatial orientation experiment 221
spear-thrower 367–8
species, concept of 108, 378
spectators, vs. seers 252, 264, 282, 431
speculation, vision as 265
speech 11, 92, 102–6, 293, 361; vs. language
393, 404, 406–7; propositional vs. expressive
components of 410–11; as skilled practice
361, 401, 404; vs. song 24, 147, 249–50,
279–80, 400, 407–10, 413, 416; and tooluse 406–7, 416; vs. writing, see writing; see
also language
Sperber, D. 164
sphere, acoustic space as 249, 253; earth as 155,
210–13, 216, 218
spirals 290, 342–3, 344–6
star courses 225
state, discourses of 133, 151
Stoller, P. 250, 252
stones, animacy of 91, 96–8; as hammers 175
storage, of food 66
stories and storytelling 56–7, 61, 76, 94, 123,
128, 189–90, 208, 228, 230, 361; of
hunting 14, 24–5, 52, 117–18; and mapping
232–4, 237; vs. natural history 91–2; and
skill 347; as wayﬁnding 219
Strathern, M. 81, 86
Stravinsky, I. 277
string bags (bilum) 351, 354–9, 372, 402
substance 12, 132, 137; vs. form 16, 19, 41,
339–40, 345
Sumeria: temple economy of 73; cuneiform
script of 401, 403
sun, as a person 91–2, 95–6, 98, 141, 228
surface: of artefacts 339–42, 347–8; of the earth
54, 130, 198, 205, 209–17, 240–2; woven 290
surveying 191–2, 254
Suyá, of Brazil 250–3, 281
symbols: artefacts as 346–7; cultural 159–60,
208, 361, 363, 417
synaesthesia 268
Tanner, A. 48–51
task 195, 324–5, 327, 329–30, 332–3

Index
task-orientation 324, 328, 330–6, 338
taskscape 154, 190, 194–200, 204, 207, 325;
vs. labour 327
taste 254, 283
taxonomy 97, 134, 138–9, 149, 161, 426
technical relations: of hunters and gatherers
289; and ritual relations 317; and social
relations 289–90, 314, 317–19, 321–2, 369,
technics 299, 349
technique 349; of the body 5, 352, 379, 401,
403; development of 321; reduction of
295–6, 316, 352; of subsistence 315, 363; vs.
technology 310–11, 315–16, 433; vs. toolusing 315, 352
technology 292, 294–5, 331; vs. art 5–6,
289–90, 295, 329–30, 333, 337, 349–51,
401, 413; concept of 6, 289, 294, 297,
312–15, 321, 349–50, 368, 402, 406, 413;
vs. cosmology 155, 216–17; vs. craft 407,
413; and culture 298, 321; deﬁnitions of
296–9; vs. engineering 295; history of, see
history; of the intellect 403; as knowledge
298–300, 416; and language 5, 298, 371,
406–7, 416; and making 297, 363; progress
of 312–13, 362–5, 366; and science 294–6,
297, 317; vs. skilled practice 294, 369, 414;
vs. society 195, 290, 312–14, 317–18, 322;
vs. technique 310–11, 315–16, 433; vs. toolusing 406; writing as 371, 393, 401–2, 404
technounits 366
tekhne 294–5, 329, 335–6, 349, 351; vs.
mekhane 295, 316
Telefolmin, of Central New Guinea 291, 351,
354–6, 358–9, 361
telescope 254, 255–6
temporality 154, 189–90, 194–7, 200, 205–8;
of perception 258–9, 271, 274; of
wayﬁnding 238, 40; see also time
text 403–4
theory vs. experiment, in science 295
Thompson, D’Arcy W. 342–3, 345
Thompson, E. P. 200, 290, 325–6, 328,
330–1, 336
thunder 91–2, 96, 101, 102–6, 264
Thunder Bird 92–3, 99, 101, 106, 278–9
tide 200
Tierra del Fuego, native inhabitants of 62, 65
time 189, 195, 200; attitudes to 323, 336; and
being 136, 143; free vs. clock 329–30, 333,
334, 337; and history 194; and money
327–8, 337; social 195–7, 325 (vs.
astronomical or sidereal 195, 326–8); vs.
space 238, 274; ‘switching’ 335; taskoriented vs. clock 290, 328–33, 334, 338;
and wayﬁnding 238, 240; see also temporality
time-consciousness 334–6

toolmaking 175, 289, 374, 406
tools 72–3, 315, 319, 364, 366–7; of coercion 2
307; and gifts 319; vs. machines 300–4,
315–16, 318, 402; men’s vs. women’s 367;
operational principles of 315, 368, 413; vs.
words 146–8, 320, 407
tool-using 289, 293–4, 309, 355, 363, 369; in 6
playing music 413–14; vs. speech 406–7,
416; vs. technique 315, 352; vs. technology
406; in writing 401–2
topography 203
totemism 11, 107, 112–15, 119, 121, 128–31, 10
touch 199, 254–5, 258–60, 271, 274; and
vision 254–5, 259–63, 266, 273; see also
feeling
traces, gestural 233, 276, 403
tracks 204; of animals 35, 52; see also paths
tradition 15, 146–8, 386
trails, see paths
transcription, vs. inscription 231–2, 234, 403–4
translation, vs. empathy 106
transmission, cultural 21–2, 36, 137–8, 146,
163–4, 225, 393 (vs. genetic 2, 30, 36–7,
164, 186, 292, 360, 386); see also learning
transmitting mechanism 303–4
trees 86, 96, 98, 140, 176–7, 187, 204–5,
276–7, 423; vs. buildings 187, 205–6, 423;
genealogical 134–5, 138–9, 140, 142, 145,
217, 426–7; as persons 145; social life of 429 5
trust 10, 69–72, 73, 75, 422; vs. conﬁdence
70–1
Turnbull, D. 224–5, 228–30, 433
Tylor, E. B. 64, 388

value 327; labour theory of 80, 194, 327–8; vs. 1
use-value 194–5, 327
Vico, G. 362, 400, 433
village settlement 180
violence, hunters’ abhorrence of 69, 71, 122–3 4
vision 244, 257–8, 263–5, 339; ambulatory
226; denigration of 246; ecology of 166,
226, 420; vs. hearing 105, 155, 199, 207,
210–11, 244–53, 258–9, 261, 266–71,
Uexküll, J. von 154, 174, 176–8, 187
Umeda, of Papua New Guinea 250–3, 276,
Umwelt 154, 176
United Nations 132, 150
Universal People (UP) 434
universals, vs. particulars 366, 378–9
use: of tools and the body 351, 354–6; and
convention 409; vs. making 199, 299, 309,
354, 361; value 194–5, 327; see also toolusing
utility, vs. habituality 433

Index • 465 •

276–82, 287, 425; and human
transformation of nature 326; vs. looking
244–5, 258, 274, 277; and modernity 202,
252–3, 286–7; as participation or as being
265, 278; and reason 245–6; reciprocity of
272–3, 276; reduction of 253, 282, 287; of
sounds 268, 275; vs. touch 254–5, 259–63,
266; and worldview 250; see also eyes; light;
watching
visualism 282, 286
vitalism, vs. mechanism 96
Viveiros de Castro, E. 94, 424
voice 104–5, 407; vs. face 246–7, 272, 278;
rendered visible 275, 281
Walbiri (Aboriginal people of the Australian
Central Desert) 20–1, 53, 228, 233
walking 144, 199; vs. cycling 291, 374–6,
378–9, 385–6
Wandjina ﬁgures 120–1
watching 24, 55, 105, 156, 196, 203, 258,
276–9; see also eyes; looking; vision
wayﬁnding 155, 219, 231–2, 234, 237–40,
242; see also mapping; navigation
weaverbirds, nest-building of 291, 351,
358–61
weaving 290, 339, 341–2, 433; vs. drawing
241; vs. making 290, 339, 346–8, 403; in
narrative 361; and writing 403–4
Western thought 6–7, 93, 170, 406; art and
technology in 111, 130–1, 289, 294, 329;
building and dwelling in 185; concept of
environment in 58, 209–10, 217–18;
constitution of the human person in 102–4,
243, 252, 410; dreams and dreaming in
100–2; genealogical thinking in 133–5;
global vs. local perspectives in 216; humanity
vs. nature in 1, 80; human uniqueness in 48,
50–1, 89–90; humans and animals in 74–6,
90–1, 109; hunters and gatherers in 61–5,
69–70, 321; idea of mastery over nature in
312, 320; language vs. music in 409–10;
living things in 96, 98; logocentrism of 404,
416; the ‘modern human’ in 389–90;
naturalism in 107; nature and culture in
40–2; notion of breeding in 86–7;

ocularcentrism in 155, 245–6, 281–2;
presentism in 405; priority of form over
process in 173, 193, 198; quest for origins in
182; ranking of senses in 254; reason vs.
nature in 15, 25; society vs. nature in 59;
tools and tool-using in 315; vision vs.
hearing in 249, 251, 269, 285–7; visual
perception in 105; see also modernity; science
whale 123–4
Whitehead, A. N. 19, 188, 200
wilderness 67–8
Wilson, P. 56, 179–80
wind 48, 91–2, 98, 112, 141, 200, 228, 264
Wittgenstein, L. 407
wolf 13–14, 91–2, 122–3
Wood, D. 231–3
Woodburn, J. 66–7, 71
woodworking 302–3
words 192, 247–8; as artefacts of writing 400;
vs. genes 381, 387; meanings of 387, 408–9,
417, 435; vs. (musical) notes 407; as sound
249, 250, 280, 408; and tools 146–8, 320,
407; uses of 146
work: attitudes to 323, 336; vs. leisure 328–30,
333–4, 336–7; and social life 323–6, 330;
and technology 297
worldviews 15, 21, 42, 95, 164, 225, 228, 250
Wright, D. 268, 270, 274–5
writing: as a developed skill 402–4; and
education 412; hieroglyphic 279–80;
‘invention’ of 371; vs. mapping 231, 233,
403; and memory 233; vs. musical notation
407, 435; vs. speech 156, 231, 233, 247–8,
276, 291–2, 376–7, 393, 399–401, 404,
412, 430; as a technology of language 371,
393, 401–2, 404
X-ray style, in animal depictions 116, 129
Yekuana, of southern Venezuela 347
Yolngu (Aboriginal people of northeast Arnhem
Land, Australia) 198, 420
Yup’ik, of Alaska 123, 125–6, 128–9, 131,
144–5, 211–12, 252–3, 278
Zuckerkandl, V. 246, 266–9, 277–8, 280

