To the extent that it has been used to legitimate the disempowerment of local people 9
in the management of their environments, this idea has had serious practical consequences 20
for those amongst whom anthropologists have conducted their studies. To adopt a distinc- 1
tion from Niklas Luhmann (1979), it might be argued that the dominance of the global 2
perspective marks the triumph of technology over cosmology. Traditional cosmology places 3
the person at the centre of an ordered universe of meaningful relations, such as that 4
depicted by Maffei (Figure 12.2), and enjoins an understanding of these relations as a 5
foundation for proper conduct towards the environment. Modern technology, by contrast, 6
places human society and its interests outside what is residually construed as the ‘phys- 7
ical world’, and furnishes the means for the former’s control over the latter. Cosmology 8
provides the guiding principles for human action within the world, technology provides 9
the principles for human action upon it. Thus, as cosmology gives way to technology, the 30
relation between people and the world is turned inside out (Figure 12.1), so that what 1
was a cosmos or lifeworld becomes a world – a solid globe – externally presented to life. 2
In short, the movement from spherical to global imagery corresponds to the undermining 3
of cosmological certainties and the growing belief in, and indeed dependence upon, the 4
technological ﬁx. It is a movement from revelation to control, and from partial know- 5
ledge to the calculated risk.
Let me add one further comment in conclusion. I have written throughout as though 7
the characterisations of the environment, respectively, as globe and sphere were irrevo- 8
cably opposed, and thus mutually exclusive. But this is not really so, since each view 9
contains the seeds of the other. To regard the world as a sphere is at once to render 40
conceivable the possibility of its logical inverse, the globe; and of course vice versa. We 1
could say that both perspectives are caught up in the dialectical interplay between engage- 2
ment and detachment, between human beings’ involvement in the world and their 3
separation from it, which has been a feature of the entire history of Western thought and 4
no doubt of other traditions as well. Concretely, this is perhaps most clearly manifest in 5
the architectural form of the dome (Smith 1950). A sphere on the inside, a globe on the 6
outside, this form has a cosmic resonance of near-universal appeal. But for any society, 7
at any period of its history, we may expect one perspective to be ascendant, and the other 118

Globes and spheres • 217 •

to be associated with its more or less muted undercurrent. And my sense of the contemporary discourse on the environment in the West is that it continues to be dominated by
global imagery associated with the triumph of modern science and technology, but that
it is under increasing threat from those – including many anthropologists – who would
turn to local or indigenous cosmologies of engagement for sources of insight into our
current predicament.

POSTSCRIPT
Since this chapter was written, two further strands have emerged along which I think the
argument can be extended. One is to relate the image of the globe, discussed here, with
that of the tree, which is currently pervasive in the representation of biodiversity. The
second is to show how the distinction between globe and sphere, as alternative topologies of environmental awareness, crosscuts the conventional dichotomy, as it appears in
contemporary environmentalist debates, between ecocentrism and anthropocentrism.
The image of living things as arrayed upon the branches of a tree will already be familiar
from my discussion of the genealogical model in Chapter Eight (pp. 134–5). The deﬁnitive feature of the model, I argued, is that every creature is speciﬁed in its essential nature
through the bestowal of attributes passed down along lines of descent, independently and
in advance of its placement in the world. The idea that the world is presented to life as
a surface to be occupied, at once continuous and ﬁnite in extent – in short, as the surface
of a globe – is simply the obverse of this notion. The intrinsic connection between the
geological image of the world as a globe and the biological image of life as a tree is beautifully illustrated in an engraving by Johannes Christian Bendorp, dating from the turn
of the nineteenth century (reproduced in Bouquet 1995: Figure 2.6). Said to depict the
Tree of Jesse, it shows a bay tree – on whose trunk and branches are arrayed all the
descendants of Adam and Eve – springing from a point on the surface of a solid globe.
The precise location of this point is immaterial; what is signiﬁcant, however, is the inscription below, which reads: ‘God created the whole family of man from one blood, to inhabit
the entire Earth’ (Bouquet 1995: 51). Thus the Earth, as a globe, is there to be colonised
by those who ‘branch out’ over it, along their several lines of descent.
Now one of the consequences of the genealogical model, as I showed in Chapter Eight
(pp. 138–9), is that difference is rendered as diversity. Thus living things are classiﬁed
and compared, and their kinds enumerated, in terms of intrinsic properties that they are
deemed to possess by virtue of genealogical connection, irrespective of their positioning
in relation to one another in an environment. This is the basis for the modern concept
of biodiversity. It follows, however, that this very concept is founded in a global perspective. In other words, the mode of apprehension that would reveal the totality of living
things as a catalogue of biodiversity is also one that reveals the world as a globe in the
purview of a universal humanity. That is why the human species is itself so conspicuously
absent from mainstream conceptions of global biodiversity. Species can only be enumerated in the natural world by a humanity that has set itself above and beyond it, and that
– being simultaneously everywhere and nowhere – can set the whole of nature in its sights.
So far as human differences are concerned, these are typically understood in terms of a
concept of cultural diversity that is seen as analogous to biodiversity rather than as an
extension of it. And the analogy, of course, serves only to reinforce the belief that whatever differences may exist between peoples, on account of their divergent histories of
descent, are superimposed upon a humanity that is common to all.

Dwelling
To pick up the second strand: contemporary discussions concerning human rights 1
and responsibilities towards the environment, above all in global geopolitical arenas, have 2
tended to revolve around a pivotal opposition between the positions of so-called anthro- 3
pocentrism and ecocentrism. By anthropocentrism is usually meant an attitude which values 4
all things non-human – all inanimate and animate components of the environment barring 5
other people – solely as instrumental means to the realisation of exclusively human ends. 6
Against this, ecocentrism is deﬁned as that attitude which credits the world of nature – 7
and above all, of living things in their interrelationships – with an intrinsic value quite 8
independently of the purposes and activities, and even of the presence, of human beings. 9
Yet despite (or perhaps because of ) their conventional opposition, these two positions 10
share more in common than meets the eye. Both presuppose a global perspective. For 1
both, ‘there is just one big environment’, identiﬁed with the order of nature (Cooper 2
1992: 167). But by its very vastness, this all-embracing environment is profoundly alien 3
to human experience. It is, as David Cooper puts it, ‘much too big’ to be lived in. One 4
cannot relate to its components. The environment we relate to, by contrast, is the one 5
that surrounds us, that constitutes our milieu and our ambience. And this is spherical 6
rather than global in its topology.4
Since we are human, the world around us must necessarily be anthropocentric: this, in 8
itself, implies no lack of participation, nor does it entail an instrumental attitude. Indeed 9
it is decidedly odd that the term ‘anthropocentrism’ should have been adopted to denote 20
an attitude that, more than any other, withdraws human life from active participation in 1
the environment. It is an attitude that might be more accurately described as ‘anthro- 2
pocircumferentialism’. The term may be an impossibly cumbersome one; nevertheless I 3
believe we need it, if only to distinguish the discursive construction of the environment 4
characteristic of modern Western thought and science from the many pre-modern and 5
non-Western cosmologies that are anthropocentric in the strict sense of placing the 6
human being at the hub of a dwelt-in world, a centre of embodied awareness that reaches 7
out, through the activity of the senses, into its surroundings. Thus the shift from 8
anthropocentrism to anthropocircumferentialism is tantamount to the withdrawal of the 9
human presence from the centre to the periphery of the lifeworld (Figure 12.1). And 30
ecocentrism, ﬁnally, is just the other side of the coin from anthropocircumferentialism. 1
For once humanity is placed on the outside, surrounding the global environment, then 2
the environment – now surrounded rather than surrounding – no longer holds any place 3
for human beings.

Culture, nature, environment • 219 •

Chapter Thirteen

To journey along a way of life
Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation

INTRODUCTION
Everyone has probably had the experience, at some time or other, of feeling lost, or of
not knowing in which way to turn in order to reach a desired destination. Yet for most
of the time we know where we are, and how to get to where we want to go. Ordinary
life would be well-nigh impossible if we did not. It remains a challenge, however, to
account for everyday skills of orientation and wayﬁnding. This challenge is compounded
by the considerable potential for misunderstanding surrounding the question of what it
actually means to know where one is, or the way to go. For the map-using stranger, making
his way in unfamiliar country, ‘being here’ or ‘going there’ generally entails the ability
to identify one’s current or intended future position with a certain spatial or geographic
location, deﬁned by the intersection of particular coordinates on the map. But a person
who has grown up in a country and is conversant with its ways knows quite well where
he is, or in what direction to go, without having to consult an artefactual map. What,
then, does he have that the stranger lacks? According to a view that has found wide
support in the literatures of geography and psychology, there is no difference in principle
between them. Both are map-users. For both, knowing where one is means identifying
one’s position in the world with a location on the map. The difference is just that the
native inhabitant’s map is held not in the hand but in the head, preserved not on paper
but in memory, in the form of a comprehensive spatial representation of his usual surroundings. At any moment, it is supposed, he can access this mental or ‘cognitive’ map, and
determine his location in terms of it.
In this chapter I shall argue, to the contrary, that there is no such map, and that the
belief in its existence is a consequence of the mistaken attribution to native people of a
sense of what it means to know one’s whereabouts that effectively treats them as strangers
in their own country. Indeed the native inhabitant may be unable to specify his location
in space, in terms of any independent system of coordinates, and yet will still insist with
good cause that he knows where he is. This, as I shall show, is because places do not
have locations but histories. Bound together by the itineraries of their inhabitants, places
exist not in space but as nodes in a matrix of movement. I shall call this matrix a ‘region’.
It is the knowledge of the region, and with it the ability to situate one’s current position
within the historical context of journeys previously made – journeys to, from and around
places – that distinguishes the countryman from the stranger. Ordinary wayﬁnding, then,
more closely resembles storytelling than map-using. To use a map is to navigate by means
of it: that is, to plot a course from one location to another in space. Wayﬁnding, by
contrast, is a matter of moving from one place to another in a region. But while it would

Dwelling
be wrong, or at least misleading, to liken the countryman’s knowledge to a map, there is 1
a certain parallel to be drawn between the processes of knowing and mapping. Both are 2
environmentally situated activities, both are carried out along paths of travel, and both 3
unfold over time. Just as wayﬁnding has to be distinguished from navigation, however, 4
so also mapping must be distinguished from mapmaking. For the designs to which mapping 5
gives rise – including what have been variously categorised as ‘native maps’ and ‘sketch 6
maps’ – are not so much representations of space as condensed histories. Thus, to put 7
my thesis in a nutshell, knowing is like mapping, not because knowledge is like a map, 8
but because the products of mapping (graphic inscriptions), as those of knowing (stories), 9
are fundamentally un-maplike. What follows is an elaboration of this argument.
COGNITIVE MAPS
At the most general level, the question of how people ﬁnd their way around may be posed 4
in terms of two alternative metaphors. Following David Rubin (1988: 375), I call the 5
ﬁrst a complex-structure metaphor, and the second a complex-process metaphor. The 6
former, which has long been dominant in cognitive psychology, holds that even before 7
the individual steps forth into the environment, he has already had copied into his mind 8
– through some mechanism of replication – a comprehensive description of its objects, 9
features and locations, and the relations between them. This, of course, is the cognitive 20
map. Having determined his current whereabouts and desired destination within the map, 1
and having plotted the route between them, his actual movement from place to place is 2
a perfectly straightforward, indeed almost mechanical matter of executing the prescribed 3
course. Getting from A to B, in short, is explained through the harnessing of a simple 4
process, of bodily locomotion, to a complex structure, the mental map. With a complex- 5
process metaphor, on the other hand, little or no pre-structured content is imputed to 6
the mind. Instead, wayﬁnding is understood as a skilled performance in which the trav- 7
eller, whose powers of perception and action have been ﬁne-tuned through previous 8
experience, ‘feels his way’ towards his goal, continually adjusting his movements in response 9
to an ongoing perceptual monitoring of his surroundings. What the ﬁrst approach explains 30
through positing an isomorphism between structures in the world and structures in the 1
mind, the second explains as the unfolding of a ﬁeld of relations established through the 2
immersion of the actor-perceiver within a given environmental context. This is the 3
approach favoured by ecological psychology, and it is the one I follow here.
Before pursuing an ecological approach to wayﬁnding, however, it is worth reﬂecting 5
on the circumstances in which the notion of the cognitive map came to be introduced 6
in the ﬁrst place. At that time, some half a century ago, psychology was still in the grip 7
of the behaviourist paradigm. Animals, including human beings, were supposed to respond 8
more or less automatically, in ways conditioned by previous experience, to particular 9
environmental stimuli. Seeking to verify this simple model, psychologists devised numerous 40
experiments in which their star laboratory animal – the humble rat – was induced to run 1
through a variety of mazes. Starved at the outset, having successfully negotiated the maze 2
the rat would be rewarded with food from a box. The idea was that through repeated 3
trials, the animal would learn to take one particular path rather than another at each 4
successive ‘choice-point’ along the route. The whole route would then be remembered as 5
a chain of conditioned responses, such as right or left turns, triggered by the successive 6
appearance of particular stimuli in the form of gateways in the maze. But rats are enter- 7
prising creatures, and they often found ways of subverting the experimenters’ intentions. 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 221 •

They would, for example, manage to climb out of the maze near the start by pushing
back the cover and then run directly over the top to the food box, where they would
climb back down and eat. This caused some consternation in the behaviourist camp, since
according to the stimulus–response model they should have had no idea of the direction
in which to head off in search of food, knowing no other way than the familiar route
through the maze, with all its twists and turns.
To further test the rats’ abilities, psychologist Edward C. Tolman and his collaborators
devised what they called a ‘spatial orientation’ experiment (Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish
1946). A maze was ﬁrst set up as shown in Figure 13.1. Starting at A, the animals had
to run across an open circular table, then through the alley CD, and ﬁnally along the
roundabout route through E and F to reach the food box at G. Once they were accustomed to this, the original maze was replaced with the apparatus shown in Figure 13.2.
Starting again at A, the animals ran across the circular table and down the alley, only to
ﬁnd it blocked at one end. After returning to the table and exploring a little way down
the other radiating paths, each rat would eventually choose to run all the way out along
one of them. The overwhelming majority opted for path number 6 – the path that would
take them to precisely the same spot where, in the original set-up, the food box had been
located. This experiment seemed to provide convincing evidence that in their training for
the ﬁrst maze, the rats had not merely learned a ﬁxed sequence of steps that would lead
them reliably towards their goal. Rather, as Tolman hypothesised, they must have built
up ‘something like a ﬁeld map of the environment’, upon which could be traced all
possible routes and paths and their relationships.
Having located their own position and that of the
food box in terms of this map, the rats were able
to select the path, in the second maze, that led
F
G
H
directly from the one to the other. In light of this
ability it was clearly inadequate, Tolman reasoned,
to liken the animal’s central nervous system – as
the behaviourists had done – to a telephone switchE
board such that every incoming stimulus simply
‘dials up’ the appropriate response. The brain was
to be compared, instead, to a ‘map control room’
where stimulus-based information would be
collected and collated, and where the routes would
be plotted that would ﬁnally determine the animal’s
overt behavioural responses (Tolman 1948: 192).
Despite its provocative title, Tolman’s 1948
paper – ‘Cognitive maps in rats and men’ – had
B
much to say about rats but virtually nothing about
human beings. Ironically, what little Tolman did
have to say about humans had nothing to do with
A
their abilities of orientation and wayﬁnding, but
with certain psychopathologies which, he thought,
could be attributed to regimes of child training that Figure 13.1 The spatial orientation experiment: the
blocked the development of properly comprehen- original maze.
sive cognitive maps. Ending on a high moral tone, After Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish, Studies in spacial
Tolman preached that only by inculcating the para- learning I, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36,
mount virtues of reason and tolerance could our 1946.

Dwelling

children be furnished with maps sufﬁciently 1
broad and comprehensive to cope with ‘that great 2
God-given maze which is our human world’ 3
H
(1948: 208). It is hard to know what the rats 4
would have made of this! Be that as it may, more 5
recent work by James and Carol Gould on the 6
wayﬁnding abilities of honey bees helps to put 7
the rats’ capacities in perspective. For it turns out 8
that what rats can do, bees can do too: namely, 9
make their way directly to a food source, along 10
a course never taken before. And they can do 1
this without involving anything that we might 2
dignify by terms like ‘thought’, ‘reason’ or ‘imag- 3
ination’. The Goulds sound an appropriate note 4
of scepticism when they remark that the calcu- 5
A
lation a bee would have to undertake in order to 6
plan an optimal route would not be beyond a 7
simple computer. There is no obvious reason why 8
Figure 13.2 The spatial orientation experiment: the
the bee, or for that matter the rat, should have 9
replacement maze.
any more of an understanding of the task before 20
After Tolman, Ritchie and Kalish, Studies in spacial
learning I, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36, 1946. it than the computer, or why its solution should 1
call for any intelligence whatsoever (Gould and 2
Gould 1988: 224–5).
Here is what the Goulds did with their bees. First, a group of foragers were trained to 4
ﬂy to a feeding station in some woods out of sight of the hive. Later, individuals about 5
to set off from the hive to the feeder were captured and transported, in an opaque container, 6
to another location well off from their regular route and from which the feeder, likewise, 7
was hidden from view. Here they were released. It was found that the bees ﬂew straight 8
from this location to the feeder, along what can only have been an entirely novel route 9
for them. There is no way in which they could have done this, had they been constrained 30
to follow a ﬁxed sequence of steps between accustomed landmarks – as stipulated by the 1
stimulus-response model. Instead, the Goulds suggest, the bee does what we would do 2
under similar circumstances: ‘she would use nearby landmarks to ﬁgure out where she 3
is, determine in which direction her goal lies, and then depart directly towards it’ 4
(Gould and Gould 1988: 109). She navigates, in other words, in terms of a cognitive 5
map. That humans do likewise was suggested by experiments conducted by Worchel (cited 6
by Oatley 1977: 539–40), who led his subjects blindfold along two sides of a right-angled 7
triangle and then told them to make their way back along the hypoteneuse – a task they 8
completed with considerable accuracy. The ability to update one’s position on the cogni- 9
tive map, and thereby to keep on target despite twists and turns, is – according to Keith 40
Oatley – the basis for any kind of navigation, whether on land or at sea. But whatever 1
the conditions under which it is carried out, navigation ‘is a complex cognitive skill’ 2
(Oatley 1977: 537).
Comparing what the Goulds say about bees with what Oatley says about humans, we 4
ﬁnd more than a hint of double standards. Confronted with essentially the same task, its 5
successful accomplishment by humans is attributed to complex skills whereas bees 6
apparently do it on autopilot. I do not mean to deny that human wayﬁnding is a highly 7
complex, skilled process. But there seems good reason to suppose that it is skilled precisely 118

Block

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 223 •

to the extent that it goes beyond the simple computational operations described by cognitive map theorists. For the environment within which people ﬁnd their way about is not,
as Tolman would have it, a ‘great God-given maze’, with all its landmarks, routes, openings and obstructions already laid out in advance. It is rather an immensely variegated
terrain of comings and goings, which is continually taking shape around the traveller even
as the latter’s movements contribute to its formation. To hold a course in such an environment is to be attentive at all times to what is going on around you, and to respond in
ways that answer to your purpose. This is probably as true of rats, in their ordinary
environment, as it is of human beings in theirs. Rats are sensitive and intelligent creatures, and if their performance in experimental mazes manifests a basic computational
capacity but no real skill, this is only because the artiﬁcial set-up in which they ﬁnd themselves is a highly impoverished one that deprives them of any opportunity for the exercise
of normal powers of discrimination and judgement.

WHAT IS A MAP ANYWAY?
The core assumption of the cognitive approach to orientation and wayﬁnding is, as we
have seen, that perceptually salient aspects of the structure of the world are copied into
an analogous structure in the mind (Rubin 1988: 375). This copy is said to be a map,
or at least to be maplike in form. But why should this particular metaphor have been
adopted, rather than some other? Why maps rather than, say, pictures or images? What
is the difference between a map of the world and a picture or image of the world? Any
general deﬁnition of a map, say Arthur Robinson and Barbara Petchenik, ‘must be based
on its being simply a representation of things in space’ (1976: 15). Yet a perspective
drawing would satisfy this criterion, and we would surely not describe such a drawing as
a map. One possible approach to deﬁning a map, in contradistinction to the perspectival
image, is suggested by Alfred Gell (1985). The approach rests on the idea that maps
encode beliefs or propositions about the locations of places and objects that are true (or
taken to be true) independently of where one is currently positioned in the world. An
example of such a proposition might be that ‘Edinburgh is north of London’. One could
issue statements to this effect whether one was in London, Edinburgh, or anywhere else
for that matter, and they would all be equally valid. In Gell’s terms, these statements –
each of which is a token of the proposition in question – are non-indexical, in that their
truth conditions are not bound to the place where they are made.
Accordingly, Gell proceeds to deﬁne the map as ‘any system of spatial knowledge and/or
beliefs which takes the form of non-token-indexical statements about the spatial locations
of places and objects’ (1985: 278–9). Now a person equipped with knowledge in this
form ought, in principle, to be able to ﬁgure out just how the world should look from
any selected point of observation. If I were hiking in the mountains, for example, I should
be able to state how the various peaks would appear arrayed before me, were I standing
on a particular summit. Such statements, however, since they hold good only for the view
from that summit, and none other, are indexical of the place. Any set of beliefs and propositions whose tokens are indexical in this sense, having regard for what is where for a
subject positioned at a certain location, comprises what Gell calls an image (1985: 280).
Thus the difference between the image and the map comes to hinge on the criterion of
the indexicality or non-indexicality of its tokens. If our knowledge consisted only of images
– that is, of token-indexical spatial propositions – then, to follow Gell’s argument, we
would never be able to hold any coherent idea about our own location in space, or about

Dwelling
the locations of other places relative to ourselves. We know where we are, not because 1
what we see around us matches to a certain mental image, but because this image has 2
itself been uniquely derived from an underlying map, at a point deﬁned by a given set 3
of spatial coordinates that are indifferent to our own movement. As we travel from one 4
place to another, we pass through a sequence of images, each of which is speciﬁc to – 5
and in turn permits us to identify – a particular location along the way. But the map, 6
from which all these images are generated, remains the same wherever we are.
I shall return in due course to what Gell has to say about the nature of navigation and 8
wayﬁnding. For the moment I want to focus on the implications of this way of distin- 9
guishing between the map and the image. It is certainly true, as Gell intimates, that the 10
mere possession of a map, whether mental or artefactual, will not help you to ﬁnd your 1
way around unless you can use it to generate location-speciﬁc images for comparison with 2
immediate perceptual experience. It is also true that no map will do the work that cogni- 3
tive theorists expect of it unless the information it encodes is invariant with respect to 4
the location of the percipient. Consider Oatley’s assertion, for example, that the essence 5
of navigation lies in the ‘ability to update one’s position within the cognitive map while 6
travelling’ (1977: 539). How could this possibly be done if the map keeps changing as 7
one goes along? Oatley himself confuses the issue, when he speaks of the navigator’s cogni- 8
tive map as ‘a process, not just a picture’ (p. 546). For if the navigator is to look to the 9
map for directions, it can be neither process nor picture, neither embodying his own 20
movement nor representing any particular scenes along the route. ‘We only update maps’, 1
as Gell observes, ‘when the geography of the world changes, not whenever we move about 2
ourselves’ (1985: 274). Ultimately, the justiﬁcation for extending the map metaphor into 3
the domain of cognition must lie in the assumption, more often than not unstated, that 4
what the map affords is a representation of things in space that is independent of any 5
particular point of view.
This assumption, however, raises problems of its own. One of the difﬁculties that cartog- 7
raphers often face in their attempts to explain the nature of maps is that the very ﬁelds, 8
of cognition and communication, from which they might ﬁnd appropriate analogues have 9
already seized upon the map as an analogue from cartography. ‘When non-cartographic 30
writers use the term “map”’, as Robinson and Petchenik say, ‘they seem to mean that it 1
is possible to take isolated incidents, experiences, and so on, and arrange them intellec- 2
tually so that there is some coherence, some total relation, instead of individual isolation’ 3
(1976: 4). Thus scientists refer to their theories as maps, into which can be ﬁtted the data 4
of observation, while anthropologists are inclined to attribute a similar maplike quality to 5
culture and society (for example, Leach 1976: 51), on the grounds that it furnishes an 6
overarching framework of concepts and categories for the organisation of otherwise frag- 7
mentary sensory experience. These, and many other similar metaphorical usages make it 8
appear natural and self-evident that actual maps should function in the same way, as 9
schematic representations of the real world, which do not index any position but upon 40
which it should be possible to plot the position of everything in relation to everything 1
else. Now most people in Western societies, educated since their schooldays in the 2
conventions of modern cartography, probably do tend to think of maps as representations 3
of this kind. But whether the artefacts and inscriptions that have at one time or another 4
been designated as maps actually satisfy the requirement of non-indexicality, is moot. The 5
question, in short, is: are maps maplike?
David Turnbull, arguing from the perspective of a sociologist of science, makes a 7
compelling case to the effect that they are not. The idea that maps are independent of 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 225 •

any point of view, that the propositions they encode are equally valid wherever one stands
in the world, is, Turnbull contends, a myth – though it is one that has been avidly cultivated in the name of science and objectivity (Turnbull 1989: 15). The reality is that no
map, however ‘modern’ or sophisticated the techniques of its production, can be wholly
divorced from the practices, interests and understandings of its makers and users. Or to
put it another way, every map is necessarily embedded in a ‘form of life’. And to the
extent that it is so embedded, it must fail on the criterion of non-indexicality. As Turnbull
explains, ‘all maps are in some measure indexical, because no map, representation or theory
can be independent of a form of life’ (1989: 20). At ﬁrst glance, this argument seems to
run directly counter to Gell’s insistence that a representation can only be a map insofar
as the propositions encoded therein are non-indexical. Closer examination, however, reveals
a certain slippage in the meaning of indexicality. Is indexing a place the same as indexing
a form of life? If the map discloses a perspective or ‘point of view’, is this a view in the
world, as it appears from a particular place, or a view of the world, ﬁltered through the
concepts, categories and schemata of a received cultural tradition? Could a map be nonindexical in the ﬁrst sense and indexical in the second?
Consider an example to which both Gell and Turnbull refer. Micronesian mariners,1
who are used to voyaging across hundreds of miles of open sea between often tiny islands,
know the bearing of any island from any other by its so-called ‘star course’ – that is, by
a list of stars whose successive rising or setting points, during the night, indicate the direction in question. The expert mariner has committed to memory an entire compendium
of star courses, each unique to a particular pair of islands, and it is in this compendium,
according to Gell, that his ‘map’ consists. Now it is clearly the case that any statement
of the course between one island A, and another island B, will not depend for its validity
on one’s current position at sea. Thus star courses ‘have the essential map property of
non-token-indexicality; they do not change truth value according to where they are uttered’
(Gell 1985: 284). Yet it is also fair to say, with Turnbull, that the principles upon which
the Micronesian mariner’s map is constructed are securely embedded within the percepts
and practices of traditional seafaring, and therefore that it requires a knowledge of this
cultural context to be able to ‘read’ and understand the map. It would appear, in short,
that while the map indexes a tradition, it is non-indexical with regard to location. The
same, moreover, could be said of ‘modern’ maps, constructed on scientiﬁc principles with
the aid of sophisticated technological gadgetry. Modern science and technology, as
Turnbull remarks (1991: 36), are as dependent on tradition for their successful transmission as is Micronesian seafaring lore. And no more than Micronesian maps can modern
maps be understood without taking into account ‘the world view, cognitive schema or
the culture of the mapmaker’ (Turnbull 1989: 20).
There is, however, something deeply paradoxical about this argument. For to separate
tradition from locality, or culture from place, is also to divorce traditional knowledge from
the contexts of its production in the environmentally situated experience of practitioners.
Thus the form of life is reduced to a ‘world view’ or ‘cognitive schema’ – a set of rules
and representations for the organisation of sensory experience that individuals carry in
their heads and that are available for transmission independently of their bodily activity
in the world. It is as though culture were received along lines of traditional transmission
from ancestors, and imported into the sites of its practical application. But this is to
fall right back into the classical view of culture as a map, the analogy – as Bourdieu (1977:
2) points out – ‘which occurs to an outsider who has to ﬁnd his way around in a foreign
landscape and who compensates for his lack of practical mastery, the prerogative of the

Dwelling
native, by the use of a model of all possible routes’. So here is the paradox: actual maps 1
are made to appear indexical with regard to cultural tradition only by a rendering of 2
culture as non-indexical with regard to locality. The placing of maps within their cultural 3
context is paralleled by the displacing of culture from its context in the lifeworld. How, 4
then, are we to resolve this dilemma? How can we hold on to the commonsense notion 5
that maps retain a certain invariance as we move about, that they do not continually 6
recompose themselves to reﬂect the particularities of wherever we happen to be, while yet 7
recognising their embeddedness in locally situated practices? My answer, in brief, will be 8
that what maps index is movement, that the vision they embody is not local but regional, 9
but that the ambition of modern cartography has been to convert this regional vision into 10
a global one, as though it issued from a point of view above and beyond the world.
HOW TO SEE THE WORLD FROM EVERYWHERE AT ONCE
When you stand at a particular spot, everything appears from a certain angle, while much 5
of the environment will likely be hidden from view behind prominent foreground features. 6
Stand at another spot, and things will appear differently. In order to have any concep- 7
tion of the overall conﬁguration of one’s environment, it would seem necessary to be in 8
possession of some kind of totalising scheme into which every one of these location-speciﬁc 9
perceptual images could be integrated. This, as we have seen, is an argument commonly 20
adduced to justify positing the existence of cognitive maps. It is an argument, however, 1
that assumes a snapshot theory of vision, as if one could only ever see, in perspective, 2
from a ﬁxed point of observation. ‘Is not to see’, as Merleau-Ponty asks rhetorically, ‘always 3
to see from somewhere?’ He proceeds to answer, however, in the negative (Merleau-Ponty 4
1962: 67). To take up his own example, the house next door may be viewed from this 5
side or that, from inside or outside, or even from up above if one were to ﬂy overhead. 6
But what I see is none of these appearances; it is the house itself, in all its concrete actu- 7
ality. The form of the house is progressively disclosed to me as I move around and about, 8
and in and out, not as the sum of a very large number of images, arrayed in memory 9
like frames on a reel of ﬁlm, but as the envelope of a continually changing perspectival 30
structure. Observation, Merleau-Ponty claims, consists not in having a ﬁxed point of view 1
on the object, but ‘in varying the point of view while keeping the object ﬁxed’ (1962: 2
91). Thus the house is not seen from somewhere but from nowhere – or rather from 3
everywhere (pp. 67–9).
In keeping with his ecological approach to visual perception, James Gibson presents an 5
argument along very similar lines. Animals and people, Gibson writes, see as they move, 6
not just in the intervals between movements. Such ambulatory vision takes place along what 7
he calls a ‘path of observation’. A path is to be understood not as an inﬁnite series of 8
discrete points, occupied at successive instants, but as a continuous itinerary of movement. 9
Thus the environment one sees is neither ‘seen-at-this-moment’ nor ‘seen-from-this-point’. 40
On the contrary, ‘what one perceives is an environment that surrounds one, that is every- 1
where equally clear, that is in-the-round or solid, and that is all-of-a-piece’ (Gibson 1979: 2
195–7). But if the features of this environment are revealed as one travels along paths of 3
view, rather than projected from a sequence of points of view, where do these paths begin, 4
and where do they end? And if we see not at this moment in time, but over a certain period, 5
how long is this period? Such questions cannot be precisely answered. Of a minor feature 6
we might say, after only cursory exploration, that we have seen it all. But of a complex, 7
varied and extensive terrain, although we may have criss-crossed it along innumerable paths, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 227 •

we may still feel there is more to be discovered. As for our perception of the environment
as a whole, what else can this be than the outcome of a lifetime’s observation, along all the
paths we have ever taken? This is what Gibson means when he asserts that perceiving the
world over a sufﬁcient length of time, and along a sufﬁciently extended set of paths, is
tantamount to perceiving it ‘as if one could be everywhere at once’ (p. 197).
It is critically important to distinguish this sense of omnipresence from that implied
by the conventional notion of the ‘bird’s-eye view’ (Gibson 1979: 198–9). The latter, of
course, has nothing to do with the way birds in ﬂight actually see, but rather describes
how we imagine the world would look from a point of observation so far above the earth’s
surface that the entire territory with which we are familiar from journeys made at ground
level could be taken in at a glance. The higher one goes, it is supposed, the more
one’s vision transcends the locational constraints and narrow horizons of the view from
the ground. And by the same token, the more apparently maplike it becomes. Robinson
and Petchenik are right to point out that the analogy between the map and the bird’s
eye view is potentially misleading, not only because of their different geometries of projection, but also because the map is ‘a construction, an abstraction, an arrangement of
markings that relates to spatial “reality” only by agreement, not by sensory testability’
(1976: 53). Nevertheless, anyone who has ﬂown over familiar country by plane will have
been astonished, on the one hand, by how strange it looks, and on the other, by how
closely the view from the window resembles a topographic map of the same territory.
There is nothing strange, however, about the environment perceived from everywhere, in
the sense adduced by Merleau-Ponty and Gibson, nor do you have to leave the ground
to perceive it in this way. It is not a view from ‘up there’ rather than ‘down here’, but
one taken along the multiple paths that make up a country, and along which people come
and go in the practical conduct of life. Our perception of the environment as a whole,
in short, is forged not in the ascent from a myopic, local perspective to a panoptic, global
one, but in the passage from place to place, and in histories of movement and changing
horizons along the way.
The same point could be made, following Edward Casey (1996: 30), through a contrast
between vertical and lateral modes of integration. In the vertical mode, embraced by
modern cartography as well as by cognitive map theorists, local particulars obtained by
observation on the ground are ﬁtted within an abstract conception of space so as to form
a representation of the world as though one were looking down upon it from ‘up above’.
While the eyes of the body remain close to the ground, the mind’s eye – which is witness
to this maplike representation – is up with the birds. The lateral mode of integration,
by contrast, presupposes no such division between mind and body. For the work of integration is performed by the organism as a whole as it moves around, purposefully and
attentively, from place to place. Such movements do not merely connect places that are
already located in terms of an independent framework of spatial coordinates. Rather, they
bring these places into being as nodes within a wider network of coming and going. Casey
refers to this network of interplace movement as a region – that is, ‘an area concatenated
by peregrinations between the places it connects’ (1996: 24). Evidently, when Gibson
speaks of perceiving the environment from everywhere at once, that ‘everywhere’ is neither
space, nor a portion of space, but a region in this sense. Likewise, every ‘somewhere’ is
not a location in space but a position on a path of movement, one of the matrix of paths
comprising the region as a whole. In short, whereas everywhere-as-space is the world as
it is imagined from a point of view above and beyond, everywhere-as-region is the world
as it is experienced by an inhabitant journeying from place to place along a way of life.

Dwelling
This idea of the region may be illustrated by means of three ethnographic examples. 1
Among the Walbiri, an Aboriginal people of western central Australia, the entire country 2
is perceived ‘in terms of networks of places linked by paths’ (Munn 1973a: 215). Originally 3
laid down through the movements of ancestral beings in that formative era known as the 4
Dreaming, these paths are continually retraced in the journeys of the living people who 5
take after them. As they relate the stories of these journeys, Walbiri men and women may 6
draw web-like ﬁgures in the sand whose basic components are lines and circles. Every line 7
conveys a journey to or from camp, while every circle conveys the act of making camp 8
by walking all around it. Rather similarly for the Ongees, a group of hunter-gatherers 9
inhabiting the island of Little Andaman in the Bay of Bengal, places are brought into 10
being at the conﬂuences of the paths of movement of humans, animals and spirits. Asked 1
by the ethnographer, Vishvajit Pandya, to draw the places where humans and spirits live, 2
Ongee informants responded by sketching lines of movement (straight for humans, wavy 3
for spirits), leading to the demarcation of the various places at their intersections.2 4
The world of the Ongees, Pandya concludes, ‘is not a preconstituted stage on which things 5
happen, but rather an area or region created and constructed by the ongoing practice of 6
movement’ (Pandya 1990: 777). My third example is taken from A. Irving Hallowell’s 7
study of the Saulteaux (Ojibwa), hunters and trappers of the Berens River district near 8
Lake Winnipeg in Canada. In Saulteaux experience, to move in a certain direction is 9
always to travel from place to place. This is so not only for human persons, but also for 20
the sun, the moon and the winds, all of which are held to be persons of a kind. Thus 1
‘what we refer to abstractly as cardinal directions are to them the homes of the winds, the 2
places they come from. Similarly, east is thought of as the place where the sun rises; west, 3
the place where it sets; south is the place to which the souls of the dead travel, and the 4
place from which the summer birds come’ (Hallowell 1955: 191). For the Saulteaux, then, 5
as indeed for the Ongee and the Walbiri, ‘everywhere’ is not a space but a region concaten- 6
ated by the place-to-place movements of humans, animals, spirits, winds, celestial bodies, 7
and so on.
KNOWING AS YOU GO
We can now return to the paradox I introduced earlier. If our knowledge of the environ- 2
ment is embedded in locally situated practices, how come that it retains a certain constancy 3
as we move about? If all knowledge is context-dependent, how can people take their know- 4
ledge with them from one context to another? For clues towards a resolution I turn once 5
again to the work of David Turnbull. One of Turnbull’s aims is to break down the 6
conventional distinction between so-called indigenous knowledge and Western science. He 7
does so by emphasising that all knowledge, of whatever kind and historical provenance, 8
is generated within a ‘ﬁeld of practices’ (1989: 61). And since practices must be carried 9
out by particular people in particular places, all knowledge – including that which we call 40
science – must be inherently local. Let me set aside for the time being the contrary thesis, 1
which Turnbull confusingly appears to entertain at the same time, that the context for 2
both indigenous and scientiﬁc knowledge is something like a worldview or cognitive 3
schema, by nature detached from the local sites of its practical expression. I have already 4
drawn attention to the dangers of falling back on a concept of culture that divorces know- 5
ledge and its transmission from environmentally situated experience. My present concern 6
is with another difﬁculty in Turnbull’s argument. For while on the one hand, he insists 7
that a common characteristic of all knowledge systems is their ‘localness’, he also argues, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 229 •

on the other, that what is critical to the growth and reproduction of any knowledge system
is the work that goes into moving its diverse components – including practitioners, their
know-how and skills, technical devices and standards of evaluation – from one local site
of knowledge production to another (Turnbull 1993a: 30).
Consider the case of Western science. According to what might be called the ‘ofﬁcial’
view of science, data recorded by means of standardised procedures in diverse locations are
ﬁtted into a framework of theory consisting of propositions that are strictly non-indexical
with regard to place. What happens in practice, however, is a good deal more messy. Not
only is it unclear where data collection ends and theory building begins, but also there is
no uniﬁed body of theory under which all of experience can be subsumed. Rather, there
are as many theoretical growth-points as there are sites of practical investigation, and the
character of each is conditioned by circumstances peculiar to each place. Much of the labour
of science, Turnbull argues, lies in attempts to establish the connectivity and equivalence
that would render procedures developed and results obtained in one local context applicable in another (1993a: 37). But if science calls for the constant movement of personnel,
knowledge and techniques from place to place, and the assemblage, in each, of inputs of
heterogeneous provenance, how can it also share the characteristic of localness? As a system
of knowledge, science cannot be rooted in any particular place or places, but must rather
emerge from the total network of interplace relations constituting its ﬁeld of practice.
Furthermore, if that is so for science, then it should be equally so for any other knowledge
system. As Turnbull himself puts it, ‘all knowing is like travelling, like a journey between
the parts of a matrix’ (1991: 35). So what is this matrix? It is, of course, a region in the
sense deﬁned above – that is, as the sum of journeys made.
My point is that knowing, like the perception of the environment in general, proceeds
along paths of observation. One can no more know in places than travel in them. Rather,
knowledge is regional: it is to be cultivated by moving along paths that lead around,
towards or away from places, from or to places elsewhere. Conceived as the ensemble of
such place-to-place movements, the notion of region, far from denoting a level of generalisation intermediate between local particulars and global universals, offers a way out of
this kind of dichotomous and hierarchical thinking. As every place, through the movements that give rise to it, enfolds its relations to all others, to be somewhere is to be
everywhere at once. Rephrased in our terms, what Turnbull proposes is a compelling argument to the effect that all knowledge systems, including science, are integrated laterally
rather than vertically. The philosopher Joseph Rouse makes much the same point in
arguing that ‘we go from one local knowledge to another rather than from universal theories to their particular instantiations’ (Rouse 1987: 72). In light of the foregoing
considerations, I would prefer to say that we know as we go, from place to place. This
does not, however, alter the basic point, which is that science is distinguished from other
systems of knowledge by the lengths to which it goes to present itself as if it were vertically integrated, as if the scientist’s task were to ﬁt data to theory rather than to put the
knowledge that has brought him to one place to work in setting off towards another. To
create this illusion, science has to suppress, or to hide from view, the social labour involved
in establishing equivalences and connections across places (Turnbull 1996: 62). In this,
moreover, it is aided and abetted by modern cartography, which has been similarly
concerned to establish its scientiﬁc credentials through its claim to produce accurate and
objective representations of a world ‘out there’.
Cartographers, like scientists, and indeed like practitioners of any other knowledge
system, draw their material from all manner of sources, through both direct observation

Dwelling
and inquiry into local tradition. The collection and collation of this material may take 1
them – or agents operating on their behalf – on innumerable and often lengthy journeys. 2
None of this, however, appears in the ﬁnal form of the modern, ‘scientiﬁc’ map. To the 3
contrary, one of the most striking characteristics of the modern map is its elimination, or 4
erasure, of the practices and itineraries that contributed to its production (Turnbull 1996: 5
62). In the words of Michel de Certeau, ‘the map, a totalising stage on which elements 6
of diverse origin are brought together to form a tableau of a “state” of geographical know- 7
ledge, pushes away into its prehistory or into its posterity, as if into the wings, the 8
operations of which it is the result or the necessary condition’ (1984: 121). Just as science, 9
in the ofﬁcial view, is charged with the task of integrating site-speciﬁc data into an over- 10
arching, uniﬁed framework of theory, so the mission of cartography is ostensibly one of 1
representing the ‘geographic facts’ on the ground within a single, universal system of spatial 2
coordinates (Edney 1993: 55). The ideal is a perfect congruence between the world and 3
its representation, and progress is measured by the degree of approximation towards it. 4
Thus in the work of the modern cartographer, knowledge generated through movement 5
from place to place within a region is presented as if it issued from a totalising vision 6
above and beyond the world. In short, cartography transforms everywhere-as-region, the 7
world as experienced by a mobile inhabitant, into everywhere-as-space, the imaginary 8
‘bird’s-eye view’ of a transcendent consciousness.
The same transformation, of course, is worked on the ordinary perception of the environ- 20
ment by the theory of cognitive maps. As in the modern artefactual map, so too in its 1
‘mental’ analogue, all those movements of coming and going through which people develop 2
a knowledge of their environment are pushed into the wings, to recall de Certeau’s phrase, 3
leaving the map as a fait accompli, ﬁnal and complete, the product of a process of making 4
that begins with the layout of the world and ends with that layout copied into the mind. 5
Any journeys undertaken beyond that point are supposed to belong to the phase of map- 6
using rather than mapmaking, and therefore to play no further part in the formation of 7
the map itself. The traditional Micronesian seafarer, in this view, is just as much a map- 8
user as is the modern marine navigator with his charts and compass, even though his skill 9
‘is entirely mental and perceptual, using no instruments of any kind’ (Oatley 1977: 537). 30
But whereas modern artefactual maps have their authors, designers or manufacturers, the 1
origins of traditional mental maps appear lost in the mists of time. Indeed to say of such 2
maps that they are ‘traditional’ is virtually tantamount to an admission that they have no 3
maker or makers, but rather that they ‘make themselves’ – or that like myths, following 4
Lévi-Strauss’s celebrated aphorism, they ‘think themselves out’ through the medium of 5
men’s minds and without their knowledge (Lévi-Strauss 1966a: 56). In any case the 6
assumption is that the map is made before it is used, that it already exists as a structure 7
in the mind, handed down as part of a received tradition, prior to the traveller’s venturing 8
forth into the world.
My contention, to the contrary, is that people’s knowledge of the environment under- 40
goes continuous formation in the very course of their moving about in it. To return to 1
a distinction which I introduced at the outset, this is to account for such knowledge 2
in terms of the generative potentials of a complex process rather than the replication of 3
a complex structure. That process consists in the engagement of the mobile actor-perceiver 4
with his or her environment. As I have already suggested, we know as we go, not before 5
we go. Such ambulatory knowing – or knowledgeable ambulating – cannot be 6
accommodated within the terms of the conventional dichotomy between mapmaking and 7
map-using. The traveller or storyteller who knows as he goes is neither making a map 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 231 •

nor using one. He is, quite simply, mapping. And the
forms or patterns that arise from this mapping process,
whether in the imagination or materialised as artefacts,
are but stepping stones along the way, punctuating the
process rather than initiating it or bringing it to a close.
My perspective, in short, accords with what Robert
Rundstrom has called ‘process cartography’, in which
mapping is seen as ‘open-ended, ongoing, always
leading to the next instance of mapping, the next map’
(Rundstrom 1993: 21). In what follows, I ﬁrst show
in more detail how mapping differs from mapmaking.
I then turn to the distinction between mapping and
map-using. All wayﬁnding, I argue, is mapping; all
navigation map-using. Thus mapping is to map-using
as wayﬁnding to navigation. The overall structure of
the argument is summarised in Figure 13.3.

Mapmaking =
Cartography

Mapping =
Wayfinding

versus

Map-using =
Navigation

Figure 13.3 The relations between mapping,
mapmaking and map-using: a summary.

MAPPING IS NOT MAPMAKING
‘Mapping’ and ‘mapmaking’, according to Denis Wood, ‘do not mean the same thing’
(1992: 32). The difference, in his view, is akin to that between speaking and writing.
Wood thinks of mapping as a capacity universal to humans, established along with other
capacities of the human mind-brain through a process of evolution under natural selection. But the fact that all human beings are capable of mapping does not mean that they
all make maps. Likewise, just because all humans can speak does not mean they all write.
Whereas mapping, like speaking, might be regarded as a ‘universal expression of individual existence’, mapmaking, like writing, has to be seen as ‘an unusual function of
speciﬁable social circumstances arising only within certain social structures’ (Wood 1993a:
50). In other words, the emergence of mapmaking belongs not to the evolution of
humanity but to its history. Yet the difference between mapping and mapmaking, just as
that between speaking and writing, is for Wood a very ﬁne one. It is not the difference
between outwardly expressing an idea and ‘capturing’ that expression in an alternative
medium. For one thing, mapping is no more the externalisation of a map that already
exists in the mapper’s head than is speaking the externalisation of a thought. Rather, both
mapping and speaking are genres of performance that draw their meanings from the
communicative contexts of their enactment. It follows, for another thing, that neither
mapmaking nor writing can serve to transcribe pre-existent thoughts or mental representations onto paper. The map, like the written word, is not, in the ﬁrst place, the
transcription of anything, but rather an inscription. Thus mapping gives way to mapmaking
at the point, not where mental imagery yields an external representation, but where the
performative gesture becomes an inscriptive practice (Wood 1993a: 53).
Wood illustrates his argument with a nice example. Two boys have been playing
rollerblade hockey. At home over dinner, one explains the layout of the court by gesturing
with his hands and ﬁngers over a place mat. The other does the same at school, to impress
a friend, but in this case (it is during an art class) he gestures with pencil in hand, over
a sheet of paper. Whereas nothing remains of the ﬁrst boy’s gestures on the mat, those
of the second leave a trace in the form of an inscription, a sketch-map, that can be
preserved and reproduced indeﬁnitely beyond the context of its production. We may

Dwelling
suppose that the two boys were of equal ability, and moreover that the ﬁrst would have 1
had ready access to pencil and paper had he needed it. So why did the second make a 2
map and the ﬁrst not? The answer, for Wood, lies in the nature of the communicative 3
situation. In general, just as much as in this exemplary instance, it is the situation – at 4
once social and political – that calls for the map. And while the difference between 5
gesturing with an inscribing tool and gesturing without might seem slight, the socio- 6
political consequences are immense. It is the ‘ﬁne line of . . . inscription’, Wood concludes, 7
‘that differentiates . . . mapping . . . from mapmaking, and mapping societies from 8
mapmaking societies, in the latter of which it is the inscriptive property of the artefactual 9
map that permits it to serve the interests of the power elites who control the mapmaking 10
process (as well as those who would contest them)’ (1993a: 53).
Now while I agree with Wood that there is an important distinction to be made between 2
mapping and mapmaking, I would draw it along different lines. Before doing so, however, 3
we need to be more precise about the meaning of mapping. Wood himself seems unable 4
to make up his mind whether the term refers to a cognitive capacity, to actual movement 5
in the environment, or to the narrative reenactment of journeys made. At one point he 6
tells us that mapping ‘is the way we humans make and deploy mental maps’ (1992: 32), 7
while at another he dismisses the concept of the mental map only to declare that mapping 8
‘is really just . . . getting around’ (1993a: 53). Yet in his example of the two boys, mapping 9
appears to consist neither in having a pre-existent ‘map in the head’, nor in bodily move- 20
ment on the ground, but in a kind of retrospective storytelling. It seems to me that the 1
notion of an evolved capacity for mental mapping is deeply ﬂawed. One could hardly 2
expect any such capacity to spring, fully formed, from an individual’s genetic make-up, 3
in advance of his or her entry into the lifeworld. It would rather have to undergo devel- 4
opment in the very unfolding of the individual’s life within an environment. Thus the 5
life-historical process of ‘getting around’ – or in a word, wayﬁnding – would appear to 6
be a condition for the emergence of a ‘mapping capacity’, rather than a consequence of 7
its application. This leaves us with the third sense of mapping – the retelling of journeys 8
made (or possibly the rehearsal for journeys to be made) – as perhaps the most appro- 9
priate. I admit, however, that the distinction between wayﬁnding and mapping is not hard 30
and fast. For one way of retelling the story of a journey is to retrace one’s steps, or the 1
steps of ancestors who made the journey in the past. In effect, since travelling from one 2
place to another means remembering the way, all wayﬁnding is mapping, though not all 3
mapping is wayﬁnding. I return to this point below.
For the time being, let us continue to regard mapping as the re-enactment, in narrative 5
gesture, of the experience of moving from place to place within a region. In this sense, both 6
boys in Wood’s example were engaged in mapping. The fact that one left no trace whereas 7
the other produced a lasting inscription has no appreciable bearing on the nature of the 8
activity as such. The sketch-map that emerged, as the trace of the second boy’s gestures, 9
was a more or less incidental by-product of the mapping process, not its ultimate goal. 40
Rundstrom makes much the same point in his account of mapping among Inuit of the 1
central and eastern Canadian Arctic. An Inuit traveller, returning from a trip, could recount 2
every detail of the environment encountered along the way, miming with his hands the 3
forms of speciﬁc land and sea features. Such gestural performance, after a long journey, 4
could last many hours. It could also, given appropriate tools and materials, generate an 5
inscription. Many of these inscriptions were produced at the instigation of Western explor- 6
ers who made contact with the Inuit. They were often astonished at the accuracy of what 7
they regarded as ‘native maps’. But for Inuit mappers it was the performance that mattered 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 233 •

– ‘the recapitulation of environmental features’ – rather than any material artefacts or
inscriptions to which it gave rise (Rundstrom 1990: 165). Undoubtedly the vast majority
of maps that have ever been produced in human societies, like those of the Inuit, have been
improvised on the spot within a particular dialogic or storytelling context, and without any
intention for their preservation or use beyond that context. This applies, for example, to
the web-like sand drawings of the Walbiri, to which I have already referred (Munn 1973b:
196). ‘Most maps for most of the time’, as Wood observes, ‘have probably been ephemeral,
scratched in sand or snow, or, if committed to a more permanent medium, immediately
crunched up and thrown away’ (1993b: 83, see Lewis 1993: 99).
In the course of producing such a map, the mapper takes his interlocutors on a tour
of the country, and as he does so his moving hand, which may or may not hold an
inscribing implement, traces out the paths taken and the sights or landmarks encountered
along the way. Of the maps produced in aboriginal times by the Saulteaux, Hallowell
notes that ‘their purpose was not to delineate a section of the country as such, but to
indicate a route to be followed, and the emphasis was upon a succession of landmarks
roughly indicated in their relations to one another’ (Hallowell 1955: 195). Malcolm Lewis’s
studies of native North American and Inuit maps have shown that they invariably rest on
deictic principles: that is, they point to things, revealing aspects of how they look as one
proceeds along a path of observation from ‘here’ to ‘there’ (Lewis 1993: 102). Even in
contemporary Western societies, whose inhabitants are bombarded on a daily basis with
images founded upon cartographic geometries of plane projection – where they live, as
Wood puts it, ‘map-immersed in the world’ (1992: 34) – people continue to describe
their environment, to themselves and others, by retracing the paths of movement they
customarily take through it rather than by assigning each of its features to a ﬁxed location in space. ‘When we are asked for directions’, as Barbara Belyea notes, ‘few of us can
resist pointing and waving our arms, or tracing the traveller’s route over the surface of
his map. The gesture becomes a part of the map, a feature of its reception’ (Belyea 1996:
11, my emphasis). It may be misleading, Belyea suggests, to liken the inscriptive process
to writing, as though the purpose of the exercise were to represent the features of the
landscape in the same way that writing is supposed to represent the spoken word. For
the graphs on the map are not representations of anything. Every line is rather the trace
of a gesture, which itself retraces an actual movement in the world. To read the map is
therefore to follow the trace as one would the path of the hand that made it.3
The analogy between mapping and writing, however, may be closer than Belyea thinks.
For much of its history, at least in the Western world, writing was understood not as the
representation of speech but as a means by which what has been said or told could be
committed to memory (Carruthers 1990). Throughout the Middle Ages, as David Olson
notes, ‘written records were thought of and treated as reminders rather than representations’ (Olson 1994: 180). And the same was true of medieval maps, which served as
memoranda of itineraries, providing directions and advice to the traveller who would
undertake the same journey (de Certeau 1984: 120). In the history of writing as in that
of mapping, remembering gradually gave way to representation over the same period –
from the ﬁfteenth to the seventeenth century – that also saw the rise of modern scientiﬁc discourse. De Certeau has shown how, in the course of this transition, the map ‘slowly
disengaged itself from the itineraries that were the conditions of its possibility’. For some
time, maps would continue to be illustrated with pictures of ships, landforms, people and
beasts of various descriptions, winds and currents, and the like. Subsequently dismissed
as quaint decorations, these ﬁgures were really fragments of stories, telling of the journeys,

Dwelling
and the incidents that took place along them, from which the map resulted. But even- 1
tually, the map won out over these pictorial ﬁgurations, eliminating all remaining traces 2
of the practices that produced it (de Certeau 1984: 120–1). Thus the making of maps 3
came to be divorced from the experience of bodily movement in the world.4 The carto- 4
grapher has no need to travel, indeed he may have no experience whatever of the territory 5
he so painstakingly seeks to represent. His task is rather to assemble, off-site, the infor- 6
mation provided to him – already shorn of the particular circumstances of its collection 7
– into a comprehensive spatial representation. It is of course no accident that precisely 8
the same task is assigned, by cognitive map theorists, to the mind in operating upon the 9
data of sense.
It is at the point where maps cease to be generated as by-products of story-telling, and 1
are created instead as end-products of projects of spatial representation, that I draw 2
the line between mapping and mapmaking. In effect, mapmaking suppresses, or ‘brackets 3
out’, both the movements of people as they come and go between places (wayﬁnding), 4
and the re-enactment of those movements in inscriptive gesture (mapping). It thereby 5
creates the appearance that the structure of the map springs directly from the structure 6
of the world, as though the mapmaker served merely to mediate a transcription from one 7
to the other. I call this the cartographic illusion (see Figure 13.4). One aspect of this illu- 8
sion lies in the assumption that the structure of the world, and so also that of the map 9
which purports to represent it, is ﬁxed without regard to the movement of its inhabitants. 20
Like a theatrical stage from which all the actors have mysteriously disappeared, the world 1
– as it is represented in the map – appears deserted, devoid of life. No-one is there; 2
nothing is going on. Suppose, for example, that I describe a journey I have made by 3
tracing a path with my ﬁnger over the surface of a topographic map. Once the map has 4
been folded and put away, nothing 5
of this would remain. So far as the 6
map’s representation of the world is 7
Situated
concerned, I may as well have never 8
Movement
made the trip. Had I, alternatively, 9
traced my path with a pencil, the 30
resulting lines would be deemed to 1
have added nothing to the map, but 2
rather to have defaced it. To restore 3
the map, they would have to be 4
Wayfinding
Mapping
rubbed out! Either way, my gesture 5
does not become part of the map but 6
is excluded from it, as is my original 7
movement from the world it repre- 8
sents.5 This is in marked contrast to 9
the maps of native North American 40
Indians and Inuit, as described by 1
World
Mapmaking
Map
such scholars as Lewis, Rundstrom 2
and Belyea, which actually grow, line 3
Figure 13.4 The cartographic illusion. The environmen- by line, with every additional 4
tally situated movement entailed in both wayﬁnding and gesture. So do the charts used by 5
its narrative re-enactment (mapping) is bracketed out to
create the illusion that the form of the map arises, in Micronesian seafarers, which ‘liter- 6
mapmaking, as a direct transcription of the layout of the ally get larger, coconut-palm rib by 7
world.
cowrie shell, and stick by stone’ 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 235 •

(Wood 1992: 31). And so, too, do our own sketch-maps. In these instances the development of the map, as a ‘pattern of interconnected lines’ (Belyea 1996: 6), parallels that
of the region, as a network of coming and going. But the modern topographic map does
not grow or develop, it is made. And just as the process of its production is eliminated
from the ﬁnal form of the product, so the world it describes is not a world in the making,
but one ready-made for life to occupy.
It is this, ﬁnally, that lies behind the distinction between the map and the picture, as
alternative descriptions of the same country. For those of us schooled in the conventions
of modern cartography, the distinction may seem obvious enough. Maps are supposed to
furnish an objective record of the disposition of things in space, that is strictly independent of any point of view, whereas pictures show how these things might be experienced
by a subject positioned somewhere in that space, or moving through it (Turnbull 1989:
15). It is widely believed, as Svetlana Alpers observes, that ‘maps give us the measure of
a place and the relationship between places, quantiﬁable data, while landscape pictures are
evocative, and aim rather to give us some quality of a place or the viewer’s sense of it.
One is closer to science, the other is art’. Anything on the map that evokes the experience of place or movement is dismissed by the scientiﬁc cartographer as ‘mere decoration’;
anything in the picture that conveys factual information about spatial location is dismissed
by the artist as ‘mere topography’ (Alpers 1983: 124–6). But for the Dutch painters and
draughtsmen of the seventeenth century, who are the subjects of Alpers’s study, these
boundaries between maps and pictures, and between science and art, would have
made little sense. Mapping and picturing were, for them, one and the same, having as
their common aim ‘to capture on a surface a great range of knowledge and information
about the world’ (1983: 122). As mapmaking triumphed over mapping, however, and as
cartographers sought to dissociate themselves professionally from artists, so maps were
stripped of their pictorial attributes. Thus historians of cartography, viewing the development of mapmaking in retrospect, are able to present it as having progressed from being
an ‘art’ to being a ‘science’, replacing subjective fancy with hardwon and independently
veriﬁable factual information (Edney 1993: 56). Art, in the words of Brian Harley, was
gradually ‘edged off the map’ (Harley 1989: 4). But to edge art off the map is also to
edge human actor-perceivers off the world, to push their direct, sensory experience into
the wings, and to consign their narratives of movement and travel to the realms of fable,
fantasy and hallucination.

WAYFINDING IS NOT NAVIGATION
‘Navigation’, writes Edwin Hutchins, ‘is a collection of techniques for answering a small
number of questions, perhaps the most central of which is “Where am I?”’ (Hutchins
1995: 12). So – to return to a question I raised at the outset – what does it mean to
know where one is? What would one need to know in order to feel that the question has
been satisfactorily answered? First of all, according to Hutchins, one must possess some
representation of space – a map – whether internal or external, inscribed in the mind or
on a sheet of paper, within which every object or feature in one’s environment is assigned
a determinate location. One has then to be able to establish a coherent set of correspondences between what is depicted on the map and what is visible in one’s surroundings.
From these it should be possible to identify one’s current position in the world with a
speciﬁc location on the map. Only then has the question of where one is been answered
(Hutchins 1995: 12–13). Alfred Gell, in an article to which I have already referred, argues

Dwelling
along much the same lines. To know where one is, in Gell’s view, it is not enough to 1
have formed a perceptual image of the environment as seen from some place. This image 2
has to be matched to that generated from the map (mental or artefactual) at a particular 3
spatial location. ‘Navigation’, according to Gell, ‘consists of a cyclic process whereby images 4
generated from maps are matched up against perceptual information, and perceptual images 5
are identiﬁed with equivalent coordinates on a map’ (1985: 280). This process of matching 6
is essentially the same as what Hutchins means by ‘establishing correspondences’, such as, 7
for example, when we say ‘this here’ (pointing to contours on the map) corresponds to 8
‘that there’ (pointing to the outline of a hill on the horizon).
Now while Gell takes as his principal ethnographic example the classic case of 10
Micronesian seafaring, Hutchins chose to study the practices of nautical navigation on 1
board a large modern naval vessel. Both writers insist, however, that reduced to its bare 2
essentials, navigation is a cognitive task that all of us face all the time as we ﬁnd our way 3
about, whether at sea or on land. Navigational techniques may of course be distinguished, 4
as Gell admits, both in terms of their complexity and the volume of information handled, 5
and in terms of the extent to which this information is published or transmitted by rote 6
memorisation. But none of this, he claims, alters the fact that ‘the essential logical processes 7
involved in all way-ﬁnding, from the most elementary and subliminal, to the most complex 8
and laborious, are identical’ (Gell 1985: 286). For Hutchins, likewise, we are all naviga- 9
tors in our everyday lives, as the following passage reveals:
When the navigator is satisﬁed that he has arrived at a coherent set of correspondences, 2
he might look to the chart and say ‘Ah, yes; I am here, off this point of land.’ And it 3
is in this sense that most of us feel we know where we are. We feel that we have achieved 4
reconciliation between the features we see in our world and a representation of that 5
world.
(1995: 13, my emphasis) 7
Yet as soon as Hutchins takes us on board ship, and introduces us to the work of the 9
navigators on the bridge, things look rather different. For it turns out that establishing 30
correspondences between features on the chart and features in the environment is extremely 1
difﬁcult, and calls for specialised skills that can only be acquired through lengthy training 2
and hands-on experience. To reconcile the chart with the territory, as Hutchins explains, 3
one has to imagine how the world would look from a point of view – that of the ‘bird’s 4
eye’ – from which it is never actually seen, save from an aircraft or satellite. The ordi- 5
nary passenger, untutored in the techniques of navigation, is quite unable to do this, and 6
may confess to being bafﬂed by maps and charts. He cannot, in other words, translate 7
from his on-board experience of motion as ‘moving through a surrounding space’ to the 8
depiction of motion on the chart as ‘that of an object moving across a space’. Navigators, 9
on the other hand, become so used to thinking of the movement of the ship from this 40
peculiar perspective – as if they were manoeuvring it about like a counter on a game- 1
board – that they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to imagine this movement, any more, from the ordinary 2
passenger’s perspective (Hutchins 1995: 62).
I intend to argue, in accord with Hutchins’s ethnography but contrary to his general 4
claim, that we are no more navigators in our everyday lives – in ﬁnding our way around in 5
a familiar environment – than we are cartographers when we retrace these movements 6
in narrative. Navigation (or map-using) is, I contend, as strange to the ordinary practices of 7
wayﬁnding as is cartography (or mapmaking) to ordinary practices of mapping. It would be 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 237 •

hard to imagine why we should ﬁnd the navigator’s charts so bafﬂing, or why his skills
should be so specialised, if they were but analogues of cognitive structures and capacities
that we use all the time. Thus Gell, along with others who have had resort to the notion
of cognitive maps, is surely wrong to regard wayﬁnding and navigation as processes of
a similar or even identical kind. For when we move about, we do not normally think
of ourselves as piloting our bodies across the surface of the earth, as the navigator pilots his
ship across the ocean. Nor do we have to think in this way in order to know, at any moment,
where we are. This is because the question ‘Where am I?’ is not ordinarily answered in terms
of a location in space, determined by the intersection of an independent set of coordinates.
Hutchins to the contrary, it is not in this sense that most of us feel we know where we are.
Indeed I may know precisely where I am and yet have no idea of my geographic location.
For it is not by assigning the position where I currently stand to certain spatial coordinates
that an answer to the ‘where’ question is arrived at, but rather by situating that position
within the matrix of movement constitutive of a region.
To amplify this point, let me compare two, admittedly ﬁctional, scenarios. In the ﬁrst
you are walking with a friend through unfamiliar terrain, equipped with a topographic
map. Arriving at a place that affords a good panoramic view, your friend stops to ask,
‘Where are we?’ You look around, pointing to various landmarks which you proceed to
correlate with markings on the map. Finally, indicating with a ﬁnger a particular spot on
the map’s paper surface, you declare ‘We are here’. In the second scenario, you are walking
in familiar country around your home, with a companion who is a stranger to the area.
Once again, on arrival at a certain place, your companion puts the same question, ‘Where
are we?’ You may respond in the ﬁrst instance with a place-name. But then, realising that
the name alone leaves him none the wiser, you might go on to tell a story about the place
– about your own association with it, about other people who have lived and visited there,
and about the things that happened to them. Now in the second case you have no need
to consult an artefactual map, nor would it be of any avail to you, not because you have
resort instead to a map inside your head, but because knowing your present whereabouts
has nothing to do with ﬁxing your location in space. As someone who has lived in a
country, and is used to its ways, knowing where you are lies not in the establishment of
a point-to-point correspondence between the world and its representation, but in the
remembering of journeys previously made, and that brought you to the place along the
same or different paths. In the ﬁrst scenario, of course, you have no knowledge of this
kind. Having never visited the country before you do not know where you are, in the
sense you do when on home ground, even though you may be able to locate your own
position, and that of everything else, with pin-point accuracy on your map.
For those who know a country, in short, the answers to such basic questions as ‘Where
am I?’ and ‘Which way should I go?’ are found in narratives of past movement. It is in
this respect, as noted earlier, that wayﬁnding and mapping become one and the same: to
follow a path is also to retrace one’s steps, or the steps of one’s predecessors. And in this
respect, too, wayﬁnding differs fundamentally from navigation, just as mapping differs
from map-using. For when navigating in a strange country by means of a topographic
map, the relation between one’s position on the ground and one’s location in space, as
deﬁned by particular map coordinates, is strictly synchronic, and divorced from any narrative context. It is possible to specify where one is – one’s current location – without regard
to where one has been, or where one is going. In ordinary wayﬁnding, by contrast, every
place holds within it memories of previous arrivals and departures, as well as expectations
of how one may reach it, or reach other places from it. Thus do places enfold the passage

Dwelling
of time: they are neither of the past, present or future but all three rolled into one. 1
Endlessly generated through the comings and goings of their inhabitants, they ﬁgure not 2
as locations in space but as speciﬁc vortices in a current of movement, of innumerable 3
journeys actually made. Taking this view of place as my starting point, I now want to 4
show how wayﬁnding might be understood not as following a course from one spatial 5
location to another, but as a movement in time, more akin to playing music or story- 6
telling than to reading a map.
PATHS, FLOWS AND THE PASSAGE OF TIME
The inspiration for this move comes from Gibson, and follows from his insight – which 1
I explored in an earlier section – that the environment is perceived not from multiple 2
points of view but along a path of observation. Rejecting both of the dominant psycho- 3
logical approaches to wayﬁnding, as chains of conditioned responses to environmental 4
stimuli and as navigation by means of cognitive maps, Gibson proposes an alternative, 5
‘the theory of reversible occlusion’ (1979: 198). In brief, the theory states that one knows 6
the way in terms of the speciﬁc order in which the surfaces of the environment come into 7
or pass out of sight as one proceeds along a path. Suppose, for example, that you are 8
walking along a street in town, or through a valley in the countryside. The surfaces you 9
can see – the facades of buildings in the one case, or the ground rising on either side in 20
the other – comprise a vista. As Gibson explains, a vista is ‘a semienclosure, a set of 1
unhidden surfaces, . . . what is seen from here, with the proviso that “here” is not a point 2
but an extended region’. But now, as you turn the corner into another street, or reach 3
the brow of the ridge at the head of the valley, a new set of surfaces, previously hidden, 4
looms into view, while those of the original vista disappear from sight. The passage from 5
one vista to another, during which the former is gradually occluded while the latter opens 6
up, constitutes a transition. Thus to travel from place to place involves the opening up 7
and closing off of vistas, in a particular order, through a continuous series of reversible 8
transitions. It is through this ordering of vistas, Gibson maintains, that the structure of 9
the environment is progressively disclosed to the moving observer, such that he or she 30
can eventually perceive it from everywhere at once (Gibson 1979: 198–9).
Gibson’s notion of wayﬁnding through reversible occlusion has been further developed 2
in recent work by psychologist Harry Heft (1996). We have already seen how the forms 3
of environmental features are revealed as the envelopes of a continually modulating pers- 4
pective structure along a path of observation. Now this ﬂow of perspective structure, as 5
Heft points out, also speciﬁes the observer’s own movements relative to the layout of the 6
environment. As every path of travel gives rise to its own distinctive ﬂow pattern, so every 7
such pattern uniquely speciﬁes a certain path. To ﬁnd one’s way, Heft argues, means to 8
travel along a particular route so as to generate or recreate the ﬂow of perspective structure 9
peculiar to the path leading to one’s destination (1996: 122). One remembers the route as 40
a succession of vistas connected by transitions, rather as one might remember a piece of 1
music as a series of thematic sections linked by bridge passages. Just as with musical 2
performance, wayﬁnding has an essentially temporal character (1996: 112): the path, like 3
the musical melody, unfolds over time rather than across space. In this connection, it is 4
important to remind ourselves of Gibson’s contention that every path should be conceived 5
as a unitary movement, and not as a potentially inﬁnite set of adjacent points (Gibson 1979: 6
197). In music, a melodic phrase is not just a sequence of discrete tones; what counts is the 7
rising or falling of pitch that gives shape to the phrase as a whole. Likewise in wayﬁnding, 118

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 239 •

the path is speciﬁed not as a sequence of point-indexical images, but as the coming-intosight and passing-out-of-sight of variously contoured and textured surfaces.
In this respect, too, the theory of wayﬁnding advanced here differs profoundly from
that which Gell has caricatured under the rubric of ‘mapless practical mastery’, and which
he attributes, inter alia, to Bourdieu (Gell 1985; see Bourdieu 1977: 2). ‘We can suppose’,
writes Gell, ‘that practical mastery of the environment consists of possessing complete
knowledge of what the environment looks like from all practically-available points of view’.
The master traveller, equipped with such knowledge, remembers the journey from A to
B as a ‘chain of linked landscape images’, each particular to a certain point along the
route, selected from the total stock of images ﬁled in memory. As he proceeds on his way
he will pause, every so often, to check that what he sees from the spot where he stands
corresponds to the image he has on ﬁle (Gell 1985: 274–5). Our argument, to the contrary,
is that mastery consists in knowing what the environment looks like from all practically
available paths of view, that what the traveller remembers are vistas and transitions rather
than location-speciﬁc images, and that keeping track is a matter of regenerating the ﬂow
of perspective structure over time. Now for Gell the theory of mapless practical mastery,
taken on its own, could not possibly work, since it would leave the traveller bereft of any
means to formulate navigational decisions. It is all very well to know that you are currently
where you ought to be – that what you see around you matches your expectations for a
certain stage in your journey. But this alone will not tell you in which direction to go to
reach the next checkpoint. Nor, if what you see does not match any of the images in the
chain for the particular journey you are making, do you have any way of working out
how to get back on track. In short, to go from A to B, or from any point to any other
along the way, you need to be able to ascertain their relative locations in space. And this,
Gell reasons, requires a map.
If it were true that all wayﬁnding consisted of navigation between ﬁxed points, Gell’s
argument would be unassailable. But it is not. Ordinary movement in a familiar environment lacks the stop-go character of navigation, in which every physical or bodily manoeuvre
(displacement in space) is preceded by a mental or calculative one (ﬁxing the course).
‘Finding one’s way’ is not a computational operation carried out prior to departure from
a place, but is tantamount to one’s own movement through the world. To recapitulate
my earlier point, we know as we go, not before we go. Thus the operation is not complete
until one has reached one’s ﬁnal destination: only then can the traveller truly claim to
have found his way. The notion of ‘ﬁnding’ has here to be understood in its original
sense of exploratory movement, at once improvisatory and assured, guided by past experience and by a continual monitoring of ﬂuctuations not only in the pattern of reﬂected
light but also in the sounds and ‘feel’ of the environment. There is no better illustration
of this than the example that Gell himself uses in an attempt to prove, to the contrary,
that wayﬁnding is based on the execution of pre-formulated ‘navigational decisions’ (1985:
282). This is the case of Micronesian seafaring. In a classic paper on the subject, Thomas
Gladwin describes how, at every moment during a voyage, the mariner is attentive to
‘a combination of motion, sound, feel of the wind, wave patterns, star relationships, etc.’,
all of which – through comparison with remembered observations from past experience
– translates into ‘a slight increase or decrease in pressure on the steering paddle, or a
grunted instruction to slack off the sail a triﬂe’ (Gladwin 1964: 171–2). Quite unlike the
European navigator, with his charts and compass, the Micronesian seafarer feels his way
towards his destination by continually adjusting his movements in relation to the ﬂow of
waves, wind, current and stars.6 In this respect his activity does not differ in principle

Dwelling
from that of the terrestrial traveller who responds to the ﬂow of perspective structure as 1
he journeys through a landscape. Both are essentially engaged in projects of wayﬁnding 2
rather than navigation: thus Hallowell’s observation that for the Saulteaux, direction always 3
has the meaning of ‘toward such-and-such a place’, is paralleled by Gladwin’s that the 4
Micronesian mariner proceeds as if he were constantly within sight of land (Hallowell 5
1955: 190–1, Gladwin 1964: 173). And once it is recognised that the wayﬁnder’s multi- 6
sensory monitoring is of ﬂows, not images, and that ﬂows specify paths and not spatial 7
locations, Gell’s objections to the idea of mapless practical mastery fall away.
Micronesian seafaring resembles terrestrial wayﬁnding in one other critical respect: every 9
journey is apprehended and remembered as a movement through time rather than across 10
space. Islands, for the mariner, are not pinned down to speciﬁc spatial or geographic loca- 1
tions, nor does he imagine his craft to be covering the distance over a planar surface from 2
one such location to another. Throughout the voyage he remains, apparently stationary, 3
at the centre of a world that stretches around as far as the horizon, with the great dome 4
of the heavens above. But as the journey proceeds the island of embarkation slips ever 5
farther astern while the destination island draws ever closer. At the same time an island 6
off to one side, selected as a point of reference for the voyage, is supposed to swing past 7
the boat, falling as it does so under the rising or setting positions of a series of stars. The 8
fact that the reference island (etak) is normally invisible below the horizon, and may not 9
even exist at all, has been a source of puzzlement to many interpreters who – assuming 20
that the mariner’s task is to navigate from one spatial location to another – have proposed 1
that the etak is used to obtain a locational ﬁx. Nothing in what the mariners themselves 2
have to say, however, suggests that it serves any such purpose. The alleged bearing of the 3
etak does not enter into any numerical computation. Rather, pointing to the etak is the 4
mariner’s way of indicating where he is in terms of the temporal unfolding of the voyage 5
as a whole (Hutchins 1995: 87–8). We have already seen how, in terrestrial wayﬁnding, 6
a route from one place to another is remembered as a temporally ordered sequence of 7
vistas. In much the same way, the Micronesian mariner remembers an inter-island voyage 8
as a sequence of etak segments, each of which begins as the reference island falls under 9
one particular star and ends as it falls under the next in line. At any movement, the 30
mariner will know what segment he is in. As it swings beneath the horizon, from segment 1
to segment, the etak island marks in its movement the passage of time, just as do the sun, 2
moon and stars overhead, in theirs. Completion of the penultimate segment should bring 3
the mariner, at length, to the ﬁnal ‘etak of sighting’, as the island for which he is bound 4
hoves into view.
THE WORLD HAS NO SURFACE
One further contrast remains to be drawn between wayﬁnding and navigation, and it takes 9
us back to the cartographic notion of the map as a representation of some portion of the 40
earth’s surface. The following ‘ofﬁcial’ deﬁnition of the map, issued by the International 1
Cartographic Association, is exemplary:
A map is a representation normally to scale and on a ﬂat medium, of a selection of 4
material or abstract features on, or in relation to, the surface of the Earth or of a celestial 5
body.
(cited in Robinson and Petchenik 1976: 17) 7

Maps, wayﬁnding and navigation • 241 •

Now the idea that the world is presented to the traveller as a surface to be traversed
presupposes the specialised, ‘bird’s-eye view’ of the cartographer or navigator. Indeed the
world can only be perceived to have an exterior surface by a mind that is situated above
and beyond it. In ordinary wayﬁnding however, whether on land or at sea, the world
is apprehended from within. One makes one’s way through it, not over or across it. Of
course the traveller encounters surfaces of diverse kinds – of solid ground, water, vegetation, buildings, and so on – and it is largely thanks to the responses of these surfaces to
light, sound and the pressure of touch that he perceives the environment in the way
he does. For the mariner the ocean, with its subtle differences of tint and colour, sculpted
by the wind into waves and ripples, and breaking up around the boat into foam
and spray, presents an inﬁnitely variegated and ever changing surface. Likewise for the
pedestrian, making his way along a forest track, the surface of the ground is a patchwork
of mud, furrowed by the imprint of previous journeys, puddles, fallen leaves, broken
boughs, and outcropping rocks and stones. These are surfaces, however, in the world, not
of the world. That is to say, they are formed on the interface, not between matter and
mind, but between solid or liquid substance and the gaseous medium (air) in which
humans live and breathe, and which affords movement and sensory perception.7 In short
for its manifold inhabitants, journeying along their respective ways of life, the world itself
has no surface.
I noted earlier the parallel between the tracing of paths on the ground in wayﬁnding
and the tracing of lines on paper (or in sand, snow, etc.) in mapping: indeed to the extent
that all wayﬁnding is mapping, these are one and the same. Our conclusion, however,
that for the mapper or wayﬁnder the world has no surface, calls for some qualiﬁcation of
the view, for which I argued above, that mapping is an inscriptive process. This need not
be so. If a map consists of a network of interconnected lines, each corresponding to a
path of movement through the world, there is no necessary reason why these lines should
be inscribed on a surface. One could think of the gesturing hand, in mapping, as a weaving
hand rather than a drawing hand, and of the result as something more akin to a cat’s
cradle than a graph. The lines of the map could be threads, wires or sticks. Micronesian
mariners used coconut leaf ribs to map the intersecting courses of ocean swells (Turnbull
1991: 24). Or to take a familiar example from a contemporary urban context, one could
construct a route map for the London Underground out of stiff wire, soldered at the
intersections, and it would serve just as well as the conventional printed versions. The
fact that the map is generally reproduced on paper is a matter of obvious practical convenience, but not of logical necessity. The meaning of the map lies entirely in its routes and
intersections, whereas the paper surface has no signiﬁcance whatsoever. To read the map
is to trace a continuous path from one station to another, without regard to their respective locations on the surface. With the modern topographic map it is quite otherwise, for
in this case the paper surface of the map stands for nothing less than the surface of
the earth. One of the most revealing indicators of this change in the signiﬁcance
of the map-surface, corresponding to the transition from mapping to mapmaking, lies
in the appearance of frame boundaries. Native maps, as Belyea points out (1996: 6), are
never framed. A line or border drawn around and enclosing such a map would have
no meaning. The frame of the topographic map, by contrast, deﬁnes the portion of the
earth’s surface that the map purports to represent. Thus the appearance of borders
around the map corresponds to the disappearance of the itineraries and practices that give
rise to it.

Dwelling
There is a paradox at the heart of modern cartography. The more it aims to furnish a 3
precise and comprehensive representation of reality, the less true to life this representa- 4
tion appears. ‘To present a useful and truthful picture’, as Mark Monmonier writes, ‘an 5
accurate map must tell white lies’ (Monmonier 1991: 1). But the reason for the discrep- 6
ancy between truth and accuracy is not quite what Monmonier claims it to be. It is not 7
that the map must leave things out if critical information is not to be drowned in a welter 8
of ever ﬁner particulars. It is rather that the world of our experience is a world suspended 9
in movement, that is continually coming into being as we – through our own movement 10
– contribute to its formation. In the cartographic world, by contrast, all is still and silent. 1
There is neither sunlight nor moonlight; there are no variations of light or shade, no 2
clouds, no shadows or reﬂections. The wind does not blow, neither disturbing the trees 3
nor whipping water into waves. No birds ﬂy in the sky, or sing in the woods; forests and 4
pastures are devoid of animal life; houses and streets are empty of people and trafﬁc. To 5
dismiss all this – to suggest that what is excluded in the cartographic reduction amounts, 6
in Monmonier’s words, to a ‘fog of detail’ – is perverse, to say the least (Wood 1992: 7
76). For it is no less than the stuff of life itself. Were one magically transported into the 8
looking-glass world behind the map, one would indeed feel lost and disoriented, as in a 9
fog. But the fogginess is a function not of the amount or density of detail but of the 20
arrestation of movement. Detached from the ﬂow of which each is but a moment, details 1
settle like an opaque precipitate upon the surface of the earth. Little wonder, then, that 2
the cartographer feels the need to sweep them up, or that the navigator prefers to brush 3
them aside in plotting a course!
The ordinary wayﬁnder, on the other hand, is not generally troubled by detail. Quite 5
to the contrary, the richer and more varied the texture of the environment, the easier it 6
is to ﬁnd one’s way about. But above all, wayﬁnding depends upon the attunement of 7
the traveller’s movements in response to the movements, in his or her surroundings, 8
of other people, animals, the wind, celestial bodies, and so on. Where nothing moves 9
there is nothing to which one can respond: at such times – as before a storm, or during 30
an eclipse – the experienced traveller can lose his bearings even in familiar terrain. These 1
observations should ﬁnally lay to rest the cartographic illusion, namely that the world is 2
pre-prepared as a stage upon which living things propel themselves about, from one loca- 3
tion to another. Life, in this view, is an internal property of objects, transported upon 4
the exterior surface of a lifeless earth. In the view I have set forth here, by contrast, the 5
world is not ready-made for life to occupy. Contrary to the assumptions of cartographers 6
and cognitive map theorists, life is not contained within things, nor is it transported about. 7
It is rather laid down along paths of movement, of action and perception. Every living 8
being, accordingly, grows and reaches out into the environment along the sum of its paths. 9
To ﬁnd one’s way is to advance along a line of growth, in a world which is never quite 40
the same from one moment to the next, and whose future conﬁguration can never be 1
fully known. Ways of life are not therefore determined in advance, as routes to be followed, 2
but have continually to be worked out anew. And these ways, far from being inscribed 3
upon the surface of an inanimate world, are the very threads from which the living world 4
is woven.

CONCLUSION

Culture, nature, environment • 243 •

Chapter Fourteen

Stop, look and listen!
Vision, hearing and human movement

ON HEARING SOUNDS, AND SEEING THINGS
Near the house where I grew up was a path I often took, which crossed a railway line.
Beside the track was a notice which advised the pedestrian to ‘stop, look and listen’ before
attempting to cross the line. I may not always have followed this advice as closely as I
should, but at least I knew what it meant. To me, as doubtless to others who walked that
path, it made perfectly good sense. In the absence of automatic signalling arrangements,
how else is one to know whether a train is coming save by looking and listening? Only
later did I discover that what is obvious to pedestrians is, to philosophers, utterly bafﬂing.
To be sure, the philosopher might admit, our knowledge of the world can only come
through some form of perception. Yet it seems that the one thing we cannot perceive is
perception itself. You may claim to see a train, but only by way of the light that reaches
your eyes. And you hear it only by way of the sound that reaches your ears. So how can
you know that the train exists at a certain distance, as a detached material object, behind
the perceptual images, shaped in light and sound, that you have of it? And if it exists
only in your perception – in your eyes and ears, or even in your thoughts – then how
can it run you down? Nor is that all. Looking and listening, we receive one set of sensations through the eyes, and another, quite different set through the ears. Supposing that
our knowledge is ultimately founded on sensory experience, how do we know that the
sights and sounds that come to our notice are all manifestations of the same thing, the
train, that is bearing down on us? If we hear sounds rather than things (like trains), then
how do I know that this sound I hear belongs to that train I see?
These are among the most ancient of philosophical conundrums, and it is not my
intention to resolve them here. I do mean to suggest, however, that the way in which they
are posed bears the imprint of a certain way of imagining the human subject – namely, as
a seat of awareness, bounded by the skin, and set over against the world – that is deeply
sedimented in the Western tradition of thought. The problem of perception, thus, is one
of how anything can be translated or ‘cross over’ from the outside to the inside, from the
macrocosm of the world to the microcosm of the mind. This is why visual and aural
perception are usually described, in the writings of philosophers and psychologists, as
processes of seeing and hearing. Sight begins at the point where light enters the eyes of the
stationary perceiver, hearing at the point where sound strikes his ears – at the interface, in
short, between outside and inside. Yet the notice beside the railway tracks did not advise
the pedestrian to ‘stand, see and hear’. It advised him to ‘stop, look and listen’: that is, to
interrupt one bodily activity, of walking, and to initiate another, of looking-and-listening
(as I show later, these are better regarded as aspects of one activity than as two distinct

Dwelling
activities). In what, then, does this activity consist? Not in opening the eyes, since these are 1
open anyway; nor in opening the ears, since they cannot be closed save by stopping them 2
with the ﬁngers. It consists, rather, in a kind of scanning movement, accomplished by the 3
whole body – albeit from a ﬁxed location – and which both seeks out, and responds to, 4
modulations or inﬂections in the environment to which it is attuned. As such, perception 5
is not an ‘inside-the head’ operation, performed upon the raw material of sensation, but 6
takes place in circuits that cross-cut the boundaries between brain, body and world.
But I am running ahead of myself. There is much ground to be cleared before the 8
idea of perception outlined above can be substantiated. To begin this clearance we need 9
to inquire more closely into the assumptions we tend to make about our experiences of 10
seeing and hearing. You can attempt to ﬁnd out what these are by performing a simple 1
thought experiment. Suppose you are standing beside the tracks as a train is passing. You 2
see the locomotive and the coaches hurtling by, you hear the roar of the engine followed 3
by the clickety-clack of bogies as they roll over joints in the rail. These sights and sounds 4
are ordinarily so entangled in your experience that it is not easy to tell them apart, to 5
imagine what the train would look like without the noise it makes, or what it would 6
sound like without the appearance it presents. But you could try, nevertheless. Picture 7
yourself blindfolded, or on a pitch dark night, such that the visual component of experi- 8
ence is eliminated. The sound of the approaching train, as it swells, seems to assault and 9
ultimately to overwhelm every ﬁbre of your being. You cannot resist being swept along 20
with it until eventually, as the train recedes into the distance, you are left stranded by 1
the trackside, breathless and dizzy, in exactly the same spot where, in truth, you had been 2
standing all along! But now, as a second experiment, picture yourself with your ears 3
stopped, so as to cut out the auditory component of experience. This time the train 4
appears to pass before your eyes as though it were a spectre whose very existence lies in 5
dimensions other than those of the world to which you belong. You see it, you register 6
its presence and its passing, but you are not moved by it. The vision is just another sighting 7
to add to your collection.
If the results of these admittedly ﬁctitious experiments have any validity, they suggest 9
that far from being equivalent and mutually substitutable, vision and hearing are radically 30
opposed, as different as is standing on the river bank, watching the water ﬂow by, from 1
being tossed in with the current. As a participant observer in the event constituted by the 2
train’s passing the spot where you stand, at the intersection of the path and the tracks, 3
it would seem that whereas you participate aurally, you observe visually. Indeed the notion 4
that sound can get inside you and shake you up, in a way that light cannot, has a long 5
and distinguished pedigree in the history of ideas. Time and again, the ears are imagined 6
topologically as openings in the head that actually allow the sound to seep in and touch 7
the innermost surfaces of being. The eyes, by contrast, are supposed to be backed by 8
screens that let no light through, leaving the mind in the dark – like the inhabitants, 9
in Plato’s celebrated allegory, of a cave who can see nothing but shadows on the walls 40
cast by the light of their own ﬁre. Sound, it is said, reaches directly into the soul, whereas 1
in vision all one can do is reconstruct a picture of what the outside world might be like, 2
on the basis of light-induced sensations. But by the same token, we are more readily 3
convinced that we hear sound than that we see light. The objects of vision, we suppose, 4
are not sources or manifestations of light but the things that light illuminates for us. The 5
objects of hearing, on the other hand, are not things but sounds or sources of sound.1 6
True, there have been dissenting voices. One of them was Martin Heidegger. In his 7
essay on ‘The origin of the work of art’, Heidegger argued that only when we divert our 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 245 •

attention away from things, or listen abstractly (as we might, say, to classical music, with
our eyes closed), do we hear ‘bare sound’. In ordinary life, he insisted, we do not hear
sounds but things themselves – the door shutting in the house, the storm in the chimney,
the Mercedes as distinct from the Volkswagen (Heidegger 1971: 26). So too, Heidegger
would have said, we hear the train before the noise it makes. But this view is not easily
reconciled with everyday experience. For what we claim to hear, at least when we speak
of these matters, is the slamming of the door, the whistling of the wind, the humming
or chugging of the car engine, and the roar of the locomotive. Slamming, whistling,
humming, and so on are words that describe not things but actions or movements which,
because of the vibrations they set up, we actually sense as noises of various kinds. Or to
take another example, consider the word ‘cuckoo’. This is, in the ﬁrst place, an
onomatopoeic rendering of a sound that I have often heard in the countryside, and which
always seems to emanate from a far-off, undisclosed location in the woods. We say the
cuckoo is a bird, but in my experience the bird exists, purely and simply, as its sound. I
have never seen one (except in illustrated books on ornithology). But only through being
seen does the cuckoo come to be apprehended as a thing that makes a sound, instead of
the sound itself.2
In due course I shall proceed to qualify the idea that we see things before light, and
hear sound before things. I shall do so by showing that sound, strictly speaking, is no
more an object of hearing than is light an object of vision. Rather, just as to say there is
light is another way of saying that one can see, so also, to say there is sound is another
way of saying that one can hear. Light and sound are, in essence, the undersides of the
experiences of seeing and hearing respectively. Now as blind people are able to tell us, it
is in fact possible to hear things as well as to see them. And for sighted people, the eyes
are as much a part of the perceptual system for listening as are the ears part of the system
for looking. To that extent, vision and hearing are not so much disparate as interchangeable.
But behind the discovery, whether visual or auditory, of a world already made there lies
a deeper, pre-objective level of perception, a level at which sensory awareness rides on the
cusp of the very movement of the world’s coming-into-being. At this level, as I shall show,
the experiences of vision and hearing are not mutually substitutable in the way that – for
example – the signed language of the deaf is substitutable for oral speech. Instead, they
are virtually indistinguishable: vision is a kind of hearing, and vice versa. This argument
eventually leads me to reject the thesis that attributes the dominance of objective thinking
in the West to an obsession with the eye. For the moment, however, let me continue
with the contrast between seeing and hearing, as this is commonly understood, in order
to examine its implications for our understanding, ﬁrst, of persons and things; secondly,
of language, speech and writing; and thirdly, of the sensory practices of people in nonWestern societies.

VISION OBJECTIFIES, SOUND PERSONIFIES
Of all the implications of the contrast between vision and hearing, the most consequential has been the notion that vision, since it is untainted by the subjective experience of
light, yields a knowledge of the outside world that is rational, detached, analytical
and atomistic. Hearing, on the other hand, since it rests on the immediate experience of
sound, is said to draw the world into the perceiver, yielding a kind of knowledge that is
intuitive, engaged, synthetic and holistic. For those who would celebrate positive scientiﬁc inquiry as the crowning achievement of the human spirit, vision is undoubtedly the

Dwelling
superior sense. Yet for all that, it is not to be trusted. The visual path to objective truth, 1
it seems, is paved with illusions. Precisely because vision yields a knowledge that is indi- 2
rect, based on conjecture from the limited data available in the light, it can never be more 3
than provisional, open to further testing and the possibility of empirical refutation.3 But 4
while we can never be certain of what we see, there is no doubt about what we hear. 5
Since sound speaks to us directly, hearing does not lie. We do not suffer from aural as 6
we do from optical illusions (Rée 1999: 46). In short, when it comes to affairs of the 7
soul, of emotion and feeling, or of the ‘inwardness’ of life, hearing surpasses seeing as 8
understanding goes beyond knowledge, and as faith transcends reason.
Nothing better illustrates these attitudes to vision and hearing, so deeply embedded in 10
Western sensibilities, than these lines from the ‘Foreword’ to Victor Zuckerkandl’s classic 1
study of musical perception, Sound and Symbol. Here he is comparing the demeanour of 2
the blind and the deaf:
The quietness, the equanimity, the trust, one might almost say the piety, so often found 5
in the blind are in strange contrast to the irritability and suspicion encountered among 6
so many of the deaf . . . It seems as if, by the very fact that the blind man trusts himself 7
to the guidance of the ear instead of the eye, other modes of connection with the world 8
are revealed to him, modes that are otherwise overshadowed by the dominance of the 9
eye – as if, in the realms with which he thus comes into contact, man were less alone, 20
better provided for, more at home, than in the world of visible things to which the 1
deaf man is directed and to which an element of foreignness always clings.
(1956: 3) 3
As a stereotypic depiction of the behaviour of blind and deaf people this passage is, of 5
course, outrageous. It says much, however, about how we are inclined to view hearing as 6
warm, connecting and sympathetic; and sight as cold, distancing and unfeeling. No 7
wonder, then, that numerous commentators have sought to lay the ills of modern Western 8
civilisation at the door of its alleged obsession with vision (Jay 1993a, Levin 1988, 1993). 9
More than any other modality of perception, they say, vision leads us to objectify our 30
environment, to regard it as a repository of things, alien to our subjective selves, that are 1
there to be seized by the eyes, analysed by science, exploited by technology, and domi- 2
nated by power. If only we could redress the balance by restoring hearing to its proper 3
place in the sensorium, it is claimed, we might hope to regain a more harmonious, benev- 4
olent and empathetic awareness of our surroundings. Then, perhaps, we may rediscover 5
what it means to belong.4
These laments are not new; to the contrary, the denigration of vision is as ancient as 7
is its elevation to the top of the hierarchy of the senses. As Don Ihde points out, in his 8
study of the phenomenology of sound, ‘there is an old and deeply held tradition that 9
vision “objectiﬁes”, and, contrarily but not so widely noted, there is a tradition which 40
holds that sound “personiﬁes”’ (Ihde 1976: 21). To this latter tradition belong the claims 1
of many classical scholars that the very word, ‘person’, is derived from the Latin verb 2
personare, meaning literally ‘to sound through’. Whether the derivation is etymologically 3
well founded need not concern us;5 what count are rather the reasons that make it so 4
compelling. These, I contend, lie in its concordance with a widely held notion that behind 5
the visible aspect of the person, above all the face, lies an inner being that reveals itself 6
through the voice. In speaking, the voice ‘sounds through’ from the inside to the outside; 7
in hearing it conversely penetrates from the outside to the inside. Where vision places us 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 247 •

vis-à-vis one another, ‘face-to-face’, leaving each of us to construct an inner representation of the other’s mental state on the basis of our observations of outward appearance,
voice and hearing establish the possibility of genuine intersubjectivity, of a participatory
communion of self and other through shared immersion in the stream of sound. Vision,
in this conception, deﬁnes the self individually in opposition to others; hearing deﬁnes the
self socially in relation to others.

THE WRITTEN WORD AND THE SOUNDS OF SPEECH
Nowhere is the ambivalence surrounding attitudes to vision and hearing more evident than
in Western ideas about language, and above all about the distinction between speech and
writing. The distrust of writing is a recurrent theme throughout the history of Western
thought. Ever since Plato and Aristotle, philosophers have tended to regard writing as an
exterior, visible facade for the inner sonic reality of spoken words. Plato, in the Phaedrus
(274–7), has Socrates declare that writing provides no more than ‘the appearance and not
the reality of wisdom’ (Plato 1973). For Aristotle, only the spoken word truly represents
mental experience, while the written word stands for the spoken one (Aristotle 1938: 115).
Rousseau, for whom writing was ‘nothing but the representation of speech’, complained
bitterly (in writing of course) about the prestige and attention accorded by his contemporaries to writing when it was no more than a contrived and inauthentic cover for the real
thing (Derrida 1974: 36). And two of the giants of twentieth-century linguistics held to
much the same opinion. For Bloomﬁeld (1933: 21) writing was ‘merely a way of recording language by visible marks’, while according to Saussure (1959: 23), ‘language and
writing are two distinct systems of signs; the second exists for the sole purpose of representing the ﬁrst’. In a famous image
(Figure 14.1), Saussure located
language at the interface between
thought and sound, as though
human consciousness – the realm
of ideas – hovered over an ocean
of sound like air over water (1959:
112).
There is, in all these pronouncements, an implicit prioritisation of
hearing over vision, as though the
former gave access to intimacies
of human experience to which
the latter could only offer a pale
reﬂection. ‘The only true bond’,
as Saussure wrote, is ‘the bond Figure 14.1 Saussure’s depiction of language at the interface between a
of sound’ (1959: 25).6 Ironically, plane of thought (A) and a plane of sound (B). The role of language is
however, at the very same time to cut the interface into subdivisions, as indicated by the vertical dashed
that writing is rendered as having lines, thereby establishing a series of relations between particular ideas
and particular sounds. ‘Visualize the air in contact with a sheet of water’,
no other purpose than the model- says Saussure; ‘if the atmospheric pressure changes, the surface of the
ling of speech in a visible medium, water will be broken up into a series of divisions, waves; the waves
the apprehension of speech is itself resemble the union of thought with phonic substance’.
modelled on the inspection of the From F. de Saussure, Course in general linguistics, New York: The Philowritten word. Thus a visual bias sophical Library, 1959, p. 112.

Dwelling
enters, as it were by the back door, into our very notion of what language is. Recall 1
that the underlying assumption, shared by both champions of visual perception and 2
their critics, is that we do not see light but the objects it illuminates. You may not be 3
able to read, for example, without a source of illumination, but what you see is not the 4
light but the words on the page. Likewise, you cannot hear speech unless it is voiced 5
in sound. However your familiarity with the written word leads you to believe that what 6
you hear is not the sound itself but the words shaped in it. ‘Language-as-word’, as 7
Ihde notes, ‘even while sounding, does not draw attention to itself as sound’ (1976: 8
161). Rather, the sound ‘yields up’ or delivers the words we claim to hear. Thus it is 9
supposed that words can be extracted from the medium of sound, and can be preserved, 10
whether as impressions in the mind or as inscriptions on the page, independently of their 1
sounding.
Language, it seems, is the exception that proves the rule that we see things (not light), 3
and hear sounds (not things). When we listen to music, we attend to the sound as such, 4
for it is surely in the sound, no more and no less, that the music consists. But when it 5
comes to speech, we are inclined to treat hearing as a species of vision – a kind of seeing 6
with the ear, or ‘earsight’ – that reacts to sound in the same way that eyesight reacts to 7
light. Thus we are convinced that we apprehend words, not sound. It is almost as though 8
the sounds of speech were seen rather than heard. This, of course, is exactly what Saussure 9
had in mind when he described the verbal signiﬁer – the pattern of sound as registered 20
in the psyche – as a sound-image (1959: 66). So far as he was concerned, we recognise a 1
word of speech in the same way that we do a word of writing, by matching the perceived 2
pattern to a pre-existing mental schema. But what if we had never seen a word, if we had 3
no notion of a word as an object of vision? Granted that our familiarity with writing 4
leads us to model the hearing of the spoken word upon the sight of the written one, how 5
might the power of speech have been experienced by people with no knowledge of writing, 6
or for whom the written word was meant to be disseminated, at most, through being read 7
aloud rather than through its reproduction in print?
In his inﬂuential study, The Gutenberg Galaxy, Marshall McLuhan (1962) argued that 9
the invention of the printing press ushered in an entirely new era in the history of human 30
culture, marked by the absolute dominance of the eye, and with it a bias towards a way 1
of thinking that is objective and analytic, and that follows a linear path of explicit logical 2
connections. Even before the introduction of print technology, during the preceding ‘chiro- 3
graphic’ stage of culture, the substitution of written for spoken words had begun to tip 4
the balance between sight and hearing in favour of the former. But among peoples at an 5
‘oral-aural’ level of culture, to whom writing was unknown, the ear exercised an over- 6
whelming tyranny over the eye (McLuhan 1962: 28). And so too, McLuhan maintained, 7
their thought lacked the logical elaboration, analytic discrimination and objectivity that, 8
in the literate West, are normally considered to be the hallmarks of rationality. Building 9
on these ideas, one of McLuhan’s associates, Walter Ong, sought to derive all the essen- 40
tial characteristics of ‘orally based thought and expression’ from the features that distinguish 1
hearing from vision. Oral culture, he claimed, is aggregating, harmonic and holistic rather 2
than dissecting, analytic and atomistic; concrete and situationally speciﬁc rather than 3
abstract and context-independent; and focused on persons rather than things. Hearing 4
binds people together in community; vision isolates the individual vis-à-vis the world. 5
Finally, ‘the interiorizing force of the oral word relates in a special way to the sacral, to 6
the ultimate concerns of existence’. With the ascendancy of vision, however, religion gives 7
way to secular science (Ong 1982: 73–4).

Vision, hearing and human movement • 249 •

In their placing of oral cultures and literate civilisations on either side of a ‘great divide’,
both McLuhan and Ong effectively reproduced a dichotomy between oral participation
and visual observation that, as I have already shown, is deeply embedded within the
Western tradition. Thus sound, according to Ong, registers the interiority of things in a
way that is impossible with light, which merely reﬂects off their outer surfaces. The
following passage is exemplary:
Sight isolates, sound incorporates. Whereas sight situates the observer outside what he
views, at a distance, sound pours into the hearer . . . Vision comes to a human being
from one direction at a time . . . When I hear, however, I gather sound from every
direction at once: I am at the center of my auditory world, which envelops me, establishing me at a kind of core of sensation and existence . . . You can immerse yourself
in hearing, in sound. There is no way to immerse yourself similarly in sight.
(Ong 1982: 72)
It is in his contention that the listener in a ‘primarily oral’ culture hears words as sound,
rather than as images shaped in sound, that Ong takes issue with Saussure (1982: 17).
People in such a culture, ‘totally untouched by any knowledge of writing or print’, do
not hear words as if they were looking at them. In their speech, every word is a fugitive
movement carried on the crest of a sound that ‘exists only when it is going out of
existence’. It was writing, Ong contends, that tied words down and made them appear
thing-like, as ‘quiescent objects . . . for assimilation by vision’ (1982: 91). Thus writing
transforms the word rather than, as Saussure thought, merely representing it in an
alternative medium.

VISION AND HEARING IN ANTHROPOLOGY
Another of McLuhan’s collaborators was the anthropologist Edmund Carpenter. Writing
on the basis of ﬁeldwork conducted among the Aivilik Eskimo (Inuit) of Southampton
Island in the Canadian arctic, Carpenter claimed that the world of the Inuit is deﬁned,
above all, by sound rather than by sight (Carpenter 1973: 33). To inhabit such a world
is not to look out upon a space of ready-made objects, but to participate from the inside
in the perpetual movement of their generation. There are, strictly speaking, no things in
the Inuit world, only beings, which establish their presence, ﬁrst and foremost, by way of
their ongoing actions. Hearing is the resonant coupling of these actions with the movement of the listener’s attention. Thus Inuit hear sound rather than things, and are moved
by the sound itself, as they are by song. Indeed the distinction between speech and song,
so central to the literate conception of language, would make no sense to them (Carpenter
1966: 212; I return to this distinction in Chapter Twenty-three, pp. 407–10). Speaking
and singing are actions which, like hunting or carving, ‘bring out’ or release aspects of
being into the fullness of the acoustic space surrounding the person. Unlike the framed,
pictorial space surveyed by the eye, acoustic space is ‘dynamic, always in ﬂux, creating its
own dimensions moment by moment’ (1973: 35, see also Carpenter and McLuhan 1960).
Its form – as we recall from Chapter Twelve (pp. 210–11) – is that of a sphere, extending
outwards from the person equally in all directions. But this sphere has no outer surface
or boundary: it does not pre-exist and enclose the speaker and listener but rather takes
shape around them in the very process of their auditory engagement with one another
and with the environment.

Dwelling
Between them, McLuhan, Carpenter and Ong effectively laid the foundations for a 1
currently vibrant ﬁeld of inquiry that has come to be known as the anthropology of the 2
senses (Stoller 1989, Howes 1991a, Classen 1993, 1997). It is true that certain aspects of 3
their programme have come in for justiﬁed criticism from anthropological quarters: the 4
attribution of pre-logical mentalities to ‘tribal’ societies at the oral-aural level, the relative 5
neglect of other sensory modalities besides sight and hearing, and the consequent elision 6
of differences among cultures on either side of the ‘great divide’ between orality and 7
literacy (Howes 1991b: 172–3, Classen 1997: 403–4). However the basic idea, that cultures 8
can be compared in terms of the relative weighting of the senses through which people 9
perceive the world around them, has been retained. Thus it is not so much in what they 10
perceive as in how they perceive that cultures differ. It will no longer do to identify cultural 1
variations with alternative worldviews, as though everyone perceived their surroundings in 2
the same way (visually, by viewing it) but saw different things on account of their drawing 3
on different models for organising the data of perception into representations. For the 4
very idea that the world is known by representing it in the mind is bound up with assump- 5
tions about the pre-eminence of vision that are not applicable cross-culturally. Below I 6
brieﬂy review three studies in the anthropology of the senses, all of which accord partic- 7
ular prominence to hearing. The ﬁrst, by Paul Stoller, is of the Songhay of Niger, in West 8
Africa; the second, by Anthony Seeger, is of the Suyá of Mato Grosso, Brazil; and the 9
third, by Alfred Gell, is of the Umeda of Papua New Guinea.
For the Songhay, Stoller asserts, sound ‘is a foundation of experience’. Unlike vision, 1
which sets up a distance between the spectator and the object seen, sound ‘penetrates the 2
individual and creates a sense of communication and participation’ (1989: 103, 120). To 3
show how this is so, Stoller examines the signiﬁcance that Songhay attach to the sounds 4
of two kinds of musical instruments – the godji (monochord violin) and gasi (gourd drum) 5
– both played during possession ceremonies, of the praise-poetry that accompanies these 6
ceremonies, and of words spoken in sorcery. The godji produces a high-pitched cry, whereas 7
the gasi, depending on how it is beaten, produces a ‘clack’ or a ‘roll’. Both people and 8
spirits are excited by these sounds, ﬁnding them irresistible. Indeed for the Songhay, the 9
cries of the violin, and the clacks and rolls of the drum, are the voices of spirits that, in 30
rituals of possession, penetrate and shake up the bodies of those possessed. And while the 1
instruments are sounding, the praise-singer (sorko) recites the names of the spirits, shouting 2
them directly into the ears of the intended medium. The sonic force of the shout affects 3
the medium’s body much as wind affects ﬁre, igniting it into paroxysms that indicate the 4
onset of possession (Stoller 1989: 108–12). In sorcery, too, it is the actual sound of the 5
magical incantation that powerfully works its effects, whether for good or ill, on the body 6
of the victim or patient. The magical word is sound, which exists (and goes out of exis- 7
tence) in the act of its enunciation. As such, it is a phenomenon of the same order as 8
the cry, clack or roll of the musical instrument, or the shout of the praise-singer. In every 9
case it is the sound itself that people hear, and to which they respond. This sound is 40
supposed to have an existence of its own, ‘separate from the domains of human, animal 1
and plant life’ (1989: 112).
Among the Suyá, according to Seeger, the faculty of hearing is valued very highly, as 3
are the complementary faculties of speech and song. Speech is distinguished from song in 4
Suyá classiﬁcation, not however in terms of the detachment of words from sound, but as 5
poles on a continuum of alternative combinations of ‘phonetics, text, time, tone and 6
timbre’ (Seeger 1987: 46, 51). The signiﬁcance accorded to hearing, as well as to speech 7
and song, is highlighted through the massive expansion of the earlobes and (for men) the 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 251 •

lower lips, into which are inserted large discs of wood or rolled palm leaf. The word
ku-mba, in the Suyá language, translates not only as ‘to hear’ but also as ‘to understand’
and ‘to know’. It is the ability to ‘hear-understand-know’ well that deﬁnes the person as
a fully social being. And where we might describe the memory even of spoken words in
visual terms, as images in the mind, Suyá describe even a visual phenomenon such as a
weaving pattern, that has been learned and remembered, as lodged in the ear (Seeger 1975:
213–14). The sense of sight, to the contrary, is associated in Suyá thinking with morally
delinquent, anti-social tendencies. A person possessed of extraordinary powers of hearing
is a paragon of virtue, but someone with extraordinary vision is a witch. The witch sees
everything – his is a transparent world that offers no barriers to sight. ‘He can look up
and see the village of the dead in the sky; he can look down and see the ﬁres of the
people who live under the earth; and he can look around and see enemy Indians in their
own villages far away’ (1975: 216). In their elaboration of hearing as the morally superior
sense, and their distrust and fear of people with vision, Suyá seem to establish ‘some kind
of opposition between vision and social virtue’ which, Seeger suggests, may have resonances elsewhere – even in the traditions of the West (1975: 222).
The Umeda, like many other peoples of Papua New Guinea, inhabit an environment
of dense, and virtually unbroken forest, in which things are visible only at close range,
normally within a few tens of metres. Such an environment, Gell argues, ‘imposes a
reorganisation of sensibility’, giving pride of place to hearing, along with smell (Gell 1995:
235). Thus out hunting, Umeda walk with their eyes to the ground, listening for game
instead of looking for it, since it is by their sounds that animals announce their existence
and presence in the world of the hunter. This is not a world of preconstituted, visualspatial objects but is rather apprehended dynamically. Not only animals and plants, but
also landscape features such as ridges, knolls and pools, are grasped in the ﬁrst place as
movements rather than static forms. Alert to these movements, the body resonates rather
like a sounding cavity, and responds in kind through its own activity of speech (1995:
240). Thus the sound of the spoken word echoes to the movement of the being or feature
in the environment to which it corresponds, giving rise to the ‘phonological iconism’
which, as Gell shows, is such a pronounced feature of the Umeda language. Through their
speech, Umeda do not point to and label things in the world ‘out there’, but continually
bring the world into being around themselves, even as they are continually brought into
being through their own immersion in an ambience of sound. But Gell goes further, to
propose that the predominance of hearing over seeing leads to a ‘bias towards the expression of sympathy towards community members’ (1995: 235). The ‘auditory’ culture of
the Umeda, Gell claims, is a ‘culture of sympathy’.

THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SENSES: A FIRST CRITIQUE
What is so striking about the studies reviewed above is that in all three, a radical contrast
is established between hearing and vision along lines which, as we have seen, are already
sharply drawn within the Western tradition. Among the criteria of distinction, to recapitulate, are that sound penetrates whereas sight isolates, that what we hear are sounds
that ﬁll the space around us whereas what we see are things abstracted or ‘cut out’ from
the space before us, that the body responds to sound like a resonant cavity and to light
like a reﬂecting screen, that the auditory world is dynamic and the visual world static,
that to hear is to participate whereas to see is to observe from a distance, that hearing is
social whereas vision is asocial or individual, that hearing is morally virtuous whereas vision

Dwelling
is intrinsically untrustworthy, and ﬁnally that hearing is sympathetic whereas vision is 1
indifferent or even treacherous. Yet there are puzzles and inconsistencies which suggest 2
that these distinctions may reﬂect more upon the preconceptions of anthropological analysts 3
than upon the actual sensory experience of the peoples among whom they have worked. 4
Indeed it is hard to avoid the suspicion, voiced by Nadia Seremetakis (1994: 124), that 5
in the imputation to non-Western ‘Others’ of heightened auditory (along with tactile and 6
olfactory) sensibilities, they are being made to carry the burden of sensory modalities exiled 7
from the sensory structure of Western modernity on account of the latter’s attribution to 8
the hegemony of vision.
Stoller, for example, devotes a whole chapter to arguing the need for anthropologists 10
to transform themselves from ethnographic ‘spectators into seers’,7 by opening up to the 1
world of the other and allowing themselves to be penetrated by it. So convinced is he, 2
however, that ‘a person’s spatialized “gaze” creates distance’ that he can follow his own 3
advice only by learning to hear, rather than to see, as the Songhay do (1989: 120). In 4
this, his approach is entirely in accord with the convention that to attain real knowledge 5
one must abandon the illusions of vision and yield to the guidance of the ear. The true 6
‘seer’ of the Western tradition is the blind prophet: in Seeger’s words, ‘one who physically 7
cannot see’ (1975: 222). Yet by Seeger’s own account, this is not so for the Suyá, among 8
whom the witch is certainly a seer rather than a spectator, albeit of a morally undesirable 9
complexion. For the witch’s all-around sight does not view the world from the outside, 20
but opens it up from the inside. A similar inconsistency between analytic preconception 1
and native experience appears in Gell’s study of the Umeda. For having reasserted 2
the now familiar proposition that ‘hearing is (relatively) intimate, concrete, and tactile, 3
whereas vision promotes abstraction’, he goes on to tell us that Umeda themselves ‘treat 4
sight . . . as a climactic sense with connotations of intimacy and danger’ (1995: 235, 239, 5
my emphases). The intimacy of sight, for Umeda, lies in close-range, eye-to-eye contact, 6
and its danger is linked to the ever present possibility of sorcery attack. An angry glance 7
can terrify the one to whom it is directed. Umeda, it seems, would be the last to agree 8
that vision promotes abstraction!
Commenting on the Suyá case, David Howes suggests that ‘there may be a connection 30
between aurality and sociability, on the one hand, and visuality and individuality (or an 1
“asocial disposition”), on the other’. This connection, he argues, might even be rephrased 2
as a general law: ‘the more a society emphasizes the eye, the less communal it will be; the 3
more it emphasizes the ear, the less individualistic it will be’ (Howes 1991b: 177–8). Once 4
again, however, this ‘law’ merely reproduces a homology between two dualities, individual 5
versus social and seeing versus hearing, that has long been axiomatic in the Western tradi- 6
tion. And it glosses over fundamental differences between Western and (for example) Suyá 7
understandings, both of the ‘asocial individual’ and of vision. The Suyá ‘witch’ is not at 8
all, as Howes (1991b: 177) thinks, the counterpart of the Western ‘individual’. For one 9
thing, the witch’s vision penetrates the world rather than catching reﬂections off its outer 40
surfaces; for another he does not stand, as does the Western individual, vis-à-vis 1
others in society, but embodies in his being the active negation of sociality as a principle 2
of relationship. In this sense the witch is more anti-social than asocial.
Like the Suyá witch, the shaman among the Inuit possesses extraordinary powers of 4
vision, though these could be used for beneﬁcial as well as harmful ends. He, too, is a 5
seer rather than a spectator, whose sight could open up pathways into the parallel worlds 6
of animals and spirits. In the cosmology of the Yup’ik Eskimos, according to Anne Fienup- 7
Riordan, ‘vision was an act constituting knowledge, and witnessing was a potentially 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 253 •

creative act’ (1994: 316). The Eskimo cosmos, it transpires, teems with ever-watchful eyes.
Among Inuit generally, there is a close association between seeing and hunting: it is
through his clear and penetrating sight that the hunter initiates an encounter with the
game animal, which in turn is consummated with the animal’s willingly offering itself to
the hunter (Oosten 1992: 130). These observations bring us back to Carpenter’s seminal
study of Inuit sensory experience. Why, in the face of overwhelming evidence for the
centrality of eyesight to the Inuit perception of their environment, did Carpenter nevertheless insist to the contrary that, for them, the eye is subservient to the ear (Carpenter
1973: 33)? Could it be because he took with him into his study a preconceived notion
of vision, as analytic and reﬂective rather than active and generative (Schafer 1985: 96),
that was fundamentally incompatible with his ﬁne appreciation of the dynamic potential
and spherical topology of the Inuit lifeworld? And if, as Inuit ethnography suggests, it is
perfectly possible to combine the perception of a lifeworld of this kind with a thoroughgoing ocularcentrism, albeit of a kind radically different from that with which we are
familiar in the West, then how can we any longer attribute such perception to the predominance of hearing over sight in the balance of the senses?
Recall that it is on precisely these grounds that Gell accounts for the Umeda perception
of animals, plants and the landscape. Judging from the descriptions of Gell and Carpenter,
the parallels between the ways in which Umeda and Inuit constitute their worlds of
experience are remarkably close. Their respective environments, however, could hardly
be more different: dense, tropical forest as against treeless, arctic tundra. It is scarcely
surprising that in these conditions, the Umeda hunter should be obliged to rely on his ears,
and the Inuit hunter on his superior eyesight. Indeed Carpenter admits that when his Inuit
companions used their eyes, ‘it was often with an acuity that amazed me’ (1973: 36).
Yet to the extent that he depends on powers of vision rather than hearing, the Inuit hunter
does not, in consequence, ﬁnd his relation with the world turned inside out. He remains,
like his Umeda counterpart, at the centre of a dynamic cosmos, caught up in the process
of its perpetual generation. Beings do not, all at once, appear to him inert and thinglike,
nor does the hunter feel himself any more an observer, or any less a participant.
Thus in comparing the sensory proﬁle of Inuit or Umeda – or for that matter, Songhay
or Suyá – with that of the West, it is clear that what is at stake is not the priority of
vision over hearing, but the understanding of vision itself. Evidently, the primacy of vision
cannot be held to account for the objectiﬁcation of the world. Rather the reverse; it is
through its co-option in the service of a peculiarly modern project of objectiﬁcation that
vision has been reduced to a faculty of pure, disinterested reﬂection, whose role is merely
to deliver up ‘things’ to a transcendent consciousness. But while the eye, as Theodor
Adorno argued, has had to get used to perceiving a reality of objects (or more speciﬁcally,
of commodities), the ear has lagged behind in this development. There is something almost
‘archaic’, says Adorno, about hearing (Adorno 1981: 99). One of the ironies of the contemporary critique of visualism is that in calling for the restoration of hearing to its rightful
place in the ratio of the senses, it actually reproduces this opposition between hearing and
vision, and with it the very narrow and impoverished concept of vision to which its enlistment in the project of modernity has brought us. Having installed vision as the chief
instrument of objective knowledge, leaving hearing to ﬂoat in the primordial realms of
emotion and feeling, we know what it means to hear sound but have effectively lost touch
with the experience of light. To show how this has come about, I turn in the next section
to a ﬁgure whose thinking is widely acknowledged to occupy a pivotal place in this
transition – René Descartes.

Dwelling
Descartes began his Optics of 1637 by proclaiming his enthusiasm for the telescope. ‘Since 3
sight’, he wrote, ‘is the noblest and most comprehensive of the senses, inventions which 4
serve to increase its power are undoubtedly among the most useful there can be’ (1988: 5
57). And what more wonderful invention could one imagine than the telescope, which 6
has so enhanced the power of sight as to open up whole new vistas for the human under- 7
standing of nature and the universe? In according pride of place among the senses to 8
vision, Descartes was following in the footsteps of a long line of philosophers, reaching 9
back to Plato and Aristotle.8 Despite continuing doubts concerning the reliability of sight, 10
as opposed to hearing, the superiority of both vision and hearing over the so-called ‘contact’ 1
senses of touch, taste and smell was never in question. So far, I have had nothing to say 2
about the latter. Taste and smell raise a whole gamut of problems of their own which 3
lie beyond my present concerns, and while I admit that they would have to be included 4
in any discussion of human sensory experience that claimed to be truly comprehensive, I 5
do not intend to deal with them further here. But I can no longer put off some consid- 6
eration of touch. For in treatments of perception in the Western philosophical tradition, 7
it is above all to touch rather than hearing that sight has been compared. And in this, 8
Descartes was no exception. Indeed it was through an analogy with touch that he chose 9
to introduce the workings of vision.
Descartes invites us to consider a man who, blind from birth, is well practised in the 1
art of perceiving objects around and about him through the medium of a stick. What 2
happens is this. When the tip of the stick impacts upon an object (whether due to the 3
movement of the stick, the object or both), a mechanical impulse is passed to the hand, 4
whence it is further registered in the region of the brain from which the nerves of the 5
hand originate. These excitations in the brain then provide the data upon which is done 6
a mental act of calculation. Suppose, for example, that the blind man wishes to judge the 7
distance of an object, which he touches at the same point with two sticks, one held in 8
each hand. Knowing the distance between his hands, and the angle formed by each stick 9
with the line connecting them, it is a simple matter to work out how far the object lies 30
from the body. As Descartes himself remarks, the mental computational task involved in 1
the estimation of distance calls for ‘a kind of reasoning quite similar to that used by 2
surveyors when they measure inaccessible places by means of two different vantage points’ 3
(1988: 67).
The import of the analogy is that for Descartes, this is precisely equivalent to what 5
happens in vision. All you have to do is to substitute rays of reﬂected light for sticks, and 6
the two eyes for the two hands.9 Fluctuations in the patterns of reﬂected light reaching 7
the eyes, due to the movement either of environmental objects or of the eyes themselves, 8
are registered at the back of the retina, and thence in the part of the brain where the 9
optic nerve-ﬁbres have their source. The mind – or what Descartes calls the soul (in 40
French, âme) – then gets to work on these patterns of excitation, resulting in that aware- 1
ness of objects that allows us to claim to ‘see’ them. In defence of Descartes, it is important 2
to recognise two aspects of this account which are often overlooked. First, it was plain to 3
him that perception – whether visual or tactile – depended on movement. Were there no 4
movement of the body and its sensory organs relative to the environment, nothing would 5
be perceived. Ironically, this point has been lost in much of the subsequent psychology 6
of vision, only to be rediscovered by advocates of an ecological approach to visual per- 7
ception who adopt an explicitly anti-Cartesian stance. I return to this below. Secondly, 118

THE OPTICS OF DESCARTES

Vision, hearing and human movement • 255 •

Descartes did not, as is commonly supposed, argue that the function of the eyes is to
establish internal representations of external objects, which are then available for inspection by the mind. Indeed he was well aware of the absurdity of having to posit another
set of eyes, inside the brain, to view the internal image. Whatever reaches the brain, and
leads us to have sensory awareness of objects, no more resembles those objects than do the
movements of the blind man’s stick resemble the objects with which it comes into contact
(1988: 64).10
It remains the case, however, that for Descartes, the act of perception naturally divides
into two stages: the ﬁrst leading from the physical encounter with an object to a pattern
of nervous excitation in the brain; the second leading from these nervous impulses to a
mental awareness of the object in the perceiver’s line of sight. In which of these
two stages, then, does the essence of vision reside? The comparison with touch suggests
the former. Thus vision uses eyes and light-rays, touch uses hands and sticks. At a critical juncture in his exposition, however, Descartes shifts his ground. For it transpires that
it is no longer in the work of the eyes that the essence of vision lies, but rather in the
operations of the mind upon the deliverances of the senses. ‘It is the soul which sees’, he
declares, ‘and not the eye; and it does not see directly, but only by means of the brain’
(1988: 68). Initially introduced as an active mode of bodily exploration of the environment, vision – as it were – ‘goes indoors’, and perforce has to build a picture of the
outside world on the basis of intelligence received via the nervous system. Nor need this
intelligence be received exclusively by way of the eyes. As a purely cognitive faculty, vision
can also work upon the data of touch. Equipped with a stick, or even with bare hands,
the blind can see! So can sighted people, walking without a light on a pitch dark night
(1988: 58).
Thus we reach the extraordinary conclusion that vision, now conceived as an exclusively intellectual achievement, is no longer conditioned in any way by the embodied
experience of inhabiting an illuminated world.11 The role of light, being precisely equivalent to that of the blind man’s stick, is to effect a purely mechanical transduction. One
does not see light, any more than the blind man sees his stick. Rather one sees things
by means of the light and the stick. For what is registered in the brain, in the form of
patterns of nervous excitation, is information not about light, or about the stick, but about
the bodies in the environment with which it comes into contact, or off which it is deﬂected.
Once this information is inside the brain, at the point where vision proper begins, the
light – like the stick – has done its job, and plays no further part in the proceedings by
virtue of which the perceiver comes to ‘see’ the world spread out before him. At this point
the eyes, that look but cannot see, hand over to the ‘I’, the Cartesian cogito, who sees but
cannot look. Through the medium of light, my eyes can touch the world, and be touched
by it; but I cannot. Yet I can see. Evidently, then, the superiority of vision over touch is
not that of one sense over another, but that of cognition over sensation. This is why
Descartes chose to explain sight by making an example of the blind man. It was his
way of showing that light, in itself, is incidental to vision.

ON THE MEANING OF LIGHT
All this, however, still leaves us with a puzzle. If the power of sight lies in the cognitive
operations of the mind rather than the physical work of the eyes, then why should Descartes
have been so excited by the telescope, which surely augments the power of the eyes
but does nothing to assist the mind? It is the soul which sees, says Descartes. But the

Dwelling
telescope, which is not a computing device, does not help the soul to see! Were we to 1
maintain, to the contrary, that the power of sight lies ﬁrst and foremost in the work of 2
the eyes and not the operations of the mind, then the telescope might indeed be of some 3
assistance, yet by Descartes’ own argument there would no longer be any reason to elevate 4
the sense of sight over the contact sense of touch. If one could, with all equanimity, 5
substitute sticks for light rays, then what is so special about eyesight? The ambivalence, 6
in Descartes’ account, between eye and mind as the primary locus of seeing, or in other 7
words between vision as bodily observation and as mental speculation (Jay 1993a: 29), was 8
never resolved, and remains with us to this day. Moreover it has become entangled in 9
our thinking with another, equally puzzling dilemma, concerning the very signiﬁcance of 10
the word ‘light’. Does it refer to rectilinear rays which, reﬂected off the surfaces of things, 1
strike the eyes and thereby give rise to certain sensations? Or does its meaning lie in the 2
subjective experience that we have in consequence of these sensations, of a luminosity 3
within which things are given to consciousness as ‘visible objects’? Does light, in short, 4
shine in the world or in the mind?
For the philosophers of antiquity, this question did not arise, or not at least in this 6
form. Their physics was one that placed the ﬁgure of sentient man at the centre of the 7
cosmos, and each chapter of physics corresponded to a particular area of bodily sensation. 8
One such chapter was optics. It was about how knowledge of the surrounding world could 9
be obtained through the eye. Light, denoted by the term lux, was both the source of illu- 20
mination and the medium in which this knowledge was supposed to be represented. As 1
such it originated from the centre, with man, rather than from the cosmic periphery. But 2
the Copernican revolution overthrew this anthropocentric cosmology. By the ﬁrst half of 3
the seventeenth century, when Descartes was writing, humankind had been relegated 4
to the periphery of a universe that was supposed to run on principles entirely indifferent 5
to human sensibilities. The task of physics was now to discover these principles. Among 6
them are those whereby some physical impulse is propagated that, along with other effects, 7
stimulates a reaction in the eyes. This impulse came to be known as lumen. Now when 8
Descartes tells us that it is the soul that sees in the light of reason, rather than the eye 9
in the light of the physical world, the light he is referring to is clearly the lux of the 30
ancients – the light that shines in the mind.12 But when to the contrary, as throughout 1
the Optics, he speaks of light as reﬂected rays that excite the eye, he evidently intends to 2
refer to the lumen of the physicists. The paradox of the Optics is that while vision ‘goes 3
indoors’, from the world to the mind, light ‘goes outdoors’ from the mind to the world. 4
And as Descartes showed, this external light – lumen – is the one thing we cannot see. 5
The result is a curious disjunction between light and sight: the former on the outside, 6
the latter on the inside, of an interface between mind and world. In short, sight begins 7
where light ends.
Although more than three centuries have passed since Descartes was writing, we are 9
still no clearer about the meaning of light. From contemporary physics we learn that light 40
is a form of radiation that consists of waves or photons. This is to understand light in 1
the sense of lumen. Yet most people, naturally enough, continue to equate light – as the 2
thinkers of antiquity did – with the lux that illuminates the world of their perception. 3
They are convinced, however, that this lux is the same as the physicists’ lumen, and there- 4
fore that it has an external existence quite independent of their own eyes. Thus it is said 5
that light travels from external objects to the eyes, and that we see because of it. And it 6
is supposed that even if we close our eyes, the environment is still illuminated, as it was 7
before. Yet we know that in fact, whatever reaches the eyes from outside (waves, photons) 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 257 •

gets no further than the back of the retina. And the experience on which we report, of
an illuminated world, is apparently possible thanks to what goes on beyond that point,
in the optic nerves and the brain. So is there light only in consequence of the stimulation of the retinal surface? Does it exist only on the hither side of eyesight? And if so,
how can we claim, at one and the same time, that light reaches the eyes from afar? Physics
has colluded in this confusion, though in the reverse direction. For notwithstanding its
redeﬁnition from a physiology of the senses to an objective science of nature, it continues
to describe as ‘optics’ that branch of study dealing with light and its propagation, even
though in practice it has nothing whatever to do with the eye.
Vasco Ronchi, in the introduction to his Optics of 1957, illustrates these problems in
the conception of light by drawing an intriguing parallel with sound. The equivalent
of the distinction between lumen and lux is, in this case, that between mechanical vibration in the external medium and the sound we claim to hear when our ears are placed
within its ﬁeld of action. By rights, there should be no such thing as a physics of sound.
For as there is no sound without an ear and a brain, the study of sound – that is, acoustics
– could be undertaken only by combining the physics of vibratory motion with the physiology of the ear and the psychology of aural perception. Yet physicists, anxious to reserve
acoustics for themselves, and not to get mixed up with subjective phenomena of mind
and perception, persist in equating the vibrations that induce in the listener an experience of sound with the sound itself, thus perpetuating the error that ‘sound is actually a
physical, not a mental phenomenon’ (Ronchi 1957: 17). And so everyone else is happy
to go along with the illusion that sound actually travels through the air and is received
as such by the listener, when in fact all that reach the ears are vibrations and there is no
sound until these have been transformed into nerve impulses and carried to the mindbrain.
But if there is really no sound in the physical world beyond the brain, are we to
conclude that this world is silent? And likewise, if there is really no lux in the external
world, are we to conclude that the world ‘out there’ is dark? This is, indeed, the conclusion to which Ronchi moves. Our minds are ﬁlled with sound and light, even though
neither vibrations nor rays reach there, while the vibrant and radiant world is actually
silent and dark. Yet what can silence mean in a world without ears, or darkness in a world
without eyes? Questions about the meaning of light, as of sound, are surely wrongly posed
if they force us to choose between regarding light and sound as either physical or mental
phenomena. They are wrongly posed because they continue to regard the organs of sense
as gateways between an external, physical world and an internal world of mind.
Thus Ronchi, like Descartes before him, thinks of vision as a process that starts with
a movement in the world which, via a propagation of waves or particles that happen to
enter the eyes, causes impulses to travel along the optic nerves to the brain, and ends with
these impulses being ‘turned over to the mind’ which – on the basis of a comparison with
information already in its possession – ‘creates a luminous and colored ﬁgure’ (Ronchi
1957: 288). According to this view, a physiology of vision can tell us about what happens
on the far side of the ‘turn-over’ point, and a psychology of vision can tell us what happens
on the near side. Neither kind of account, however, can embrace the ‘turning over’ itself.
How it is that nervous impulses are passed to the mind – or how they ‘tickle’ the soul,
as Descartes rather quaintly put it (1988: 65) – remains a mystery.
It is my contention that there is no such interface between eye and mind. Far from
starting with incident radiation and ﬁnishing up with a mental image, the process of vision
consists in a never-ending, two-way process of engagement between the perceiver and his

Dwelling
or her environment. This is what we mean when we speak of vision, colloquially, as 1
‘looking’ or ‘watching’. And what Ronchi presents as a turn-over point is not that at all, 2
but a critical nexus in this process. It is at this nexus, rather than on either the near or 3
the far side of it, that the phenomenon we know as ‘light’ is generated. This phenom- 4
enon is not the objective, external lumen, nor is it the subjective, interior lux. It is rather 5
a phenomenon of experience, of that very involvement in the world that is a necessary 6
precondition for the isolation of the perceiver as a subject with a ‘mind’, and of the 7
environment as a domain of objects to be perceived. Establishing this understanding of 8
the process of vision and of the nature of light will be our next task.
THREE TWENTIETH-CENTURY THINKERS
In order to set out the groundwork for an alternative metaphysics of vision, I shall embark 3
in what follows on a kind of theoretical triangulation. I do this by reviewing the ideas of 4
three mid-twentieth-century thinkers, all of whom had important things to say about 5
vision which were critical, in one way or another, of Descartes. The ﬁrst, Hans Jonas, 6
went out of his way to stress the differences between vision, hearing and touch as sensory 7
modalities. For him, vision was indeed the superior sense, due not to its identiﬁcation 8
with reason, but to its peculiar phenomenal properties. The second, James Gibson, rejected 9
the two-stage model of visual perception, and with it the classic Cartesian dualism of body 20
and mind. Gibson argued that perception is an activity not of the mind, upon the deliv- 1
erances of sense, but of the whole organism in its environmental setting. Vision is not, 2
then, indirect, as Descartes maintained, but direct. The third, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 3
has perhaps gone further than any other recent thinker in recognising that vision is not 4
just a matter of seeing things but is crucially an experience of light. Refusing to set up 5
any absolute boundary, or line of demarcation, between the perceiver and the perceived, 6
Merleau-Ponty held that light is tantamount to what we experience, in vision, as an 7
opening up of the body onto the world.
Hans Jonas
The distinctiveness of sight, for Jonas, lies in three properties that are unique to this 2
sensory modality: namely, simultaneity, neutralisation and distance (Jonas 1966: 136). The 3
ﬁrst refers to the ability to take in the world at a glance, so that a manifold that is present 4
all at once can likewise be apprehended all at once. Neither hearing nor touch can achieve 5
this. Reiterating a well-established view that we have already encountered, Jonas argues 6
that whereas one can see things, one hears only sounds rather than the entities whose 7
activity gives rise to them. Thus one hears the bark but not the dog, whose presence can 8
only be inferred on the basis of non-acoustic information. And there is no sound that is 9
not suspended in the current of time. The duration of the sound one hears is the same 40
as that of one’s hearing it; what is disclosed over time is also apprehended over time. 1
True, distinct sounds may coexist or be juxtaposed, but each belongs to one of several 2
‘strands’ proceeding concurrently, and cannot be apprehended apart from the temporal 3
ﬂow. Arrest the ﬂow and what you have is not a coherent snapshot, but a collection of 4
atomic fragments. Touch shares with hearing this quality of temporality, at least so far as 5
the perceiver is concerned. Yet unlike hearing, the data of touch can be synthesised to 6
reveal the stable presence of objects. In this respect, touch comes closer to vision: thus, 7
up to a point, the blind can achieve with their hands what the sighted achieve with their 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 259 •

eyes. Nevertheless, the difference between touch and vision remains fundamental. The
discovery of objects through touch necessitates an active exploration of the environment:
this calls for movement and takes time. With vision you have only to open your eyes,
and the world is there, already spread out as a ground for any further exploration of it.
Only with vision, therefore, is it possible to distinguish being from becoming, and hence
to entertain a concept of change. For hearing and touch, since they can know the world
only through the movement of perceptual activity, there is neither change nor stasis, only
becoming (Jonas 1966: 136–45).
The second property of sight, what Jonas calls neutralisation, lies in the disengagement
between the perceiver and the seen. Touching something entails an action on your part,
to which the object responds according to its nature. Hearing presupposes an action on
the part of the object which generates the sound, to which you respond according to your
sensibility. Thus while the balance of agency shifts from the subject (in touch) to the
object (in hearing), there is in both an engagement between them, of a kind that is entirely
absent from vision. The object need do nothing to be seen, since the source of the light
by which it is revealed lies elsewhere. And to see the object one does not have to take up
an attitude towards it. ‘In seeing’, Jonas writes, ‘the percipient remains entirely free from
causal involvement in the things to be perceived’ (1966: 148). Thus vision is neutralising
since it reveals the object simply for what it is. What is lost in terms of an intuitive understanding of the connectedness of things is gained in terms of objectivity. Rather than
affecting the perceiver, as touch and hearing do, vision offers to the perceiver an image
which, handed over to thought, can be manipulated at will, without further consequence
for the object itself. But precisely because of their neutralisation, the objects of vision are
in a sense ‘mute’, since in revealing their presence they do not speak to us or address
human concerns (Jonas 1966: 145–9).
The third property of sight, spatial distance, is relatively self-evident. In an environment free from obstruction we can see a long way. Touch does not extend beyond the
reach of the body, augmented perhaps by sticks or other such prostheses. Sound carries
further, but has its limits, and is especially susceptible to distortion at the margins.
Moreover when I hear a far-off sound, though I may be able to estimate the direction
and distance of its source from where I now stand, I still have no idea – from the acoustic
information alone – of what lies in between. It is peculiar to vision, by contrast, that it
reveals not only distant objects, but also an encompassing landscape that stretches out
from my present location to the horizon. I could, then, set out along a path that would
take me to any one of these objects, with some foreknowledge of what to expect along
the way (Jonas 1966: 149–52). Yet in an appendix, Jonas adds a crucial qualiﬁcation to
this argument. As he now admits, vision would never reveal the world in the way it does,
arranged in depth and stretching away from us, were we not already used to moving
through it, and in so doing, incorporating its features into structures of tactile awareness.
Touch, in a word, conﬁrms the materiality of the visible. Hence the motility of the body
is a factor in the very constitution of vision and of the seen world. At ﬁrst glance, this
proposition seems at odds with the thesis of the simultaneity of visual perception: that
the world can be taken in at a glance, from a ﬁxed standpoint. Jonas’s solution to the
paradox is to argue that we are able to view the world as a spectacle, from a position of
rest, precisely because we do so in the light of the ‘accumulated experience of performed
motion’ (1966: 154) resulting from a history of previous activities. In short, the dynamics
of bodily movement establish the essential foundation for the static experience of vision,
but are not themselves part of that experience (Jonas 1966: 152–6).

Dwelling
With this last point, Gibson would have found himself in fundamental disagreement. 3
Movement, in his view, is as integral to vision as it is to touch; moreover there is no need 4
for the one sense to be validated by the other (Gibson 1966: 55). I shall not here attempt 5
a full review of Gibson’s ecological approach to visual perception, as others have done so 6
elsewhere (Michaels and Carello 1981, Reed 1988b; see also Chapter Nine, pp. 166–8). 7
However there are three aspects of this approach that I am particularly concerned to bring 8
out here. First, I shall explain more precisely what Gibson meant by saying that visual as 9
well as other modalities of perception are direct rather than indirect. Secondly, I show 10
how Gibson’s conception of the senses as perceptual systems, rather than as stimulus- 1
speciﬁc registers of experience, renders the distinctions between vision, hearing and touch 2
far less clearcut than we are inclined to think. Thirdly, I want to explore the speciﬁc argu- 3
ment by which Gibson denies that we ever see light as such. In this, I suggest, his ideas 4
are still ﬁrmly rooted in the Cartesian tradition.
For Descartes, it will be recalled, the mind is unable to mingle with the world. Locked 6
within the conﬁnes of a body, all it can do is to perform various calculative manoeuvres, 7
on the basis of stimuli registered in the brain, in order to build up a more or less accu- 8
rate representation of the world outside. This is what Descartes meant by describing 9
perception – whether visual or tactile – as indirect. Gibson maintains, to the contrary, 20
that perception is direct. By this he does not mean that it can somehow bypass the brain; 1
any such suggestion would obviously be absurd. His point is rather that we should cease 2
thinking of perception as the computational activity of a mind within a body, and regard 3
it instead as the exploratory activity of the organism within its environment. As such, it 4
does not yield images or representations. It rather guides the organism along in the further- 5
ance of its project. The perceptually acute organism is one whose movements are closely 6
tuned and ever responsive to environmental perturbations. For this reason, visual percep- 7
tion can never be disinterested or purely contemplative, as Jonas claimed. What we see is 8
inseparable from how we see, and how we see is always a function of the practical activity 9
in which we are currently engaged.
On the face of it Gibson would seem to agree with Descartes, that sight and touch are 1
strictly comparable as modes of sensory contact with the environment. ‘In many respects’, 2
he writes, ‘the [haptic] system parallels vision’ (1966: 134). Moreover we have seen that 3
Gibson’s view that perception of any kind depends on movement of the perceiver relative 4
to the perceived also ﬁnds resonances in Descartes. Beneath the apparent convergence, 5
however, their respective positions are diametrically opposed. For on the axis of contrast 6
that Jonas draws between neutralisation and engagement, and which for him distinguishes 7
sight from touch, the Cartesian perspective would join touch with sight on the side of 8
neutralisation, whereas the Gibsonian perspective joins sight with touch on the side 9
of engagement. Or to sum up:
Touch
Sight
Descartes:
Neutralisation
Neutralisation
Jonas:
Engagement
Neutralisation
Gibson:
Engagement
Engagement
It would be wrong, Gibson argues, to think of the eyes, the ears or the sensitive surfaces 7
of the skin simply as loci for banks of receptor cells that are, in turn, hooked up to centres 118

James Gibson

Vision, hearing and human movement • 261 •

of projection in the brain. Rather, they are to be understood as integral parts of a body
that is continually on the move, actively exploring the environment in the practical pursuit
of its life in the world. Sight, for instance, is not an effect of the stimulation of photoreceptors in the retina, coupled to processors in the visual cortex. It is rather an achievement
of a system that also encompasses the neuromuscular linkages controlling the movement
and orientation of the organs in which the receptors are located. These organs may be
speciﬁed on a number of levels of increasing inclusivity: thus ‘the eye is part of a dual
organ, one of a pair of mobile eyes, and they are set in a head that can turn, attached to
a body that can move from place to place’. Together these organs comprise what Gibson
calls the perceptual system for vision (Gibson 1979: 53, cf. 1966). Much of this is shared
with the system for hearing, and with that for touch. The head, for example, is common
to vision and hearing: the action of turning the head so as to balance the auditory input
from a sound source to the two ears, located on each side, also turns the eyes, at the
front, so that they are oriented directly towards the source. As this example demonstrates,
the perceptual systems not only overlap in their functions, but are also subsumed under
a total system of bodily orientation (Gibson 1966: 4, 49–51; 1979: 245). Looking, listening
and touching, therefore, are not separate activities, they are just different facets of the
same activity: that of the whole organism in its environment.
Hence the idea, proposed by Jonas, that having made a thorough exploration of the
world through movement, relying on the sense of touch, one could then stop still and
take it in at a glance through the eyes, would have made no sense to Gibson. This is for
two reasons: ﬁrst, that we explore the world with our eyes open (and even when we stop
we look about); and secondly, that vision does not yield a snapshot, or even a series of
snapshots. It rather yields an appreciation of objects ‘in the round’. We do not see an
object, any more than we feel it, from a single point of view. Rather, by ‘running our
eyes over it’ – as we might run our ﬁngers over it in tactile perception – we discover its
form as the envelope of a movement, that is of the continuous modulation of the array
of reﬂected light reaching the eyes. Indeed it is because vision, like touch, takes place over
time along what Gibson calls a ‘path of observation’ (1979: 197), that we can see aspects
of objects which, at any particular moment, may be hidden by occluding edges. And since
the information yielded by the operation of perceptual systems is speciﬁc to the things
encountered, rather than to the particular sensory keyboard that is activated, a switch in
the balance of stimulation – say from the tactile to the visual – may make little appreciable difference to what is actually perceived. Of course the sensations of vision are not
the same as those of touch and hearing. But the ‘patterns in the ﬂux of sound, touch,
and light from the environment’, which specify the objects of one’s attention, may be
strictly equivalent (Gibson 1966: 54–5; 1979: 243).
This argument carries an important corollary. For if what we see is delineated by the
patterning or modulation of reﬂected light as it is picked up by the moving organs of
sight, then the one thing we never actually see must be light itself. To the question, ‘Of
all the possible things that can be seen, is light one of them?’, Gibson answers categorically in the negative (1979: 54). Rather, he says, we see things by means of light. In view
of Gibson’s resolutely anti-Cartesian stance, this conclusion – which is fully in accord
with Descartes’ views on the matter – comes as something of a surprise. Indeed he admits
to being vexed by the question of how certain phenomena seem to announce their presence directly, as radiant light, rather than by way of the illumination of their surfaces
(1966: 220). Is this not how we come to perceive a ﬂaming ﬁre, a candle lamp, the sun
and moon, a shaft of sunlight through the clouds, a rainbow, the glare of the sun reﬂected

Dwelling
from a glossy surface, or the scintillations of light off water? Intuitively, it seems that in 1
every one of these cases light is just what we do see. Yet for each, Gibson has his answer: 2
the ﬁre and the lamp are ‘speciﬁc objects and are so speciﬁed’, as are the celestial bodies. 3
We do not really see shafts of sunlight, but only illuminated particles in the air. Dazzled 4
by the sun, what we actually perceive is a ‘fact about the body’, namely its excessive optical 5
stimulation, experienced as a kind of pain. As for rainbows, scintillations and the like, 6
these ‘are all manifestations of light, not light as such’ (1979: 55).
But as the examples mount up, Gibson’s defence becomes less and less plausible. In 8
what sense can we possibly regard a ﬂame as an object? Ignoring the knowledge of science 9
and schoolbooks, how are the sun and moon speciﬁed?13 When it comes to beams of 10
sunlight, common sense tells us that we see the light by way of airborne particles, and 1
not vice versa. If excessive optical stimulation causes pain, does this make it any less an 2
experience of light? What if the glare were less intense, and caused no appreciable discom- 3
fort: would we, then, cease to be aware of it? Finally, it is difﬁcult to see how ‘manifestations 4
of light’ can possibly be distinguished from ‘light as such’ without resorting to a highly 5
reductive notion of what light actually is. Indeed this is precisely what Gibson does. ‘All 6
we ever see’, he insists, ‘is the environment or facts about the environment, never photons 7
or radiant energy’ (1979: 55, my emphasis). Gibson’s ‘light’, in short, is the lumen of 8
modern physics.14 At no point does he ever think of it as anything other than a kind of 9
energetic impulse, a source of stimulation that, if it exceeds a certain threshold, causes 20
photoreceptor cells to ‘ﬁre’. The resulting sensations, he insists, do not in themselves 1
constitute the basis for visual perception. No amount of light will cause us to see, unless 2
that light is structured on account of its reﬂection from illuminated surfaces in the environ- 3
ment. Thus light carries the information for perception, but is never perceived as such. 4
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
It is here, above all, that Gibson’s ecological psychology parts company with the phenom- 8
enology of Merleau-Ponty. Though they speak very different intellectual languages, there 9
is much in common between what Gibson and Merleau-Ponty have to say. For both, the 30
senses exist not as distinct registers whose separate impressions are combined only at higher 1
levels of cognitive processing, but as aspects of functioning of the whole body in move- 2
ment, brought together in the very action of its involvement in an environment. Any one 3
sense, in ‘homing in’ on a particular topic of attention, brings with it the concordant 4
operations of all the others. In his Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty compares 5
this integration of the senses in action to the collaboration of the eyes in binocular vision 6
(1962: 230–3). Just as the unity of the object of vision is not the result of some ‘third 7
person process’ which produces a single image out of two monocular images, but is rather 8
given in the way the two eyes ‘are used as a single organ by one single gaze’, so the unity 9
of a thing as an ‘inter-sensory entity’ lies not in the mental fusion of images founded on 40
different registers of sensation, but in the bodily synergy of the senses in their convergent 1
striving towards a common goal. Thus ‘my gaze, my touch and all my other senses are 2
together the powers of one and the same body integrated into one and the same action’ 3
(1962: 317–18). In short, for Merleau-Ponty as for Gibson, it is in their collaborative 4
bearing on features of the world, rather than their common accountability to processing 5
centres in the mind, that the senses are conjoined.
Like Gibson, too, Merleau-Ponty regards touch and vision as comparable modes of 7
sensory engagement with the environment. This is not to say they are equivalent, since 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 263 •

each brings with it ‘a structure of being that can never be exactly transposed’ (1962: 225).
That is why formerly blind persons, whose sight has been restored, initially ﬁnd their
predicament so bewildering: tactile experience turns out to be a poor guide to the visual
world, not because it is relatively impoverished but because the tactile world is differently
structured (1962: 222–4). Nevertheless, Merleau-Ponty surmises that the visual gaze functions as a ‘natural instrument’ of perception in much the same way as does the blind
man’s stick (1962: 153). The analogy, of course, is drawn from Descartes. Yet in his celebrated essay on ‘Eye and mind’, Merleau-Ponty takes it as the starting point for an all-out
attack on the whole Cartesian programme (Merleau-Ponty 1964a: 169–78). His objection, however, is not to the comparison of the visual gaze to the tactile probe, but to the
idea that both are harnessed to the project of constructing internal representations of an
external reality. The truth, he maintains, is quite otherwise. For like the stick, the gaze is
caught up in a dialogic, exploratory encounter between the perceiver and the world, in
which every movement on the part of the perceiver is a questioning, and every reaction
on the part of the perceived is a response. Thus ‘the gaze gets more or less from things
according to the way it questions them, ranges over or dwells on them’ (1962: 153).
Both Gibson and Merleau-Ponty are adamant in their rejection of the Cartesian idea
of vision, in Merleau-Ponty’s words, ‘as an operation of thought that would set up before
the mind a picture or a representation of the world’ (1964a: 162). Indeed the perceiver,
they would say, has no need for such a picture in order to act in a way that is attuned
to the features of his or her surroundings. Since my body inhabits the world, and since
– to all intents and purposes – I and my body are one and the same (Merleau-Ponty
1962: 206), it follows that I, too, am an inhabitant of the world rather than of a space
inside my head. And for the same reason, I can always consult the world to orient my
movements, rather than an internal cognitive representation. Like Gibson, Merleau-Ponty
stressed that while there cannot be vision without movement, this movement must also
be visually guided: it must ‘have its antennae, its clairvoyance’ (1964a: 162). But whereas
Gibson asked how it is possible for the perceiver to see objects in the environment,
Merleau-Ponty went one step further back. For how could there be an environment full
of objects, he asked, except for a being that is already immersed in the lifeworld, in ‘the
soil of the sensible’ (1964a: 160), and therefore caught up in a visual ﬁeld that is preobjectively given? Such involvement must be ontologically prior to the objectiﬁcation of
the environment that Gibson takes as his point of departure. In short, before ‘I see things’
must come ‘I can see’. So what does it mean, to see?
Merleau-Ponty’s essay ‘Eye and mind’, his last published work, is an attempt to answer
this question. The arguments of the essay are not easy to follow, but one can get the gist
of them by performing a simple experiment. Close your eyes for a while, and then open
them again. Do you have the impression that you are staring out upon the world through
a hole (or perhaps two holes) in the front of your head? Is it as though you were looking
through the windows of your unlit house, having opened the shutters?15 Far from it.
Rather, it seems that you are out there yourself, shamelessly mingling with all you see,
and ﬂitting around like an agile spirit from one place to another as the focus of your
attention shifts. It is as if the walls and ceiling of your house had simply vanished, leaving
you out in the open. In short, you experience seeing not as seeing out, but as being out
– until, that is, you close your eyes again, at which point the spirit is instantly captured
and put back inside, imprisoned in the dark and eery conﬁnes of a shuttered enclosure,
your head. For Descartes the light of the mind (lux) was in this darkness, which is why
he thought the blind could see. But experience teaches us differently. It is, as Merleau-

Dwelling
Ponty writes, that through vision ‘we come into contact with the sun and the stars, that 1
we are everywhere all at once’. Or again, vision ‘is the means given me for being absent 2
from myself ’ (1964a: 186–7). We now have a clue to what Merleau-Ponty meant by his 3
repeated insistence on the indistinguishability of the seeing and the seen, or the ‘sensor 4
and the sensible’ (cf. 1962: 214). This is primordially evident in the case of my body, 5
which both sees and is seen, but equally true of the whole ‘fabric of the world’ in which 6
it is caught up. And we can understand what he means by the assertion that vision is not 7
of things but happens among them. For it is constitutive of the whole perceptual ﬁeld, 8
drawn around myself at its centre, which both they and I inhabit.
All this is a far cry from the picture that Jonas paints of the immobile and detached 10
spectator, contemplating a world with which he has no causal involvement whatever. 1
Returning to an opposition that I have already introduced in the context of my initial 2
discussion of the anthropology of the senses, Merleau-Ponty replaces the image of the 3
spectator with that of the seer. ‘Immersed in the visible by his body’, he writes, ‘the see- 4
er does not appropriate what he sees; he merely approaches it by looking, he opens himself 5
to the world’ (1964a: 162). Raise your eyelids, and you ﬁnd yourself, almost literally, ‘in 6
the open’. Indeed, this little phrase perfectly captures what Merleau-Ponty portrays as the 7
magic – or delirium (1964a: 166) – of vision. We live in visual space from the inside, 8
we inhabit it, yet that space is already outside, open to the horizon. Thus the boundary 9
between inside and outside, or between self and world, is dissolved. The space of vision 20
both surrounds us and passes through us (1964a: 178). Elsewhere, Merleau-Ponty imag- 1
ines himself gazing up at the blue sky:
As I contemplate the blue of the sky I am not set over against it as an acosmic subject; 4
I do not possess it in thought, or spread out towards it some idea of blue such as might 5
reveal the secret of it . . . I am the sky itself as it is drawn together and uniﬁed, and 6
as it begins to exist for itself; my consciousness is saturated with this limitless blue.
(1962: 214, original emphases) 8
Compare this with Gibson, who answers his own question of how one might visually 30
perceive ‘a luminous ﬁeld, such as the sky?’, with the response: ‘To me it seems that I see 1
the sky, not luminosity as such’ (1979: 54).
The sky presents a problem for Gibson precisely because he is unable to countenance 3
the environment in any other way than as a world of objects ‘set over against’ the perceiver, 4
and revealed through the patterns of ambient light reﬂected from its opaque, outer surfaces. 5
Yet the sky has no surface. It is not a thing, like a building or a tree, off which light 6
rebounds. On the contrary, the sky is openness or transparency itself, sheer luminosity, 7
against which things stand out by virtue of their opacity or closure. To suppose, as Gibson 8
does, that one sees the sky as distinct from its luminosity is like pretending that one hears 9
thunder rather than its sound, or feels the wind rather than a current of air. What is 40
thunder if not sound, or the wind if not airﬂow? On hearing thunder, or feeling the wind, 1
it is as though one’s very being mingles with the surrounding medium and resonates with 2
its vibrations. Likewise, sunlight and moonlight present themselves to vision, in Merleau- 3
Ponty’s words, as ‘kinds of symbiosis, certain ways the outside has of invading us and 4
certain ways we have of meeting this invasion’ (1962: 317). This is not to reduce light 5
to radiant energy or photons, as in a physicalist description; nor is it to conclude, on the 6
other extreme, that light shines only in the mind while the world might as well be pitch 7
dark. It is to recognise that for persons who can see, light is the experience of inhabiting 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 265 •

the world of the visible, and that its qualities – of brilliance and shade, tint and colour,
and saturation – are variations upon this experience.16
Perhaps Gibson was right, after all, to say that we do not see light ‘as such’, since light
is not an object. It rather constitutes, for the sighted, the pre-objective foundation of existence, that commingling of the subject with the world without which there could not be
visible things, or ‘facts about the environment’, at all. Light, in short, is the ground of
being out of which things coalesce – or from which they stand forth – as objects of attention. Thus as Merleau-Ponty writes (1964a: 178), we do not so much see light as see in
it. And for all who can see in it, the experience of light is perfectly real. Indeed we have
no more reason to doubt the reality of light than we have to question the experience of
blindness for those who cannot see in it. Yet we are all too ready to take it for granted:
it is the very familiarity of our experience, of that openness to the world sensed as light,
that causes it to hide from us. So busily preoccupied are we with all the things that vision
reveals to us that we forget the foundational experience upon which it rests. The process
of seeing in light is swallowed up by its products, objects of sight. And by the same token,
the joy and astonishment of the discovery that ‘I can see’ gives way to the mundane indifference of ‘I see things’. The message of Merleau-Ponty is that we need to reverse this
perspective, to recover the sense of vision that is original to our experience of the world,
and that is a precondition for its objectiﬁcation.17
This, ﬁnally, is what motivates the work of the painter. A painting, for Merleau-Ponty,
is not just another object of vision. You do not look at it, nor do you see it, as you would
any ordinary thing. Rather, you ‘see according to it, or with it’ (1964a: 164). Like all sighted
people, painters see in light, and it is the inspiration for their work. They cannot afford to
dismiss their experience as an illusion, and nor can we, unless we wish to write off the history
of painting as an aberration caused by the overstimulation of excessively susceptible minds
(1964a: 186–7). However the painter’s vision, Merleau-Ponty insists, ‘is not a view from
the outside, a merely “physical-optical” relation with the world’. It is rather a ‘continued
birth’, as though at every moment the painter opened his eyes to the world, like a new-born
infant, for the ﬁrst time. The birth of his vision is, at one and the same time, the ‘concentration or coming-to-itself of the visible’. And so the painting to which it gives rise is an
embodiment of this creative movement: it does not represent things, or a world, but shows
‘how things become things, how the world becomes a world’ (1964a: 167–8, 181).18 Thus
to see with, or according to, a painting is to question the ordinariness of our everyday
perception of objects, to rekindle in us the astonishment of vision, and to remind us that
there are things in the world to be seen only because we ﬁrst can see.
In the course of this review of the ideas of our three thinkers – Jonas, Gibson and MerleauPonty – we have progressed from a notion of vision as a mode of speculation, to one of
vision as a mode of participation, and ﬁnally to one of vision as a mode of being. For
Jonas the visual world is presented to the disinterested observer as a scene or spectacle;
for Gibson it becomes an environment that surrounds the engaged participant but whose
preformed surfaces nevertheless remain closed and impenetrable to the eye. For MerleauPonty the visual world is given to subjective experience as a cosmos that is open and
transparent, that one can see into rather than merely look at, and that continually comes
into existence around the perceiver. As we have already seen, recent debates in both anthropology and philosophy concerning the role of the senses in human societies have tended
to assume that vision is inherently speculative, and have paid little heed to the possibility
of alternative modalities. When it comes to touch and especially sound, however, a quite

Dwelling
different view prevails, and this has led to the positing of a great sensory divide between 1
visual perception on the one hand, and auditory and tactile perception on the other, and 2
with it, between Western societies in which the former allegedly dominates, and non- 3
Western societies which are said to be given over to the latter. My aim, now, is to replace 4
the orthodox, speculative notion of vision with a participatory or existential one. Once 5
this is done, the ‘great divide’ simply vanishes.
THE HEARING EYE AND THE SEEING EAR
After that long excursion into theories of vision, our immediate priority must be to return 10
to sound and hearing. Earlier on, I cited a passage from the work of the musicologist 1
Zuckerkandl, Sound and Symbol (1956), in which he contrasts the properties of sight and 2
hearing by way of a rather gross characterisation of the attitudes of deaf and blind people. 3
I shall consider what such people have to say about their own sensory experience in the 4
following section. For the moment, however, I intend to look rather more closely at 5
Zuckerkandl’s study, for two reasons. First, I want to bring out the close parallels between 6
the way Zuckerkandl speaks of the musical experience of sound, and the way Merleau- 7
Ponty speaks of the painterly experience of light. These experiences, it turns out, are 8
virtually identical. Secondly, although Zuckerkandl maintains that vision and hearing are 9
generally opposed, he admits that this is not universally so, and towards the end of his 20
study he speculates that this opposition may not have been given from the start, either 1
in the development of the individual or in the evolution of human culture. If he is right 2
in supposing that vision split off from hearing in the course of an evolution towards 3
modern Western civilisation, then it is clearly inadmissible to retroject the resulting distinc- 4
tion between these sensory modalities onto humanity at large.
For the most part, Zuckerkandl is quite categorical about the difference between 6
the way in which the world is perceived through the eye and through the ear. The eye 7
reinforces a barrier separating two domains: the inner domain of the mind or conscious- 8
ness, and the outer domain of the world. It keeps things at a distance. They stay ‘out 9
there’, ﬁxed in their proper places in an overall spatial array that can be mapped out in 30
terms of intervals and boundaries. The space of vision is one from which you, the viewer, 1
are excluded, a space where things are but you are not. Thus the visual experience of 2
space is essentially disjunctive. The domains of ‘inner’ and ‘outer’, as Zuckerkandl writes, 3
‘face each other like two mutually exclusive precincts on either side of an impassable 4
dividing line’. But in hearing, the distinction between ‘precincts’ is transformed into one 5
between ‘directions’. In the inward direction, the world penetrates consciousness; in 6
the reverse, outward direction, consciousness penetrates the world (1956: 368–9). In place 7
of the barrier that the eye throws up around the perceiving subject, the ear builds a 8
bridge which allows a two-way ﬂow of sensory trafﬁc. When you see things that are far 9
away, they are perceived to be at a distance, but when you hear far-off sounds they 40
seem to be coming from a distance (p. 291). The space of hearing, then, is not set over 1
against you, the listener, but streams towards you and into you. It is a space not of 2
places but of ﬂows, where nothing can be divided and nothing measured. Your auditory 3
experience is essentially participatory, one of immersion in a ‘boundless indivisible one- 4
ness’ (p. 336). And so the quality ‘out there’, that we experience in vision, is replaced 5
by the quality ‘from-out-there-toward-me-and-through-me’. Or in other words, the step 6
from visual to auditory perception is ‘like a transition from a static to a ﬂuid medium’ 7
(p. 277).

Vision, hearing and human movement • 267 •

What I ﬁnd so remarkable about Zuckerkandl’s account of hearing is that it matches
point by point, almost down to the details of the rhetoric, what Merleau-Ponty has to say
about vision. We have only to recall Merleau-Ponty’s conception of visual space as
both ‘surrounding’ and ‘passing through’ the perceiver, of consciousness as ‘saturated’ with
luminosity, of the seer as ‘immersed’ in the visible, of the outside ‘invading’ us and of our
‘meeting this invasion’ (1962: 214, 317; 1964a: 162, 178). Echoing Zuckerkandl’s notion
of inward and outward currents, Merleau-Ponty speaks of an ‘inspiration and expiration of
Being, action and passion so slightly discernible that it becomes impossible to distinguish
between what sees and what is seen’ (1964a: 167). Revealing, too, is the fact that in order
to convey the sense of what he means by vision, Merleau-Ponty has occasional recourse to
auditory metaphor – the precise reverse of the use of visual metaphor to describe auditory
experience that we have already encountered in the Saussurian notion of the sound-image.
‘Quality, light, colour, depth’, he writes, ‘are there only because they awaken an echo in
our body and because the body welcomes them’ (1964a: 164). If for Saussure it sometimes
seems as though the sounds of speech were seen and not heard, for Merleau-Ponty it can
seem as though we listen with the eyes. In other words, though our experience may be one
of seeing in light, it is nevertheless an experience that has all the qualities of hearing.
This thought had also occurred to Zuckerkandl. It arises in the context of a discussion
of the pros and cons of either playing or listening to music with the eyes closed. According
to one view, the eye is so closely implicated in a particular apprehension of space, occupied by ‘corporeal things in their places’, that it actively inhibits our involvement in the
ﬂuid space of forces that music opens up to us. It holds us back, and makes us unwilling
to entrust ourselves with the whole of our being to sound. But Zuckerkandl is not fully
convinced. Is it really necessary, he asks, to blind ourselves temporarily in order properly
to hear? Is vision capable only of seeing things in their places? ‘Can the eye perhaps hear
too?’ (1956: 341). Zuckerkandl believes that it can, albeit exceptionally, and that there
are indeed ‘activities of the eye that go beyond the function of seeing a thing in a place
– and go beyond it in a particular direction, which it seems natural to compare with the
mode of perception of the ear’ (p. 344, my emphases). To exemplify the point Zuckerkandl
imagines himself, just as had Merleau-Ponty before him, gazing into the blue sky. What
he sees is not a ‘thing out there’ but ‘boundless space, in which I lose myself ’. But whereas
Merleau-Ponty uses this example to illustrate the coalescence of the perceiver and the
world which he takes to be fundamental to apprehending the space of vision, Zuckerkandl
uses it to clarify his conception of auditory space! For him, the experience one has, looking
up at the sky, is precisely what it means to hear.
It seems, then, that the kind of opening up to the world that Merleau-Ponty calls seeing
is more or less identical to that which Zuckerkandl calls hearing. In Zuckerkandl’s book,
everything that Merleau-Ponty has to say about painterly vision would fall under the rubric
of ‘hearing with the eyes’. Indeed it is above all in the realm of painting, he thinks, that
we ﬁnd a perception of forces and dynamic relations strictly akin to the hearing of tones
in music. The space of the picture, along with the things represented therein, ‘is not
simply set off from the observer; rather it opens itself to him, takes him into itself, passes
into him’ (Zuckerkandl 1956: 345). But reversing the perspective, all of what Zuckerkandl
says about hearing could be regarded, from Merleau-Ponty’s angle, as ‘seeing with the
ears’. This expectation is conﬁrmed in the Phenomenology of Perception, where MerleauPonty devotes special attention to ‘the sight of sounds’. Thus ‘when I say that I see a
sound, I mean that I echo the vibration of the sound with my whole sensory being’ (1962:
234). This equivalence of seeing and hearing, however, raises an intriguing question. When

Dwelling
we hear with the eyes, or conversely when we see with the ears, is the experience one of 1
light or sound?
Before we can answer this question, we have ﬁrst to recognise that sound is no more a 3
physical impulse that arrives from outside than it is a purely mental, ‘inside the head’ phe- 4
nomenon. Indeed everything we have said about light applies to sound also. Like light, 5
sound exists neither on the inner nor on the outer side of an interface between mind and 6
world. It is rather generated as the experiential quality of an ongoing engagement between 7
the perceiver and his or her environment. Sound is the underside of hearing just as light is 8
the underside of vision; we hear in one as we see in the other. Now it would be foolish to 9
suggest that gazing up at the sky yields anything other than an experience of light. Yet as 10
seeing is tantamount, in this case, to hearing, it would be equally foolish to deny that it 1
could also, and at the same time, be experienced as sound. Poets, as Zuckerkandl points 2
out, have never had any difﬁculty with the idea (1956: 341). A particularly eloquent example 3
of the sight of sound, or hearing with the eye, is offered by the poet David Wright, who 4
speaks of how he ‘hears’ things, or rather movements, which most of us take to be silent: 5
I take it that the ﬂight of most birds, at least at a distance, must be silent . . . Yet it 7
appears audible, each species creating a different ‘eye-music’, from the nonchalant melan- 8
choly of seagulls to the staccato ﬂitting of birds.
(Wright 1990: 12) 20
The particular poignancy of this example derives from the fact that Wright is himself 2
deaf. He cannot therefore hear with the ears, as other people do. But for precisely that 3
reason, his visual experience has an auditory dimension that is missing for most people 4
with normal hearing, placed in similar situations.
Much has been made of the phenomenon of synaesthesia, the apparent capacity of 6
certain perceivers to register an experience in one sensory modality on the basis of sensa- 7
tions delivered in another. The synaesthetic may, for example, claim to see certain forms 8
or colours on hearing a musical melody, or to hear particular sounds on watching a silent 9
movement. Wright’s report of hearing the ﬂight of distant birds might well be taken as 30
an instance of the latter. Yet built into the very deﬁnition of synaesthesia is a two-fold 1
distinction between sensation and perception on the one hand, and between discrete 2
sensory modalities on the other. Following both Gibson and Merleau-Ponty, I have 3
suggested that the eyes and ears should not be understood as separate keyboards for the 4
registration of sensation but as organs of the body as a whole, in whose movement, within 5
an environment, the activity of perception consists. ‘My body’, as Merleau-Ponty puts it, 6
‘is not a collection of adjacent organs but a synergic system, all the functions of which 7
are exercised and linked together in the general action of being in the world’ (1962: 234). 8
Sight and hearing, to the extent that they can be distinguished at all, are but facets of 9
this action, and the quality of the experience, whether cast in light or sound, is intrinsic 40
to the bodily movement entailed, rather than possessed ‘after the fact’ by the mind. So 1
if I hear the ﬂight of birds it is because, following their course across the sky, the move- 2
ment of my own body – of my eyes, of my hand, indeed of my entire posture – resonates 3
with theirs. From this point of view, the ‘problem’ of synaesthesia simply vanishes.
For Zuckerkandl, too, when Dante speaks of Hell as ‘a place dumb of all light’, or 5
when Goethe declares that light ‘trumpets’, they are referring not to synaesthesia but to 6
‘a real perception through the eyes, but which nevertheless has the characteristics of hear- 7
ing’ (1956: 341). Under all normal circumstances, Zuckerkandl maintains, this kind of 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 269 •

perception is overshadowed by the ordinary sight of things, and re-emerges only during
rare moments of ecstasy when the boundary between the perceiver and the world appears
to dissolve. But for the new-born baby, opening its eyes upon the world for the ﬁrst
time, or the previously blind person to whom sight has been restored through a medical
procedure, the experience must be overwhelming. As William James wrote, with acknowledgement to Condillac, ‘The ﬁrst time we see light . . . we are it rather than see it’ (James
1892: 14). Light – or ‘I can see’, which is another way of saying the same thing – is in
this situation quintessentially an experience of being. Ihde notes that the ﬁrst impressions
of a blind person, on gaining sight, are often reported to be akin to those of listening:
the patient ‘is impressed by what we might call the ﬂux and ﬂow’ (Ihde 1976: 63).19
For the baby, of course, there are not yet things to be seen, for the separation of the self
from the world, and the consequent process of objectiﬁcation, have hardly begun. But
long before it ﬁrst opens its eyes, the baby can already hear quite well. For every newborn, as Schafer says (1985: 96), hearing precedes vision. Thus while Berger (1972: 7)
may be right to say that in the life of the child, ‘seeing comes before words’, it is still
the case that the infant hears the sounds of speech, and above all its mother’s voice, long
before it can see. It is therefore entirely understandable that the earliest visual perception
should be experienced as a hearing with the eyes.
The conclusion to be drawn from this, as Zuckerkandl recognises, is that the ‘normal’
function of the eye – ‘the perception of things in places’ – is not given from the start
but is the result of a development in the ﬁeld of vision, ‘whose earlier stages are not so
sharply differentiated from hearing as later ones’ (1956: 342). From this conclusion,
Zuckerkandl launches into an argument which, by his own admission, is entirely speculative, but which is nevertheless of profound signiﬁcance for the anthropology of the senses.
If vision gradually diverges from hearing in the life-history of the individual, could this
not also occur, along the same lines and through similar stages, in the evolution of culture?
Could the congruence of sight and hearing, so quickly overtaken in individual development, have once characterised an entire epoch? And could it persist, perhaps, in the
‘magical abilities of . . . primitives, . . . based upon a direct seeing of space as force, a
dynamic communication between within and without’? If so, then ‘we should have in
music the miraculous echo of a world that once lay open to sight’ – a world that otherwise survives only in the visual arts, especially painting (1956: 343–5). While the
ontogenetic and evolutionary assumptions built into this argument, and especially the
identiﬁcation of ‘primitive’ perception with that of children, may no longer be acceptable
today, Zuckerkandl’s remarks nevertheless suggest something very important, namely, that
the distinction between vision and hearing, as generally understood in the Western tradition, is not natural or universal to humanity but the outcome of a speciﬁc historical
development. In comparisons between Western and non-Western societies, therefore, the
distinction cannot form part of the explanation for differences in sensory experience, but
is part of what has to be explained.

THE SENSORY EXPERIENCE OF BLIND AND DEAF PEOPLE
It is now time to return to the two thought experiments with which I began. To recall, in
the ﬁrst you listen blindfold to the sound of an oncoming train; in the second you watch
it pass with your ears plugged. In the one case, you suppose, the sound gets inside you
and shakes you up; in the other it is as though the train glided by in a world apart from
the one you inhabit. Now these experiments do indeed tell us much about the ways we

Dwelling
imagine vision and hearing to work. But they turn out to be a poor guide to what is actu- 1
ally going on, at least in the case of people whose eyes and ears are functioning normally. 2
Seeing with the ears stopped is qualitatively different from seeing without, for the simple 3
reason that a good deal of the information controlling the movements of the organs of sight, 4
including the eyes, head and whole body, is picked up by hearing. Without that informa- 5
tion, vision is disoriented, which is precisely why, in the second experiment, your visual 6
attention seemed so detached from the train’s movement. Conversely, hearing blindfold is 7
qualitatively different from hearing with one’s eyes open, for although the ears (unlike the 8
eyes) are immobile relative to the head, hearing is affected by head and body movements 9
which are partially guided by information picked up by the operations of sight. Again, it is 10
the lack of such information, and the ensuing loss of auditory control, that accounts for the 1
violence with which the sound of the unseen train seems to assault your senses.
If our experiments mislead us when it comes to normal vision and hearing, could they 3
nevertheless tell us something about the experience of people who are deaf or blind? Is 4
the deaf person, of necessity, an impassive observer of things in a world from which he 5
or she feels somewhat alienated? And are the blind, conversely, participants in a world in 6
which all is movement and becoming, yet inevitably at the mercy of its currents? Such 7
views are commonly encountered; I have already cited, as an example, a passage to this 8
effect from Zuckerkandl. They are not, however, supported by the testimony of blind and 9
deaf people themselves. These people do not feel that their experience of the world is any 20
less complete, or has any less integrity, than that of anyone else. In this respect it is quite 1
unlike the experience of normally sighted and hearing persons, on ﬁnding themselves 2
suddenly but temporarily blinded or deafened. Is it the case, then, that those for whom 3
blindness or deafness is a permanent condition compensate for the lack of one sense by 4
augmenting the powers of those remaining? Once again, the answer appears to be ‘no’. 5
Indeed David Wright, speaking as one who is profoundly deaf, argues that the theory of 6
compensation is a mistake, and an irritating one at that (Wright 1990: 12, 111). It is in 7
error for two reasons: ﬁrst, aural perception actually deteriorates when it is not oriented 8
by vision, and vice versa; and secondly, the theory mistakes a heightened sensitivity to 9
speciﬁc movements – aural or gestural – which are critical for the interpretation of what 30
is going on for a general enhancement of the sense as a whole. Blind and deaf people, 1
like everyone else, sense the world with their whole body, and like everyone else, too, 2
they have to cope with the resources available to them. But their resources are more 3
limited, and for this there is absolutely no compensation. The life of the blind person, as 4
John Hull puts it, ‘is experienced as being intact, although the scope of activity has in 5
many ways become smaller’. It is not like a round cake from which a substantial slice has 6
been cut out. It is more like a smaller cake (Hull 1997: xii).
Granted that the experience of the blind or deaf person is not any particular segment, 8
or ‘cut’, of the total experience of the visually and aurally unimpaired, but is a totality of 9
a very different kind, I believe (with Ihde 1976: 44) that we can still learn a great deal 40
about how visual and auditory perception work – even for people with normal sight and 1
hearing – from a comparison of these different experiences. The comparison is of course 2
complicated by the fact that there are individual variations in degrees of blindness and 3
deafness. In what follows I shall assume the total non-functioning of eyes and ears respec- 4
tively. I begin with blindness, drawing on the superb and extremely moving account by 5
John Hull of his own experience of going blind, and of adjusting to this condition, as an 6
adult. The account is revealing in two ways. First, it highlights features of visual percep- 7
tion that we normally rely on but tend to take for granted, by bringing out the problems 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 271 •

that ensue from their absence. Secondly, it reveals unexpected properties of aural perception that are critical for the blind, but which may be equally at work among sighted
people although not recognised for what they are. Apropos the ﬁrst, I shall focus on eyeto-eye contact; apropos the second, I shall consider the phenomenon of echolocation. As
a prelude to both, however, a few general remarks are in order about how blind and
sighted people, respectively, perceive the space around them.

Being blind
There is much in Hull’s account that corroborates the ideas of Hans Jonas, reviewed in
an earlier section. The perception of the blind person, dependent as it is on touch and
hearing, is fundamentally suspended in the current of time. Visual space is presented to
the sighted all at once, but tactile space has to be assembled by the blind, bit by bit,
through a repetitive and time-consuming exploration with the ﬁngers. Thus the blind
person may take days ‘to discover what the sighted person will grasp in a split second’
(Hull 1997: 183). Acoustic space is similarly temporal. Unlike the objects of touch,
however, which can always be touched again, the manifold inhabitants of acoustic space
have an ephemeral nature, passing in and out of existence along with the sounds they
make. This is not a world of being – ‘the silent, still world where things simply are’ –
but a world of becoming where there is only action, and where every sound marks a locus
of action (pp. 72–3). In this world, ‘sounds come and go in a way that sights do not’
(pp. 145–6). So do the agents, especially people, who make the sounds. As a sighted
person, I can see when someone else is in the room before he or she begins to speak or
approaches to shake my hand. But for the blind person, the voice or handshake comes
from nowhere. One has the feeling of being grasped or accosted, unable either to resist
or to choose one’s assailant (p. 87). Other people, with their voices and tactile gestures,
appear suddenly and disappear equally abruptly. ‘The intermittent nature of the acoustic
world’, Hull writes, ‘is one of its most striking features’ (p. 73). The seen world can never
escape one’s eyes, it is always there, and one can return to it again and again. But the
world of sound escapes as fast as it comes into being. And the sound that has passed can
never be recovered (p. 145).
Can the blind person, then, ever enjoy an experience comparable to that of the sighted,
of being placed in something like a landscape that can be taken in as a totality, with its
inﬁnitely variegated surfaces, contours and textures, inhabited by animals and plants, and
littered with objects both natural and artiﬁcial? There is one circumstance in which
this is possible, in Hull’s experience, namely when it is raining. For the sounds of raindrops, which are perceived to come not from any particular point but from all quarters
at once, reveal in every detail the surfaces on which they fall. ‘Rain’, Hull writes, ‘has a
way of bringing out the contours of everything; it throws a coloured blanket over previously invisible things; instead of an intermittent and thus fragmented world, the steadily
falling rain creates continuity of acoustic experience . . . This is an experience of great
beauty’ (1997: 26–7). There is indeed a certain parallel between the ecstasy of hearing
that Hull describes and what, for the sighted, I have described as the astonishment of
vision, when the world is revealed to the seer as though the fog in which it had been
enveloped were lifted, and he or she were gazing upon on it for the ﬁrst time. Rain does
for the blind what sunshine does for the sighted, bathing the world in sound as the sun
bathes it in light. Immersed in the audible, to borrow and adapt Merleau-Ponty’s words,
the listener opens himself to the world: ‘My body and the rain intermingle, and become

Dwelling
one audio-tactile, three-dimensional universe, within which and throughout the whole of 1
which lies my awareness’ (Hull 1997: 120).
Now in my earlier discussion of the maxim ‘vision objectiﬁes, sound personiﬁes’, I 3
noted that it is closely bound in the Western tradition with a certain construction of the 4
person, according to which an inner essence, identiﬁed with the voice, is supposed to hide 5
behind – but nevertheless to sound through – an outer mask identiﬁed with the face. The 6
voice can be heard, the face seen – unless, that is, one is in the company of another who 7
happens to be blind. Yet the view is commonly expressed that for the blind their inability 8
to see the faces of others can be a positive advantage. For they are not, like the rest of 9
us, susceptible to outward impressions. Thus did David Hume, in the eighteenth century, 10
address a blind acquaintance, the Edinburgh poet Thomas Blacklock: ‘Your passion . . . 1
will always be better founded than ours, who have sight: we are so foolish as to allow 2
ourselves to be captivated by exterior beauty: nothing but beauty of the mind can affect 3
you’ (cited in Rée 1999: 40). In our present times the blind French writer Jacques 4
Lusseyran takes the same view: the blind inhabit a world ‘free of the deception of phys- 5
ical appearances, where what and how something is said reveals its true purpose’ (cited 6
in Hill 1985: 109). But in Hull’s experience matters are not that simple. For him the 7
face is not a mask but is as intimately bound up with the life and identity of the self as 8
is the voice. And of all the components of the face, the most revealing, and the topic of 9
our greatest attention and fascination, are the eyes.
If there is a critical difference between face and voice, it is not so much that one 1
is seen and the other heard, than that you can hear your own voice whereas you cannot 2
see your own face. ‘I live in the facial expressions of the other’, writes Merleau-Ponty, 3
‘as I feel him living in mine’ (1964b: 146). From this stems what John Berger calls ‘the 4
reciprocal nature of vision’ – a reciprocity that is even more fundamental, in Berger’s view, 5
than that of spoken dialogue. For in eye-to-eye contact, he writes, ‘the eye of the other 6
combines with our own eye to make it credible that we are part of the visible world’ 7
(Berger 1972: 9).20 Thus your visibility, your identity, indeed your very existence as a 8
person, is conﬁrmed in the sight of others. In normal circumstances, to see another person 9
is to know you can be seen by them; to see a place is to know that you could, in prin- 30
ciple, be seen by someone standing there. But when the other person is blind the reciprocity 1
of vision breaks down. Suppose that I am sighted and you are blind: while I can see your 2
face, I am also aware that you are not looking at me. It seems that I am not there for 3
you. But not being able to see the faces of others leads you to imagine that others, 4
conversely, cannot see you. Hull vividly describes the nagging fear of having no face, the 5
loss of consciousness associated with perceived invisibility. ‘Because I cannot see, I cannot 6
be seen . . . It would make no difference if my whole face disappeared. Being invisible to 7
others, I become invisible to myself ’. It requires a real effort of will, if you are blind, 8
to remind yourself that you can still be seen (Hull 1997: 51–2).
Far from leading to deep intersubjectivity, to a greater sense of belonging, connected- 40
ness and participation, as the received stereotype implies, blindness results – at least in 1
Hull’s experience – in an overwhelming feeling of distance and withdrawal. ‘People’, as 2
he puts it, ‘become mere sounds’, and ‘sounds are abstract’ (1997: 21, 48). For him, quite 3
contrary to conventional wisdom, vision personiﬁes, whereas sound objectiﬁes. Hull writes 4
as one who has been fully blind for only a few years: he knows very well what it is like 5
to be able to see the faces of others, and what he says must surely resonate with the expe- 6
rience of every sighted person. Why then, against all the evidence of our senses, do we 7
cling to the illusion that sight is inimical to sociality, that it individualises, isolates and 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 273 •

abstracts? Is it because we take, as a prototypical scenario of vision, the situation of looking
at an inert, opaque object, rather than that of looking into the eyes of an active, lively
subject – whose eyes are also looking into one’s own? If so, does this not provide further
proof of what has already become apparent from my ﬁrst critique of the anthropology of
the senses: namely, that it is not vision that objectiﬁes the world, but rather the harnessing
of vision to a project of objectiﬁcation that has reduced it to an instrument of disinterested observation? Our very familiarity with the reciprocal, intersubjective nature of vision,
it seems, has conspired to hide it from us. It becomes the tacit ground against which is
projected an explicit image of vision as the sight of things.
Blind people, of course, cannot see things any more than they can see faces. But they
can listen to them. Blind participants in a study conducted by Miriam Hill reported
listening to mailboxes, signs, openings, doors, posts, poles and trees, as well as ‘the sounds
that bounce off buildings’ (Hill 1985: 102). The ability to perceive objects in this way,
beyond the reach of touch, seems to be based on a principle of echolocation. Just as for
the sighted, recalling Gibson’s argument, the presence and forms of environmental objects
are revealed through modulations in the array of reﬂected light reaching the eyes of a
moving observer, so for the blind they are revealed through modulations in the array of
reﬂected sound. Yet it is not only the ears that are at work in this process. ‘What the
blind person experiences in the presence of an object’, as Lusseyran explains, ‘is pressure’
(cited in Hill 1985: 107). Hull reports on precisely the same experience, describing the
pressure as sometimes so intense that one instinctively wants to put up a hand to the face
to protect oneself.
One shrinks from whatever it is. It seems to be characterised by a certain stillness in
the atmosphere. Where one should perceive the movement of air and a certain openness, somehow one becomes aware of a stillness, an intensity instead of an emptiness,
a sense of vague solidity.
(Hull 1997: 23)
For the blind actor-musician Tom Sullivan, it seemed that he could feel, on his face,
waves of air that had been pushed away by the body during movement and returned at
an angle from some obstacle (Sullivan and Gill 1975: 68). He called this ‘facial vision’.
Not surprisingly, it does not work well in windy weather (Hill 1985: 103).
There is some doubt, then, as to whether facial vision is a form of hearing or of touch:
indeed the phenomenon raises in a peculiarly acute form the problem of the distinction
between these sensory modalities. Hull claims that ‘the sense of pressure is upon the skin
of the face, rather than upon or within the ears’ (1997: 24). Elsewhere he describes the
sensation of being in an empty building as one that goes beyond mere hearing; ‘there
must be a certain sensitivity of the entire body to vibrations and to air pressure as well
as to inaudible echoes’ (p. 85). Evidently the same vibrations which, as they excite the
membrane of the ear, are discerned as sound can also excite receptors distributed over the
skin, but are then discerned as ‘pressure’. Paul Rodaway (1994: 50) regards facial vision
as a form of ‘global touch’, by which he means the body’s general contact with the environment, across all its surfaces. But as he points out, it could just as well be described as a
subtle form of auditory perception. The implication, that we hear not just with the ears
but with the whole body, is, as we shall see in a moment, of great signiﬁcance for understanding the sensory experience of the deaf. For the present, I should like to conclude my
discussion of the experience of blindness with three points.

Dwelling
First, the clear distinction that sighted people are inclined to make between touch and 1
hearing may in fact be a consequence of vision, and of the precise delineation of tangible 2
surfaces, at the interface between solid objects and the surrounding medium, that it affords. 3
This may be why the multimodal feeling-hearing of the blind, which is neither touch, echo, 4
nor motion but a blending of all of these, may be so hard for the sighted to grasp (Hill 5
1985: 104). Secondly, the commonplace supposition that vision is inherently spatial and 6
hearing inherently temporal needs to be qualiﬁed. Through the principle of echolocation, 7
hearing can disclose a world of stable forms – of things in their places – just as vision can. 8
And while it is true that such disclosure depends upon the perceiver’s motion relative to the 9
perceived, the same is equally true of vision (Rodaway 1994: 124–5). In essence, both 10
looking and listening are aspects of a movement that, being generative of both space and 1
time, is ontologically prior to any opposition we might draw between them. Thirdly, it 2
seems probable that even sighted people, albeit unawares, are signiﬁcantly guided by echo- 3
location or ‘facial vision’ (Ihde 1976: 67–70). They simply do not pay any attention to it. 4
As Rée writes, for all of us ‘becoming acquainted with buildings or landscapes is partly a 5
matter of getting to know their acoustic proﬁles – listening to the sounds they produce and 6
the echoes they give back’ (1999: 53). To be at home in a place, especially in the dark, 7
means knowing how it sounds and resounds.21 Thus listening is just as much a means of 8
active inquiry and of orienting oneself in the world as is looking.
Being deaf
Turning now to the experience of the deaf, there are two aspects of what Wright aptly 3
calls ‘deafmanship’ (1990: 113) on which I want to focus. For the ﬁrst, I return to the 4
point that we hear with the whole body, in order to bring out the range of auditory expe- 5
rience even for people who, like Wright himself, have no use of the ears whatever. Secondly, 6
I refer to the sign language of the deaf, in order to show that the contrast between hearing 7
and vision as sensory modalities of verbal communication is far less fundamental than is 8
commonly supposed. On the ﬁrst point, and judging from Wright’s autobiographical 9
account, it seems that deafness is never absolute in the way that blindness can be (Wright 30
1990: 9, see Ihde 1976: 45, Rée 1999: 36–7). This is because what we experience as 1
sound is caused by vibrations in surrounding media and surfaces, to which the ears are 2
not alone in responding. Standing on a resonant surface such as wooden ﬂoorboards, one 3
can ‘hear’ approaching footsteps through the feet. But one cannot do this if the surface 4
is, say, of stone or concrete. In speech, one hears the sound of one’s own voice, in part, 5
through an internal conduction of vibrations set up in the bones of the head. Insofar as 6
these vibrations bypass the mechanism of the ear, they may still be sensed by a speaker 7
who is deaf. In addition, deaf people can judge the quality of their voice by placing a 8
ﬁnger to their neck, at the location of the larynx, and they can likewise ‘hear’ the sound 9
of a musical instrument, radio or record player by touching the sound box or ampliﬁer 40
(Rée 1999: 36).
But in these instances of ‘touch-hearing’, what is heard is nothing like the complete 2
sound as it would be experienced by a listener whose ears are functioning normally. Much 3
depends on the particular resonant properties of the surfaces with which one comes into 4
contact, principally through the hands and feet. As a rule, however, the sound ‘comes 5
across as a blurred bumble of noise’ (Wright 1990: 9). Timbre and pitch are indetermi- 6
nate, but there is an overwhelming concentration on frequencies at the lower end of the 7
spectrum. The sounds that can be ‘heard’ at these frequencies tend to be abrupt and 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 275 •

percussive, like explosions or the noise of heavy machinery. Since they cannot be placed
within the ﬁnely differentiated acoustic ﬁeld of background and foreground sounds such
as is revealed by the ears, it is hard to pin them down to speciﬁc sources or locations.
They tend, rather, to appear and disappear, suddenly and without warning. Moreover
low-frequency external noise, picked up through bodily vibration, is easily confused with
that generated internally in the course of normal metabolic and respiratory processes – of
the kind that the doctor can ‘hear’ by means of a stethoscope (Rodaway 1994: 100–1,
Rée 1999: 53–4).
Besides this touch-hearing, however, Wright reports on another kind of experience of
sound, registered not through feeling but through sight. Only where nothing moves, as
on a perfectly calm day, does the world appear to be shrouded in total silence. Upon the
slightest movement, this silence is shattered. I have already referred to such experience as
an instance of the ‘sight of sound’, exempliﬁed in Wright’s observation that ‘birds, ﬂying,
sing with wings instead’ (1990: 3, 11–12). Yet he admits that this ‘visionary noise’, unlike
the palpable sensations of touch-hearing, is actually a thing of the imagination. It does
not really exist. I have to say that I am not convinced by the implied distinction between
real and imaginary sound. For even the sounds that people with normal hearing routinely
describe as real are no less phenomena of lived experience, and it is perfectly clear from
Wright’s description of vision-hearing that the sounds he sees are, for him, every bit as
vivid as are the sounds that other people hear, for them. Wright himself wonders whether
his eye for sound may owe something to unconscious childhood memories, for deafness
did not strike him until the age of seven. He recalls that at the time, he did not notice
he was deaf, and only gradually became aware of his condition on account of his inability
to pick up the sounds of unobservable movements like the ticking of a clock (1990: 22,
see Rée 1999: 37). In the case of visible movements, the fact that his ears had ceased to
function made no perceptible difference, at least at ﬁrst, to what he heard. This surely
furnishes compelling evidence for the view that even for the aurally unimpaired, hearing
is critically guided by the ‘antennae’ of sight. And it ﬁts with Hull’s observation that when
people go blind, their hearing does not improve but rather deteriorates (Hull 1997: 117).
Now when people are speaking to one another, the movements of their speech may be
visible in the face, and especially the lips. This is the basis for the skill of lip-reading. It
is normal, too, for speech to be accompanied, and ampliﬁed in its expressive force, by
visible gestures of the hands. In communities of the deaf, gestural systems have been elaborated to the point of constituting languages in their own right, fully commensurate with
spoken ones. These are conventionally known as signed languages (Armstrong, Stokoe and
Wilcox 1995). Neither speech nor sign has quite the intimacy of eye-to-eye contact, since
in both cases there is a functional differentiation, within the overall bodily system of
perception and action, between the organs of sense and motion. In speech the division is
between the ears and the voice; in sign it is between the eyes and hands. But as speech
and sign are formally equivalent in this regard, the possibilities of establishing a direct,
mutual involvement of self and other through sign must be just as great as they are through
speech. This is the point at which to remind ourselves of what McLuhan, Ong and their
followers have to say about the properties of thought and expression in the oral-aural
modality. For setting aside the likelihood of deaf signers’ familiarity with the written word,
there seems no good reason to doubt that these properties should be attributable to the
manual-visual modality as well.
Recall that for Ong, people in a primarily oral culture hear words not as things, as
though they were looking at them, but as sound. Similarly for deaf signers, gestures are

Dwelling
movements to be watched, not objects to be looked at (Armstrong, Stokoe and Wilcox 1
1995: 83–4). There is no holding them still for inspection. Like speech sounds, signed 2
gestures exist only in their passing. The fact that they are seen and not heard makes them 3
no less ﬂeeting, no more thing-like, than spoken sounds. Moreover the movements of the 4
hands in gesture respond to visually perceptible movements in the signer’s surroundings 5
much as, in the oral context, speech sounds resonate to the properties of the acoustic 6
environment, yielding the ‘gestural iconism’ that is such a pronounced feature of the signed 7
language of the deaf – the precise counterpart of the phonological iconism in the speech 8
of supposedly ‘auditory’ cultures such as the Umeda (Gell 1995: 247–8). Taking all these 9
parallels into account, we can only come to the same conclusion as Jonathan Rée, in his 10
study of the history of deaf education. ‘The idea that there is a metaphysical gulf dividing 1
communication by visible gestures from communication by audible words’, he writes, ‘is 2
a fantasy without foundation, a hallucination rather than a theory’ (Rée 1999: 323–4). 3
McLuhan and Ong, of course, were above all concerned to contrast the properties of 4
speech and writing. Their mistake, as should now have become clear, was to imagine that 5
these contrasting properties could be deduced from the differences between hearing and 6
vision. The critical feature of writing, by which it is distinguished from both sign and 7
speech, is that it is inscribed upon a durable surface. Is it, then, their inscription, and not 8
just their visibility, that renders words as things? Not exactly, for the perception of inscrip- 9
tions as objects depends upon a still more limited set of conditions. The trace of a gesture, 20
such as the calligrapher’s brush stroke, may be apprehended as a movement in just the 1
same way as the gesture itself. In this, the reader’s eye follows the trace as it would follow 2
the trajectory of the hand that made it. The written word is perceived as a thing only 3
when it is read not as the trace of a visible gesture but as the representation of a vocal 4
one. Thus, lurking behind the argument that writing leads us to see words as ‘quiescent 5
objects’ (Ong 1982: 91) lies an assumption, still widespread even among linguists, that 6
the only proper languages are spoken languages, and therefore that writing exists for the 7
sole purpose of representing the sounds of speech. This phonocentric assumption betrays 8
a deep-seated and obstinately persistent prejudice to the effect that manual signing is an 9
imperfect form of communication that scarcely qualiﬁes as ‘language’ at all.22 And it is 30
precisely this disqualiﬁcation of gesture from language proper that has given rise to the 1
idea that language can be made visible in no other way than through the representation 2
of speech in writing.
THE INTERCHANGEABILITY OF VISUAL AND AUDITORY PERCEPTION
In conversation with Georges Charbonnier, the painter André Marchand describes his 7
perception of the visible world as one in which he is already submerged, and which opens 8
up to him, as it were, on the inside:
For example, in a forest, I have felt many times that it was not I who was looking at 1
the forest. On some days I have felt that it was the trees that were looking at me, that 2
were speaking to me. For myself, I was there . . . listening.23
(Charbonnier 1959: 143) 4
This experience is surely familiar to anyone who has wandered in the woods. There are 6
two aspects of it to which I want to draw attention. First, it lends compelling support to 7
the idea of the reciprocity of vision, to which I have already alluded in connection with 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 277 •

the ordeals of blindness. Unable to see, the blind person becomes convinced of his own
invisibility, as though his very existence were thrown into question. Conversely, to ‘be
there’, to have a presence in the world, and so to be able to see, is to exist in the sight
of others. Thus we feel that the trees around us have eyes and are looking at us, for if
they were not, where would we be? Secondly, notice how readily Marchand slips from
the language of sight to that of sound. The trees look, but they may as well be speaking;
we watch, but we might as well be listening. It is to this interchangeability of visual and
auditory perception that I now wish to turn.
I begin with a musicological example, which takes us back to Zuckerkandl’s question
of whether it is preferable to listen to music with the eyes open or closed. In his autobiography, the composer Igor Stravinsky argues passionately for the former view. ‘I have
always had a horror’, he writes, ‘of listening to music with my eyes shut, with nothing
for them to do. The sight of the gestures and movements of the various parts of the body
producing the music is fundamentally necessary if it is to be grasped in all its fullness’
(Stravinsky 1936: 72). Watching the movements of the drummer, the violinist or the
trombonist gives shape and direction to our hearing, which would otherwise be empty
and aimless. We hear less well with the eyes closed, according to Stravinsky (and as Hull
also found with the onset of his blindness), since we lose this visual steering of auditory
perception. Cut loose from the bodily movement of its production, musical sound appears
abstract and incorporeal. It has often been remarked of hearing that it is a passive sense,
that all it can do is succumb to imperatives issuing from the outside world. Jonas, for
example, maintains that ‘in hearing, the percipient is at the mercy of environmental action’
(1966: 139), while for Adorno, hearing appears ‘dozy and inert’ (1981: 100). It is just
this kind of passive hearing, as ‘mere supine susceptibility’ (Rée 1999: 53), that Stravinsky
attributes to those who like to listen to music with their eyes shut. Such people, as he
caustically remarks, far from listening to the music itself, prefer to ‘abandon themselves
to the reveries induced by the lullaby of its sounds’ (1936: 73). They allow the sound to
wash over them – or to ‘ﬂoat through experience’, as Ihde (1976: 78) puts it – oblivious
to the fact that it is being produced by players with instruments. Once we open our eyes,
however, we cease to be mere consumers of sound, and join silently in the process of its
production. Hearing is roused from its slumber, and becomes active and engaged.
This leads us to a conclusion of paramount importance. If hearing is a mode of participatory engagement with the environment, it is not because it is opposed in this regard
to vision, but because we ‘hear’ with the eyes as well as the ears. In other words, it is the
very incorporation of vision into the process of auditory perception that transforms passive
hearing into active listening. But the converse also applies: it is the incorporation of audition into the process of visual perception that converts passive spectating into active looking
or watching. That is why Marchand found that in looking at the trees – which were also
looking at him – he was also silently listening to them. He was ‘looking’ with the ears
as well as the eyes. Marchand’s experience would be entirely familiar to the Koyukon
people, who follow a life of hunting, trapping and ﬁshing in the forests of Alaska. They
‘live in a world that watches’, according to their ethnographer Richard Nelson, ‘in a forest
of eyes’ (1983: 14). But it is a forest of ears as well. The principal trees of the forest,
namely spruce and birch, as well as many of its diverse animal inhabitants, are invested
with spirits which, like people, can hear as well as see. That is why, for the Koyukon, it
is always important to be careful in what you say, so as not to cause any offence. They
see because you see; they hear because you hear. But whether on the side of people or
spirits, it is the element of auditory attention that converts vision into watchfulness.

Dwelling
Among the Yup’ik Eskimos, too, there was a similar awareness that people are constantly 1
under the watchful scrutiny of spirits. The cosmos itself (ella) – sentient, knowing and 2
responsive – was conceived as an immense eye, but it was one that could hear as well as 3
see. It could also smell. Thus for their own and everyone else’s safety, mourners and 4
menstruating women were subject to restrictions such that they ‘remained odorless, 5
inaudible, immobile, and invisible to the eye of ella’ (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 248). The 6
knowledge that the eye of ella was watching, and that human activities were visible to the 7
spirit world, controlled every aspect of everyday Yup’ik life. To witness a spirit directly 8
was to see it as a face which, like the cosmos itself, was circular in form and centred on 9
the eyes. However the face was not a mask covering over the persona of the spirit, and 10
through which its voice could be heard. To the contrary, the face would be revealed 1
through a process of unmasking akin to the retraction of a hood – a dissembling of 2
outward appearance as given to ordinary, quotidian vision so as to uncover the being 3
within. To encounter another person ‘face-to-face’ was not, therefore, to be set over against 4
them, as in the image of the vis-à-vis, but to be enveloped in the intense, intersubjective 5
intimacy of eye-to-eye contact. Unmasked, the eyes of the spirit would literally catch the 6
glance of the beholder in their sight. But this implies that as an aspect of being, the face 7
is as much on the ‘inside’ as is the voice. If the voice is the sound of being, then the face 8
is its look.24 And hence, too, to listen to another person, whether human or spirit, is 9
equivalent to looking at them. As one Yup’ik man explained: ‘A speaker will not scold 20
you for looking at him too much. But looking all the time while someone is teaching, 1
that is how one must keep listening’ (Joe Beaver, in Fienup-Riordan 1994: 316). To this, 2
Fienup-Riordan adds that ‘watching a person’s face . . . was particularly revealing’.
Some sort of distinction is nevertheless entailed, here, between two kinds – or levels – 4
of vision: on the one hand, the ordinary sight of pre-existing things that comes from 5
moving around in the environment and detecting patterns in the ambient light reﬂected 6
off its outer surfaces; on the other hand, the revelatory sight experienced at those moments 7
when the world opens up to the perceiver, as though he or she were caught up in the 8
movement of its birth. This distinction is effectively equivalent to the one I introduced 9
earlier, in comparing the theories of visual perception of Gibson and Merleau-Ponty, 30
between vision as a mode of participation and as a mode of being. In neither case can 1
vision be radically separated from hearing. In the former, as I have shown, it is the co- 2
option of hearing by vision that turns merely contemplative seeing into active looking or 3
watching. In the latter, our inquiry into the convergences between what Merleau-Ponty 4
and Zuckerkandl have to say, respectively, about the painterly apprehension of light and 5
the musical apprehension of sound, showed that they were, in principle, all but indistin- 6
guishable. To illustrate the contrast between these two levels of vision, and the different 7
relations with hearing involved in each, I turn brieﬂy to another example.
Earlier, I told of how I know the cuckoo by its sound, and that only through being 9
seen does it come to be perceived as a thing that makes a sound. Among the Ojibwa, 40
indigenous hunters and trappers of the Canadian North, there is said to be a bird whose 1
sound, as it swoops across the sky, is a peal of thunder. Few have seen it, and those who 2
have are credited with exceptional powers of revelatory vision (Hallowell 1960: 32; see 3
Chapter Six, pp. 92–3, 99, for a more detailed account based on Hallowell’s ethnography). 4
What is the difference, then, between seeing a cuckoo and seeing a thunderbird? 5
Birdwatchers would surely be among the ﬁrst to recognise the importance of hearing to 6
active, exploratory vision. Listening out for birdsong and other sounds – the beating of 7
wings, or the rustling of leaves – the watcher’s sight homes in on the source from which 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 279 •

these sounds issue. Thus the organs of hearing constitute an auditory guidance system
that serves to orient vision towards its target. The enigma of the call, cuc-koo, emanating
from somewhere in the trees, is resolved as soon as we spot the bird that is producing it.
Naming the bird by the sound of its call, we regard it as just another individual of a
species, a living thing, whose presence and activity, moreover, are unaffected by the
watcher’s neutralising gaze.
The thunderbird, by contrast, is not a thing of any kind. Like the sound of thunder,
it is a phenomenon of experience. Though it is by thunder that the bird makes its presence heard, this sound is not produced by the thunderbird as the cuckoo produces its call.
For the thunder is the bird, in its sonic incarnation. Therefore to see it is not to resolve
the cosmic mystery of the sound, as though one could take a step back from one’s involvement in the world and say ‘Oh, so that’s where it’s coming from!’ One is rather drawn
further in. The bird presents itself to vision as an experience of light in just the same way
that it presents itself to hearing as an experience of sound. If sound, here, is intrinsic to
sight, this is not because it guides vision towards its object but because hearing is seeing.
As a speciﬁc form of the experience of light, the thunderbird is not set over against the
perceiver as an object of vision, but invades the perceiver’s consciousness, whence it is
generative of his or her own capacity to see. Much the same could be said of the experience of sunlight or moonlight, and indeed the sun and moon are apprehended by the
Ojibwa, along with the thunderbird, as beings of similar kind. They are, in short, not so
much visible things as manifestations of light.
Whereas in Western society such revelatory vision is the province of the painter, in
many non-Western societies it is closely associated with the activities of the shaman. The
metamorphosis of sound into light and vice versa – that is, hearing with the eyes and
seeing with the ears – is peculiarly characteristic of shamanic practice. A fascinating example
of this phenomenon has been documented among the Shipibo-Conibo Indians of eastern
Peru by Angelika Gebhart-Sayer (1985). In a ritual of healing the shaman, suitably
entranced, becomes conscious of an aura of radiant light that seems to ﬂoat towards him,
covering the surfaces on which it falls with elaborately reticulate, geometric designs. Where
they touch his lips, these luminescent designs are at once converted into melodious song.
The shaman sings along with his attendant spirits, and other villagers (who hear only the
shaman’s voice) join in, following his example. As the combined voices are wafted through
the air, they turn once more (though only in the shaman’s sight) into designs that penetrate the patient’s body and settle there, becoming ever clearer as the cure proceeds
(Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 162–4). The shaman’s songs, as Gebhart-Sayer puts it, ‘can be heard
in a visual way, . . . and the geometric designs may be seen acoustically’ (p. 170).
The designs themselves are of extraordinary intricacy, and were once recorded on cotton
fabric sheets bound into ‘books’ – leading to speculation that the Indians in this region
might have possessed a form of hieroglyphic writing. None of these books survive today,
but the villagers among whom Gebhart-Sayer carried out her ﬁeldwork recalled that an
old man from a nearby village, the son-in-law of a shaman, had kept a school exercise
book whose pages were ﬁlled with minute red and black patterns. One woman remembered how, as a child, she had managed secretly to get hold of the book and to copy four
of the designs before being caught and scolded by her grandmother. She claimed never
to have forgotten them, and was able to redraw them from memory (Gebhart-Sayer 1985:
155). One of her drawings is reproduced in Figure 14.2. It is not hard to see why European
observers should have been moved to compare such graphs to writing. It seems, on the
face of it, that the Shipibo-Conibo shaman apprehends the sounds of song in much the

Dwelling
Figure 14.2 One of the designs from the sacred book of a Shipibo-Conibo shaman, drawn from memory 30
by a woman from the village of Caimito in 1981.
Reproduced from A. Gebhart-Sayer, The Geometric Designs of the Shipibo-Conibo in Ritual Context, 2
Journal of Latin American Lore, 11: 2, 1985, p. 158.
same way that people in the literate West are supposed to apprehend the sounds of speech 6
– that is, as if they were looking at them. The geometric design lodged in the shaman’s 7
vision bears an uncanny resemblance to the Saussurian ‘sound-image’. And if the written 8
word is a transcription of the image from the mind onto paper, could not the same be 9
said of the graphic designs in the shaman’s ‘books’?
It is true that in a sense, the Indian shaman ‘sees’ songs, and that in another sense, 1
people raised in the Western tradition of print literacy ‘see’ spoken words. But the senses 2
of seeing adduced in these two instances could not be more different. This difference 3
corresponds, rather precisely, to the way in which Western thinkers have conventionally 4
distinguished vision from hearing. To recall Zuckerkandl’s formulation, it is the differ- 5
ence between the experience of a world ‘out there’, and that of a world coming 6
‘from-out-there-toward-me-and-through-me’ (Zuckerkandl 1956: 368). For the Westerner 7
to see words is to apprehend them as things, exterior objects to be grasped by way of the 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 281 •

images or representations that are formed of them in the mind. The shaman’s vision, by
contrast, is not a seeing of things but an experience of light, which is felt to be streaming
towards him and into him. As it does so it turns to sound. It is at the interface where
inﬂowing light is converted into outﬂowing sound that the designs are generated in his
perception. In the healing ritual, this conversion takes place upon the shaman’s lips. Thus
where the design is inscribed upon a surface, such as cotton fabric or paper, that surface
is transformed into an interface of the same kind as the lips. This immediately makes
sense of native claims to the effect that the surface, with its designs, speaks directly to the
person who ‘reads’ it (Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 154).
If this is indeed reading, then it is more akin to lip-reading than to the reading of the
written word. In the graphic traces on the page of the shaman’s book the voice is rendered
visible, just as it is, for the deaf lip-reader, in the movements of the speaker’s lips and
face. As the eye of the beholder follows the traces, his lips move to pronounce the corresponding sounds. This interpretation is corroborated by Peter Gow, in a study of reading
and writing among another native people of the Peruvian Amazon, the Piro. The study
focuses on the story of one man, Sangama, reputed to be the ‘ﬁrst Piro who could read’.
According to the story, told in the 1940s by his younger cousin Zumaeta, Sangama used
to pick up printed books and newspapers and read them, ‘his eyes following the letters
and his mouth moving’ (Gow 1990: 91). What he saw, however, were not words on
paper. He saw the paper itself as the red painted lips of a woman, speaking to him. And
he was convinced that this was what his European bosses saw when they read their newspapers: ‘When the white, our patron, sees a paper, he holds it up all day long, and she
[the paper] talks to him . . . The white does that every day’ (in Gow 1990: 92–3). If
Europeans were predisposed to treat Indian designs as an instance of writing, what could
be more natural than for the Indian, Sangama, to treat the printed texts of European
books and newspapers as instances of design? Sangama’s claim to be able to read, as Gow
shows, was based on his understanding of shamanic practice. In accord with this understanding, he approached the graphs on the page not as ‘representations’ or ‘symbols’ of
vocal sounds, but as the voice itself, shining forth as a pattern of light. It is probably
along these lines, too, that we should interpret Seeger’s observation that among the Suyá,
another Amazonian people, visual designs such as weaving patterns are seen acoustically.
On learning such a design, they say ‘It is in my ear’ (Seeger 1975: 214).

THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SENSES: A SECOND CRITIQUE
We can now pick up the threads of my critique of the anthropology of the senses, from
where I left off earlier in this chapter. The common ﬂaw, running through all the work
in this ﬁeld that I have reviewed so far, lies in its naturalisation of the properties of seeing,
hearing and other sensory modalities, leading to the mistaken belief that differences between
cultures in the ways people perceive the world around them may be attributed to the relative balance, in each, of a certain sense or senses over others. Thus it is supposed that
where vision predominates, people will apprehend the world in one way, and where hearing
predominates they will apprehend it in another. This approach is exempliﬁed in the work
of David Howes, who formulates the key question in the anthropology of the senses as
follows: ‘What is the world like to a culture that takes actuality in less visual, more auditory or olfactory, gustatory or tactile terms than those to which we are accustomed?’
(Howes 1991a: 6). By ‘we’ he means people of modern Western societies, steeped in a
hyper-visual aesthetic that turns the world into a spectacle laid out before the ‘detached

Dwelling
and observing eye’ (Romanyshyn 1989: 31). As an antidote to this kind of spectacular 1
vision, epitomised by the representational techniques of linear perspective, Howes invites 2
us to consider the graphic designs of the Shipibo-Conibo Indians, such as the one repro- 3
duced in Figure 14.2. Unlike the perspective drawing where everything is geometrically 4
ﬁxed in its proper place, these designs, he says, fairly pulsate (Howes 1991a: 5).
What is the explanation for this contrast? Why should the impact of Shipibo-Conibo 6
shamanic designs be so very different from that of the drawings of Renaissance draftsmen? 7
For Howes the answer lies in the ‘pluri-sensorial’ quality of the Shipibo-Conibo aesthetic, 8
as against the ‘almost exclusively visual’ aesthetic of the West. He seems to think that 9
vision is an inherently objectifying sense, that it naturally sets things off at a distance from 10
the observer, but that these distancing effects can be counteracted by adding liberal doses 1
of non-visual experience to the sensory mix. Thus in shamanic healing, the luminescent 2
designs mingle with songs and fragrances to bring about a cure, whereas in the viewing 3
of Renaissance art sounds and smells are screened out, leading to a stultiﬁcation of the 4
non-visual senses and a corresponding stepping up of ‘the natural power of the eye to 5
survey things from afar’ (Howes 1991a: 5–6). This is hardly a convincing argument, 6
however. For one thing, it is no more in the nature of the eye that it should function as 7
an instrument of detached speculation than that it should open the seer to experiences of 8
the most intimate revelation. Besides, it is simply not the case that people in Western 9
societies exercise their powers of sight in an environment sheltered from acoustic and 20
olfactory stimuli. Certainly, the sight of designs moves the Shipibo-Conibo shaman to 1
song, and the odours of selected plants form an important part of the ambience of the 2
healing ritual (Gebhart-Sayer 1985: 171–2). Yet who would deny the power of fragrance 3
and song, alongside visual images of sacred signiﬁcance, in the Catholic Mass? The aesthetic 4
experience of the Western church-goer is surely just as ‘pluri-sensorial’ as that of the partic- 5
ipant in a Shipibo-Conibo ceremony. Adding more sounds and smells will not make any 6
difference to the way he or she sees.
If the centrality that the Western tradition accords to the eye were due to nothing more 8
than an inattention to hearing, along with touch, taste and smell, then it could be easily 9
corrected. So far as hearing is concerned, we would have only to speak up in praise of sound 30
– which, in itself, would be no bad thing (Ihde 1976: 9). But as Ihde points out, the situation 1
is complicated by the fact that the reduction to vision, in the West, has been accompanied 2
by a second reduction, namely the reduction of vision. One cannot escape this reduction, 3
inherent in the rhetoric of visualism, simply by erecting an antivisualism in its place (Ihde 4
1976: 21, see Feld 1996: 96). For its source lies not in any bias towards the eye over other 5
organs of sense, but in what Johannes Fabian (1983: 123) calls a particular ‘cognitive style’ 6
– one that is likely to prejudice our understanding of all kinds of perceptual experience, 7
whether predominantly visual or not. It is in this style, rather than in anything to do with 8
the ratio of the senses, that we ﬁnd the answer to our question of how Renaissance draw- 9
ing differs in its impact from Shipibo-Conibo design. Incorporated into Western techniques 40
of depiction, it leads us to equate vision with visualisation – that is with the formation, in 1
the mind, of images or representations of the world. Incorporated into techniques of anthro- 2
pological analysis, however, this very same cognitive style is what leads us to regard the 3
process whereby people ‘make sense’ of their world as a cultural construction of reality.
At the heart of this approach is a representationalist theory of knowledge, according to 5
which people draw on the raw material of bodily sensation to build up an internal picture 6
of what the world ‘out there’ is like, on the basis of models or schemata received through 7
their education in a particular tradition. The theory rests on a fundamental distinction 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 283 •

between physical and cultural dimensions of perception, the former having to do with the
registration of sensations by the body and brain, the latter with the construction of representations in the mind. And despite vigorous protestations to the contrary (Howes 1991b:
169–70), the anthropology of the senses remains fully committed to this version of
Cartesian mind/body dualism. It turns out that it is not, after all, concerned with the
varieties of sensory experience, generated in the course of people’s practical, bodily engagement with the world around them, but with how this experience is ordered and made
meaningful within the concepts and categories of their culture. Moreover the same logic
that divides bodily sensation from mental representation, as a physical rather than a cultural
fact, also reiﬁes the senses as aspects of a universal human nature. In its movements and
responses, such as in looking, listening and touching, the body may furnish symbolic
resources for projects of cultural cognition, but it is not from these bodily processes themselves that culture springs. In short, to adopt a useful distinction from Csordas (1990: 40
fn. 2), the body with its various senses is taken to comprise the cognitive rather than the
existential ground of culture (see also Chapter Nine, pp. 169–70).
This position is exempliﬁed by Constance Classen, in her book Worlds of Sense (1993).
Her concern here is quite explicitly with the expressive rather than the practical signiﬁcance of sensory experience – that is, with the ways in which such experience may be
selected, metaphorically, to ‘stand for’ the central concepts and values of a culture. These
values and concepts add up to what she calls the sensory model. Thus Western culture, for
example, has fastened on the experience of vision to signify the value of objective knowledge. In another culture, with a different sensory model, core values might be expressed
through metaphors of hearing, or touch. This is what Classen means by the cultural
‘shaping’, or ‘conditioning’, of perception. ‘Sensory models’, as she insists, ‘are cultural
models, and sensory values are cultural values’. But just because here vision, or there touch
or hearing, have been singled out as vehicles for symbolic elaboration, this does not mean
that people will see, hear or touch any differently in consequence. Whether the mode of
engagement with the environment of greatest practical importance to people is looking,
listening, or touching, or some amalgam of these, is immaterial. What is important, so
far as the ‘cross-cultural exploration of sensory orders’ is concerned, is that the meanings
and understandings of the world gained through perceptual activity are expressed symbolically by way of metaphors drawn from one or another domain of sensory experience
(1993: 135–7, see also Classen 1997).
The same objectiﬁcation of the bodily experiences of looking, listening and touching,
and their conversion into metaphorical resources for the expression of extra-somatic,
cultural values, is also evident in the work of Howes. To his credit, Howes does recognise that human beings are not simply endowed by nature with ready-made powers of
perception, but that these powers are rather cultivated, like any skill, through practice and
training in an environment. For this reason they can vary from one individual to another,
even within a single society. The musician, for example, may develop a ﬁne sense of
hearing, and the chef an equally subtle sense of taste, even though both may belong – as
they do in the West – to a society that is inclined to describe the knowledge and judgement of each through metaphors of sight. We could even expect that these variations of
sensory skill would be manifested neurophysiologically in the differential development of
the cerebral cortex, such that were we to map the surface of the human body on a scale
that varies in proportion to the space that each region takes up in the cortex, the resulting
ﬁgure – known as the ‘sensory homunculus’ (see Figure 14.3) – would differ, say, from
the musician to the chef, reﬂecting their contrasting ‘sensory proﬁles’.25 For Howes,

Dwelling

however, these individual variations in 1
practical, perceptual ability are simply 2
irrelevant. He wants to show how the ‘map 3
of the senses’ differs, not between indi- 4
viduals, but between whole cultures or 5
societies (Howes 1991b: 168–9).
The effect of this move is to uphold a 7
notion of cultures as consisting in systems 8
of collective representations, over and 9
above the conditions and contexts of prac- 10
tical life within which people develop and 1
embody their own skills of action and 2
perception. Howes sets out his position on 3
the matter as follows:
Differences among individuals (by age, 6
Figure 14.3 The sensory homunculus, an illustration of how sex, occupation, or temperament) only 7
the surface of the body is represented in the somatosensory
take on meaning against the background 8
cortex. Larger areas of the cortex are devoted to the more sensiof the culture to which they belong. It is 9
tive parts of the body, such as the ﬁngers and lips.
the sense in which whole societies can be 20
classiﬁed as more tasteful than others, . . . or more aurally than visually minded, . . . 1
that is of primary interest to the ‘anthropology of the senses’.
(1991b: 168, original emphasis) 3
In an ‘aurally minded’ society, for example, people would express their ideas of know- 5
ledge or understanding by drawing on metaphors from the realm of acoustic experience. 6
Where we, in our ‘visually minded’ society, say ‘I see what you mean’, they might say ‘I 7
hear what you mean’. But this implies nothing about the relative development of their 8
powers of hearing or seeing. Thus Howes is fatally confused in supposing that what he 9
envisages as a ‘cultural map of the senses’ is merely a scaled-up version of the sensory 30
homunculus (1991b: 168–9). For as the level of analysis shifts from the individual to 1
society as a whole, so the domain that is ‘mapped’ is no longer of bodily but of concep- 2
tual space. Instead of tracing a set metonymical connections between the sense organs and 3
regions of the brain, the ‘cultural map’ establishes a system of metaphorical correspon- 4
dences between the material realm of sensory experience and the ideal realm of mental 5
representations. To grasp the logic of this, one has only to substitute a ‘plane of sense’ 6
for the ‘plane of sound’ in Saussure’s depiction of language (see Figure 14.1).
Like the earlier anthropology of the body (see Jackson 1989: 123; Chapter Nine, 8
pp. 169–70), the anthropology of the senses – as presented in the work of scholars such as 9
Howes and Classen – seems determined to leave lived, sensory experience behind in the 40
search for what it stands for, namely the incorporeal ‘ideas’ and ‘beliefs’ of a culture. Far 1
from helping us to understand how the whole body perceives, and how meaning 2
is generated within the contexts of its activities of looking, listening and so on, this approach 3
reduces the body to a locus of objectiﬁed and enumerable senses whose one and only role 4
is to carry the semantic load projected onto them by a collective, supersensory subject – 5
namely society – and whose balance or ratio may be calculated according to the proportion 6
of the load borne by each.26 Now in criticising this approach, I do not intend to down- 7
play the importance of examining the ways in which sensory metaphors are mobilised in 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 285 •

discourse. The fact that we say ‘I see what you mean’ is surely signiﬁcant. But in resorting
to this ﬁgure of speech, I am not expressing one thing, a concept of understanding, in terms
of another, a speciﬁc objectiﬁcation of the bodily sensation of sight. I am rather inviting
you to compare the experience of unison arising from our mutual engagement in verbal
dialogue to the experience, with which both you and I are familiar, of unison between
perceiver and perceived in the activity of watching or looking. But what if you were not
familiar with the latter experience? What if you were blind?
For Howes and Classen, whether or not you can actually see, or just how one’s sensory
capacities are practically deployed in activities of perception, is beside the point so far as
the sensory characterisation of a whole society is concerned. These are merely questions
of individual idiosyncrasy. Fieldwork among the ‘aurally minded’, in a society which has
elected to articulate its core values by means of metaphors of hearing, will not tell us
anything about the experience of the blind. But as Hull shows, in a meditation upon the
blind person’s response to the expresssion ‘I see what you mean’, matters are not that
simple. Should he refrain from using the expression? That, Hull remarks, would be absurd.
To opt out of the verbal conventions of one’s society would be to compound one disability
with another. Yet he cannot avoid the fact that the expression, which invites comparison
between his understanding and a form of perceptual experience which he does not share
with his interlocutors, does not have quite the same resonance for him as it has for them.
There is, he says, ‘a subtle shift in the whole character of communication between sighted
and blind people’ (Hull 1997: 26).
The lesson to be learned from this is that the verbal conventions of a society do not come
ready-made, nor are they simply superimposed upon the experience of its members so as to
‘make sense’ of it. Rather, they are continually being forged and reforged in the course
of people’s efforts to make themselves understood – that is to ‘make sense’ of themselves to
others. They do this by drawing comparisons between their own sensory practices and
experiences and those attributable to their fellows. I suppose you are familiar, as I am,
with the sound of thunder and the sight of lightning. I want you to understand what it felt
like when I stood by the railway tracks as the train passed by. ‘It thundered past me’, I say,
‘in a ﬂash’. But in having recourse to this metaphor, it is my experience that I want to convey
to you, not some conceptual prototype of a ‘passing train’ for which the auditory and visual
sensations of thunder and lightning happen to provide apt vehicles of symbolic expression.
Instead of abandoning the lived experience of individuals for the collective sensory
consciousness of society, it is surely to this creative interweaving of experience in discourse,
and to the ways in which the resulting discursive constructions in turn affect people’s perceptions of the world around them, that an anthropology of the senses should primarily
direct its attention. ‘Making sense’, in short, lies not in the subjection of human nature to
social conditioning (Classen 1993: 5), but in the involvement of whole persons with one
another, and with their environment, in the ongoing process of social life.

EPILOGUE
Martin Jay closes his monumental study of attitudes to vision in the recent history of
Western thought, above all in the Francophone tradition of scholarship, with the following
words:
The trip began by acknowledging . . . how ineluctible . . . is the modality of the visible,
not merely as perceptual experience, but also as cultural trope. It thus seemed fruitful

Dwelling
to follow the unfolding of a loose discourse about visuality, rather than to try to docu- 1
ment actual transformations in sensual practices.
(Jay 1993a: 587) 3
If there is one, principal conclusion to be drawn from my critique of the anthropology 5
of the senses, it is that any attempt to separate out the discourse surrounding vision from 6
the actual practices of looking, watching and seeing is unsustainable. The same, indeed, 7
goes for any other sensory modality. For what is discourse, if not a narrative interweaving 8
of experience born of practical, perceptual activity? The meanings to which it gives rise, 9
as I have shown, are not added ‘on top’ of lived, bodily experience, but lie in the ways 10
in which the strands of this experience are woven together. Historians of philosophy are 1
surely deceiving themselves in imagining that what has been thought and written in terms 2
of the senses can be neatly partitioned off from what has been lived and felt through them. 3
As Rée says, ‘the historical development of philosophy will never make much sense if it 4
is treated as a bloodless struggle between great books, with all the local ﬂavours, fragrances, 5
noises, temperatures, and colours of ordinary experience left out’ (1999: 383).
Indeed the conceit of the philosopher who would write a history of vision without regard 7
to how people actually see mirrors that of the physicist who would construct an optics that 8
makes no reference to the eye. Both, in effect, reproduce a dichotomy between mind and 9
nature, within which all knowledge takes the form of representations of reality. It is through 20
its assimilation to this framework that vision has come to be characterised, by admirers and 1
detractors alike, as having a natural propensity to turn whatever it encounters into objec- 2
tive ‘things’, to be grasped dispassionately from a distance (Levin 1988: 98). And having 3
been cast in this role, as either the hero or the villain of the drama of modernity, any ten- 4
dency towards imagining the world as a domain of exterior objects, to be seized by the senses 5
and analysed by the mind, is automatically construed as ‘visualism’ (Fabian 1983: 106–7). 6
It is as though vision had been compelled to take on the mantle of a particular cognitive 7
style, and all the virtues and vices that go with it. Naturally, critics of visualism have 8
concentrated on the vices (Jenks 1995). David Levin, for example, insists that vision is ‘the 9
most reifying of all our perceptual modalities’ (1988: 65),27 whose hegemony in modern 30
society can be linked to a will to power, technoscientiﬁc exploitation and political surveil- 1
lance. And while he admits that vision might have its more open, caring or gentle side, this 2
is to be found only on the margins, in the ‘play of shadows and reﬂections’ which reveal to 3
us that ‘we are, after all, phenomena of light’ (pp. 429, 431).
However, to make the charge against vision stick, as Stephen Houlgate shows, one 5
would have to show that seeing in actual practice, rather than as imagined by philosophers, 6
harboured within itself a tendency towards reiﬁcation (Houlgate 1993: 98–9). One would, 7
in other words, have to breach those artiﬁcial barriers that separate life from discourse, 8
allowing the realities of experience to intrude upon the hallowed turf of intellectual debate. 9
Anthropologists do this all the time, indeed the creative tension between theoretical spec- 40
ulation and lived experience is the very driving force of anthropological inquiry. Historians 1
of philosophy, on the other hand, are loath to mix the two, fearing that any move in that 2
direction would threaten the integrity of their own, essentially literary project. That is 3
why philosophical critics of visualism would never dream of asking the kind of question 4
with which a hard-nosed psychologist like Gibson, for example, begins his study of visual 5
perception: ‘How do we see the environment around us?’ (Gibson 1979: 1). For them, 6
the answer is already presupposed: to see is to reduce the environment to objects that are 7
to be grasped and appropriated as representations in the mind. The irony is that this 118

Vision, hearing and human movement • 287 •

answer, which critics of visualism are inclined to take for granted, has its source in the
very Cartesian epistemology that they seek to dethrone. What they offer, then, is not an
account of visual practice, but a critique of modernity dressed up as a critique of the hegemony of vision.
From the arguments and evidence presented in this chapter I hope to have shown that
the case against vision is comprehensively disproven. Indeed it should never have been
brought in the ﬁrst place. It is as unreasonable to blame vision for the ills of modernity
as it is to blame the actor for crimes committed, on stage, by the character whose part
he has the misfortune to be playing. With Houlgate (1993: 106, 111), I believe that the
responsibility for reducing the world to a realm of manipulable objects lies not with the
hegemony of vision but with a ‘certain narrow conception of thought’. And it is this
conception, too, that has led to the reduction of vision – that is, to its construal as a
sensory modality specialised in the appropriation and manipulation of an objectiﬁed world.
Through this reduction, as I have shown, vision came to be opposed to hearing. But there
is nothing natural or pre-ordained about this opposition: as often as it is reasserted
in academic books, it is belied by our own experience. It is my contention that by
exploring the common ground between vision and hearing, rather than by abandoning
the one for the other through a ‘turn to listening’ (Levin 1993: 3–4), we may be guided
not only towards a better appreciation of the richness and depth of visual experience, but
also towards a more generous, open-ended and participatory understanding of thought.

Dwelling

Part III

Skill

INTRODUCTION
In Western society we tend to think of art and technology as separate ﬁelds of endeavour,
and the study of each has been built on different foundations. The chapters in this part
suggest ways in which this separation might be overcome, by taking as a point of departure the skilled practices of socially situated agents. The ﬁrst three chapters represent
successive stages in my attempts to rethink the technical. It was in drafting the essay which
now appears as Chapter Fifteen that it dawned on me that the opposition between intellectual design and mechanical execution, in terms of which discussions of human and
animal toolmaking and tool-using have traditionally been couched, is in fact a phenomenon of Western modernity. Instead of assuming that technical operations are, by their
very nature, mechanical, I argue in this chapter that the machine is an outcome of the
historical development of the forces of production accompanying the growth of industrial
capitalism. In this development the relations between workers, tools and raw material have
been transformed, such as to replace subject-centred skills with objective principles of
mechanical functioning. It is to these principles that the modern concept of technology
refers. I show how the emergence of this concept was bound up with the rise of a mechanistic cosmology that separated design from construction, and reduced skilled making to
‘merely technical’ execution. Thus whereas in the artisan’s handling of his tools, the movements of their working points are guided by his own perception, the motions of the
machine, and any tools attached to it, are predetermined.
I conclude that the transition, in the history of human technicity, from the hand-tool
to the machine, is not from the simple to the complex, but is rather tantamount to the
withdrawal of the producer, in person, from the centre to the periphery of the productive process. It is a history, in other words, not of complexiﬁcation but of externalisation.
In Chapter Sixteen I consider how this conclusion might affect our understanding of the
technical capabilities of hunters and gatherers. Classically portrayed as people with the
simplest of technologies, it would be closer to the mark to say that hunter-gatherers have
no technology at all. That is to say, their lives are not bound, as is so often suggested,
to the operational requirements of a predetermined ‘techno-environmental system’. Rather,
the success of their way of life depends upon their possession of acutely sensitive skills of
perception and action. Yet as properties of persons, developed in the contexts of their
engagement with other persons or person-like agencies in the environment, technical skills
are themselves constituted within the matrix of social relations. Hence, insofar as they
involve the use of tools, these must be understood as links in chains of personal rather
than mechanical causation, serving to draw components of the environment into the sphere

Skill
of social relations rather than to emancipate human society from the constraints of nature. 1
Their purpose, in short, is not to control but to reveal.
Herein lay the second step in my rethinking of the technical. Having ﬁrst recognised 3
that hunting, for example, entails the practice of a skill rather than the operation of a 4
technology, the stage was set for my realisation that technical relations, in pre-industrial 5
societies, are embedded in social relations. It follows that the process of externalisation is 6
also a process of disembedding of the technical from the social, ultimately giving rise to 7
the modern, institutionalised separation of technology and society. Returning, however, 8
to the context of modern industrial society, I began to think that this picture of a progres- 9
sive evolution from skill to technology, in which the craftsman or artisan gradually gives 10
way to the machine operative, is too simple. In Chapter Seventeen I present an alterna- 1
tive to this evolutionary model, while at the same time linking the discussion of tools and 2
technicity to the issues of time and temporality adumbrated in Chapter Eleven. Following 3
a classic article by historian E. P. Thompson, the transition from pre-industrial to indus- 4
trial society has often been depicted as one in which a task-oriented time, grounded in 5
the rhythms of social life, has been replaced by the mechanical regimen of the clock. 6
Drawing on ethnographic studies of locomotive drivers I show, to the contrary, that task- 7
orientation remains central to the experience of work in industrial society, even though 8
the reality of that experience is systematically denied by the Western discourse of freedom 9
and necessity. Indeed, clock time is as alien to people of industrial as it is to those of pre- 20
industrial societies: the only difference is that the former have to deal with it. Likewise 1
the machine operative of industrial society remains a skilled practitioner: his skill, however, 2
lies in coping with machines rather than in their operation, and what it produces is not 3
commodities for the owner of capital but his own personal and social identity.
In Chapter Eighteen I return to a theme already introduced in Chapter Five, concerning 5
the difference between making things and growing things. There I was concerned to show 6
what it means to say that the herdsman’s animals, or the farmer’s crops, are grown rather 7
than made. I now take up the suggestion that artefacts, too, may be grown, and that in 8
this sense they are not so very different from living organisms. To illustrate the argument 9
I consider the weaving of a coiled basket. Conventionally, we regard weaving as a kind 30
of making. Could we not, however, reverse the argument, and regard making as a kind 1
of weaving? The effect of this reversal – which is precisely equivalent to our strategy, in 2
Part II, of regarding building as a kind of dwelling – would be to place the emphasis on 3
the skilled character of the form-generating process rather than upon the ﬁnal form of 4
the object produced. Evidently, a basket is not made through the forcible imposition upon 5
material substance of some pre-existent design, included among the collective representa- 6
tions of a cultural tradition, as the standard notion of artefacts as items of ‘material culture’ 7
would lead us to believe. For in weaving, a surface is built up rather than transformed, 8
and the spiral form of the basket emerges through the rhythmic repetition of movement 9
in the weaving process rather than originating in the maker’s mind. Indeed, despite their 40
different geometrical properties, there is a close parallel between the generation of spirals 1
in artefacts (such as the basket) and in living organisms (such as in the shell of a gastropod). 2
Just as the form of the organism is not preﬁgured genetically but arises through a process 3
