the placement of real encounters of hunting beyond the bounds of these intentional worlds,
in a separate domain designated as ‘natural’. And ﬁnally, in examining Aboriginal perceptions of the landscape, we found that by treating the perceived world as culturalised space,
the real-world landscape in which people live and move comes to be rendered as an indifferent and impersonal physical substrate, raw material for imaginative acts of world-making.
In short, a cultural constructionist approach to environmental perception, far from challenging the prevailing ecological models of hunting and gathering as foraging, actually
reinforces them, creating by exclusion a separate logical space for organism–environment
interactions wherein these models are appropriately applied. Those who oppose the designation of hunter-gatherers as foragers (for example, Bird-David 1992b: 38) often do so
on the grounds that it makes them seem just like non-human animals, without however
questioning the applicability of the foraging model to the animals themselves. I believe
that by paying attention to what hunter-gatherers are telling us, this is just what we should
be questioning, and in doing so laying down a challenge not only to cultural anthropology but to ecological science as well. We may admit that humans are, indeed, just like
other animals; not, however, insofar as they exist as organisms rather than persons, as
constituent entities in an objective world of nature presented as a spectacle to detached
scientiﬁc observation, but by virtue of their mutual involvement, as undivided centres of
action and awareness, within a continuous life process. In this process, the relations that
human beings have with one another form just one part of the total ﬁeld of relations
embracing all living things (Ingold 1990: 220).

Livelihood
There can, then, be no radical break between social and ecological relations; rather, the 1
former constitute a subset of the latter. What this suggests is the possibility of a new kind 2
of ecological anthropology, one that would take as its starting point the active, percep- 3
tual engagement of human beings with the constituents of their world – for it is only 4
from a position of such engagement that they can launch their imaginative speculations 5
concerning what the world is like. The ﬁrst step in the establishment of this ecological 6
anthropology would be to recognise that the relations with which it deals, between human 7
beings and their environments, are not conﬁned to a domain of ‘nature’, separate from, 8
and given independently of, the domain in which they lead their lives as persons. For 9
hunter-gatherers as for the rest of us, life is given in engagement, not in disengagement, 10
and in that very engagement the real world at once ceases to be ‘nature’ and is revealed 1
to us as an environment for people. Environments are constituted in life, not just in 2
thought, and it is only because we live in an environment that we can think at all.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Four

From trust to domination
An alternative history of human–animal relations

Just as humans have a history of their relations with animals, so also animals have a history
of their relations with humans. Only humans, however, construct narratives of this
history. Such narratives range from what we might regard as myths of totemic origin to
supposedly ‘scientiﬁc’ accounts of the origins of domestication. And however we might
choose to distinguish between myth and science, if indeed the distinction can be made
at all, they have in common that they tell us as much about how the narrators view their
own humanity as they do about their attitudes and relations to non-human animals. In
this chapter I aim to show that the story we tell in the West about the human exploitation and eventual domestication of animals is part of a more encompassing story about
how humans have risen above, and have sought to bring under control, a world of nature
that includes their own animality.
In this story, a special role is created for that category of human beings who have yet
to achieve such emancipation from the natural world: known in the past as wild men or
savages, they are now more politely designated as hunters and gatherers. I shall be looking
at how hunter-gatherers have come to be stereotypically portrayed, in Western anthropological accounts, as surviving exemplars of the ‘natural’ condition of mankind, and more
particularly at how this is reﬂected in the depiction of hunters’ relations towards their
animal prey. I shall then go on to contrast this depiction with the understandings that
people who actually live by hunting and gathering have of their relations with the environmental resources on which they depend: again, since our concern is speciﬁcally with
relations towards animals, I shall concentrate on hunting rather than gathering whilst
recognising, of course, that it is not a simple matter to determine where the former ends
and the latter begins (Ingold 1986a: 79–100).
Taking the hunter-gatherer understandings as a baseline, I shall attempt to construct
an alternative account of the transformation in human–animal relations that in Western
discourse comes under the rubric of domestication. My concern, in particular, will be to
contrast human–animal relations under a regime of hunting with those under a regime
of pastoralism. And a leading premise of my account will be that the domain in which
human persons are involved as social beings with one another cannot be rigidly set apart
from the domain of their involvement with non-human components of the environment.
Hence, any qualitative transformation in environmental relations is likely to be manifested
similarly both in the relationships that humans extend towards animals and in those that
obtain among themselves in society.

Livelihood
Let me begin, then, with the portrayal of the savage hunter-gatherer in Western litera- 3
ture.1 There are countless instances, especially in the writings of nineteenth-century 4
anthropologists, of pronouncements to the effect that hunter-gatherers ‘live like animals’ 5
or ‘live little better than animals’. Remarks of this kind carry force only in the context of 6
a belief that the proper destiny of human beings is to overcome the condition of animality 7
to which the life of all other creatures is conﬁned. Darwin, for example, found nothing 8
shocking, and much to marvel at, in the lives of non-human animals, yet his reaction on 9
encountering the native human inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, during his round-the- 10
world voyage in the Beagle, was one of utter disgust. ‘Viewing such men’, he conﬁded to 1
his journal, ‘one can hardly make oneself believe that they are fellow-creatures and inhab- 2
itants of the same world’ (Darwin 1860: 216). It was not just that their technical inferiority 3
left them completely at the mercy of their miserable environment; they also had no control 4
over their own impulses and desires, being by nature ﬁckle, excitable and violent. ‘I could 5
not have believed’, Darwin wrote, ‘how wide was the difference between savage and civilised 6
man; it is greater than between a wild and domesticated animal, inasmuch as in man 7
there is a greater power of improvement’ (1860: 208).
Now Darwin, like many of his contemporaries and followers, was in no doubt that 9
these human hunter-gatherers were innately inferior to modern Europeans. This is a view 20
that no longer commands acceptance today. If you wanted to compare, say, the innate 1
capacities of humans and chimpanzees, it should make no difference whatever whether 2
your human subjects were – say – Tasmanian Aboriginal hunter-gatherers or British airline 3
pilots.2 Nevertheless the belief persists in many quarters that even though hunter-gatherers 4
are fully human so far as their species membership is concerned, they continue to live 5
alongside other animals within a pristine world of nature. Indeed this idea of hunters and 6
gatherers, as the human inhabitants of such a world, is virtually given by deﬁnition. To 7
see why this should be so, we need to return to that very dichotomy which Darwin used 8
as the measure of the distance from savagery to civilisation, namely that between the wild 9
and the domestic.
Hunting and gathering, of course, are terms that denote particular kinds of activities. 1
How, then, are these activities to be deﬁned? The conventional answer is that hunters 2
and gatherers exploit ‘wild’ or non-domesticated resources, whereas farmers and herdsmen 3
exploit domesticated ones (see, for example, Ellen 1982: 128). The precise meaning of 4
domestication has remained a topic of scholarly debate for well over a century, and I shall 5
return in a moment to examine some of the suppositions that underlie this debate. Sufﬁce 6
it to say at this point that every one of the competing deﬁnitions introduces some notion 7
of human control over the growth and reproduction of animals and plants. Wild animals, 8
therefore, are animals out of control. Hunter-gatherers, it seems, are no more able to achieve 9
mastery over their environmental resources than they are to master their own internal 40
dispositions. They are depicted as though engaged, like other animal predators, in the 1
continual pursuit of fugitive prey, locked in a struggle for existence which – on account 2
of the poverty of their technology – is not yet won. Indeed the ubiquity, in Western 3
archaeo-zoological literature, of the metaphors of pursuit and capture is extremely striking: 4
hunters forever pursue, but it is capture that represents the decisive moment in the onset 5
of domestication (Ducos 1989: 28). Feral animals, in turn, are likened to convicts on the 6
loose. Notice how the relation between predator and prey is presented as an essentially 7
antagonistic one, pitting the endurance and cunning of the hunter against the capacities 118

HUMANITY, NATURE AND HUNTER-GATHERERS

From trust to domination

for escape and evasion of his quarry, each continually augmented by the other through
the ratchet mechanism of natural selection. The encounter, when it comes, is forcible and
violent.
Behind this opposition between the wild and the domestic there lies a much more
fundamental metaphysical dualism – one that seems peculiar to the discourse which, as a
convenient shorthand, we can call ‘Western’, to the extent of being its deﬁning feature.
This is the separation of two, mutually exclusive domains of being to which we attach
the labels ‘humanity’ and ‘nature’. All animals, according to the principle of this separation, belong wholly in the world of nature, such that the differences between species are
differences within nature. Humans, however, are the sole exception: they are different
because the essence of their humanity transcends nature; and by the same token, that part
of them that remains within nature presents itself as an undifferentiated amalgam of animal
characteristics (Ingold 1990: 210). Thus human beings, uniquely among animals, live a
two-tier existence, half-in nature and half-out, both as organisms with bodies and as persons
with minds. Now as Raymond Williams has pointed out:
to speak of man ‘intervening’ in natural processes is to suppose that he might ﬁnd
it possible not to do so, or decide not to do so. Nature has to be thought of . . . as
separate from man, before any question of intervention or command, and the method
and ethics of either, can arise.
(1972: 154)
It follows that when we speak of domestication as an intervention in nature, as we are
inclined to do, humanity’s transcendence over the natural world is already presupposed.
The same goes for the concept of production, classically deﬁned by Friedrich Engels as
‘the transforming reaction of man on nature’ (1934: 34). In order to produce, humans
have to achieve such command or mastery over nature as to be able to impress their own,
calculated designs upon the face of the earth. Thus ‘the further removed men are from
animals, . . . the more their effect on nature assumes the character of premeditated, planned
action directed towards deﬁnite preconceived ends’ (Engels 1934: 178). In other words,
to the extent that the human condition transcends nature, so nature herself comes to stand
as raw material to human projects of construction. In their realisation, these projects establish a division, within the material world, between the natural and the artiﬁcial, the pristine
and the man-made, nature-in-the-raw and nature transformed. Hunters and gatherers, as
the human inhabitants of a still pristine environment, cannot produce, for in the very act
of production the world is irreversibly altered from its natural state. The virgin forest, for
example, becomes a neatly ordered patchwork of cultivated ﬁelds, naturally occurring raw
materials are turned into tools and artefacts, and plants and animals are bred to forms
that better serve human purposes. The ﬁeld, the plough and the ox, though they all belong
to the physical world, have been engineered to designs that in every case had their origins
in the minds of men, in human acts of envisioning.
Since our present concern is with the history of human–animal relations, or rather with
a particular narration of that history, I want to stress the way ‘domestication’ ﬁgures in
this account as a feat of engineering, as though the ox were man-made, an artiﬁcial
construction put together like the plough. Of course the possibility of actually engineering
animals has opened up only very recently, and remains more in the realm of ﬁction than
fact. Darwin, to his credit, was at pains to stress that the power of humans to intervene
in natural processes is in reality rather limited: above all, humans cannot create novel

Livelihood
variants, but can only select retroactively from those that arise spontaneously. ‘It is an 1
error’, Darwin wrote, ‘to speak of man “tampering with nature” and causing variability’ 2
(1875: 2). Nevertheless, and despite Darwin’s careful distinction between intentional and 3
unintentional selection, the belief has persisted that the husbandry of animals, to qualify 4
at all as productive activity, must necessarily entail the deliberate, planned modiﬁcation 5
of the species involved. Now for pastoralists and farmers, who cannot exactly engineer the 6
forms or behaviours of their animals and plants, the nearest they can come to it is 7
‘controlled breeding’ (Bökonyi 1969: 219; 1989: 22). And so it is in the modiﬁcations 8
brought about by such breeding – or more technically by ‘artiﬁcial selection’ – that the 9
essence of domestication has been supposed to lie. Thus it came to be assumed that to 10
husband animals was, in essence, to breed them, both practices being lumped indiscrim- 1
inately under the concept of domestication. Instances where one appeared without the 2
other, such as the reindeer of northern Eurasian pastoralists which fall within the range 3
of variation of the ‘wild’ form (Ingold 1980: Ch. 2), were dismissed as unstable, transi- 4
tional states of ‘semi-domestication’.
The separation of humanity and nature implicit in the deﬁnition of domestication as 6
a process of artiﬁcial selection reappears in a competing deﬁnition which emphasises 7
its social rather than its biological aspect. ‘Domestication’, Ducos writes, ‘can be said to 8
exist when living animals are integrated as objects into the socio-economic organisation 9
of the human group’ (1978: 54; 1989; see also Ingold 1986a: 113, 168, 233). They 20
become a form of property which can be owned, inherited and exchanged. Property, 1
however, is conceived here as a relation between persons (subjects) in respect of things 2
(objects), or more generally, as a social appropriation of nature. Human beings, as social 3
persons, can own; animals, as natural objects, are only ownable. Thus the concept of 4
appropriation, just as the concept of intervention, sets humanity, the world of persons, 5
on a pedestal above the natural world of things. As I have remarked elsewhere, in connec- 6
tion with the concept of land tenure, ‘one cannot appropriate that within which one’s 7
being is wholly contained’ (Ingold 1986a: 135). It follows that hunters and gatherers, 8
characterised in Western discourse as exemplars of man in the state of nature, ‘at or near 9
the absolute zero of cultural development’ (ibid.), can no more own their resources than 30
they can intervene in their reproductive processes. The advent of domestication, in both 1
senses, had to await the breakthrough that liberated humanity from the shackles of nature, 2
a breakthrough that was marked equally by the emergence of institutions of law and 3
government, serving to shackle human nature to a social order.
Implied here is the evolutionary premise that the level of being that sets mankind above 5
the animal kingdom had to be achieved, in the course of an ascent from savagery to civil- 6
isation, just as it has to be achieved in the development of every individual from childhood 7
to maturity.3 That man’s rise to civilisation was conceived to have had its counterpart in 8
the domestication of nature is evident from the interchangeable use of the concept of 9
culture to denote both processes. Edward Tylor’s Primitive Culture of 1871, the ﬁrst 40
comprehensive study of human cultural variation, began with the words ‘Culture or 1
Civilisation’, by which he meant the cultivation of intellectual potentialities common to 2
humanity (1871, I: 1, see Ingold 1986b: 44). Darwin, for his part, introduced his equally 3
compendious study, The variation of animals and plants under domestication, with the 4
remark that ‘from a remote period, in all parts of the world, man has subjected many 5
animals and plants to domestication or culture’ (1875: 2). The cultivation of nature thus 6
appears as the logical corollary of man’s cultivation of himself, of his own powers of reason 7
and morality. As the former gave rise to modern domesticated breeds, so did the latter 118

From trust to domination

culminate in the emergence of that most perfect expression of the human condition,
namely civil society.
Let me conclude this section by returning to Darwin’s observation of the native inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego. When it came to his own kind, Darwin remained forever
convinced of the necessity and inevitability of progress towards civilisation, yet he was
unequivocal in his estimation that the Fuegians had not made it. In the spheres of religion, law, language and technology, they fell far short of a truly human level of existence.
Thus:
We have no reason to believe that they perform any sort of religious worship, . . . their
different tribes have no government or chief, . . . the language of these people, according
to our notions, scarcely deserves to be called articulate, . . . their [technical] skill in
some respects may be compared to the instinct of animals, for it is not improved by
experience.
(1860: 208, 217–18)
Biologically, Darwin seems to be saying, these people are certainly human beings, they
are of the same species as ourselves, yet in terms of their level of civilisation they are so
far from being human that their existence may justiﬁably be set on a par with that of the
animals. That being so, any inﬂuence that they may have had on the non-human animals
in their environment, and on which they depend, cannot differ in kind from the inﬂuence that such animals have had on one another.

HOW HUNTERS AND GATHERERS RELATE TO THEIR ENVIRONMENTS
So much for the construction of hunter-gatherers, as somewhat ambiguously human, within
the framework of concepts bequeathed by Western thought. Let me turn now to the
hunter-gatherers themselves. How do those peoples who derive a livelihood, at least in
part, from hunting and gathering, actually relate to the manifold constituents of their
environments?
Much of our information about the traditional ways of life of hunters and gatherers –
prior to their transformation or destruction in the wake of European invasion of their
lands – comes from the writings of early anthropologists, missionaries, traders and explorers.
They tended to depict hunter-gatherer life as a constant struggle for existence. Equipped
with the most rudimentary technology in a harsh environment, hunters and gatherers were
thought to have to devote every moment of their lives to the quest for food. In this
respect, Darwin’s description of the natives of Tierra del Fuego, apparently beset by hunger
and famine and without the wit to improve their miserable condition, was entirely typical.
More recent ethnographic studies, however, have shown this picture to be grossly exaggerated, if not entirely false. The new view of hunter-gatherer economy that emerged from
these studies was put forward in its most outspoken form in a now celebrated article by
Marshall Sahlins, originally presented to the 1966 Symposium on ‘Man the Hunter’, and
provocatively entitled ‘The original afﬂuent society’ (subsequently revised and published
in Sahlins 1972: Ch. 1).
Unlike the individual in modern Western society who always wants more than he can
get, however well-off he may be, the wants of the hunter-gatherer, Sahlins argued, are
very limited. What one has, one shares, and there is no point in accumulating material
property that would only be an impediment, given the demands of nomadic life. Moreover,

Livelihood
for hunter-gatherers who know how to get it, food is always abundant. There is no concept 1
of scarcity. Hunter-gatherers fulﬁl their limited needs easily and without having to expend 2
very much effort. Two points go along with this. The ﬁrst is an apparent lack of fore- 3
sight, or of concern for the future. Hunter-gatherers, in Sahlins’s depiction, take what 4
they can get opportunistically, as and when they want it. And what they have they consume. 5
The important thing, for them, is that food should ‘go round’ rather than that it should 6
‘last out’. Whatever food is available is distributed so that everyone has a share, even 7
though this means that there may be none left on the morrow. No attempt is made to 8
ration food out from one day to the next, as explorers do when they go on expeditions. 9
After all, for hunter-gatherers the ‘expedition’ is not time out from ordinary life but is 10
rather life itself, and this life rests on the assumption that more food will eventually be 1
found (Ingold 1986a: 211–12). The second point, which follows directly from this, is 2
that hunter-gatherers are unconcerned about the storage of food. Stored surpluses impede 3
mobility, and given that food is all around in the environment, hunter-gatherers treat the 4
environment itself as their storehouse, rather than setting aside supplies of harvested food 5
for the future.
One of the studies on which Sahlins drew for evidence in presenting this picture of 7
hunter-gatherer afﬂuence was that undertaken by James Woodburn, of the Hadza of 8
Tanzania. But Woodburn himself, in a series of recent articles, has sought to qualify this 9
view by distinguishing between different kinds of hunter-gatherer economy (Woodburn 20
1980, 1982, 1988). The major distinction is between what he calls immediate-return and 1
delayed-return economies. In an immediate-return system, people go out on most days to 2
obtain food, which they consume on the day they obtain it or very soon after. The equip- 3
ment they use is simple and quickly made without involving much time or effort, nor do 4
they invest any effort in looking after the resources they exploit. Moreover, there is little 5
or no storage of harvested food. This picture, according to Woodburn, is consistent with 6
the Hadza data, and also with Sahlins’s general picture of hunter-gatherer afﬂuence. In a 7
delayed-return system, by contrast, there may be a substantial advance investment of 8
labour in the construction of hunting or trapping facilities or (for ﬁshermen) boats and 9
nets. People might devote considerable effort to husbanding their resources, and there may 30
also be extensive storage.
The signiﬁcance of this distinction lies in what it suggests about peoples’ commitments 2
both to the non-human environment and to one another. Such commitments, Woodburn 3
thinks, are likely to be far greater in a delayed-return system than in an immediate-return 4
one. Obviously, people depend in an immediate-return system, just as much as they do 5
in a delayed-return one, both on the resources of their environment and on the support 6
of other people. But what is striking about the immediate-return system is the lack of 7
investment in, or commitment towards, particular resources or persons. An individual, say 8
in Hadza society, relies on other people in general, and on the resources of the environ- 9
ment in general, rather than building up relationships with particular people and particular 40
resources. As Woodburn puts it, ‘people are not dependent on speciﬁc other people, for 1
access to basic requirements’ (1982: 434).
The more, however, that we learn about hunter-gatherer perceptions of the environ- 3
ment, and of their relations with it, the more unlikely this picture of the immediate-return 4
system seems. If what Woodburn says about the Hadza is correct, then they appear more 5
as the exception than the rule. Over and over again we encounter the idea that the environ- 6
ment, far from being seen as a passive container for resources that are there in abundance 7
for the taking, is saturated with personal powers of one kind or another. It is alive.4 And 118

From trust to domination

hunter-gatherers, if they are to survive and prosper, have to maintain relationships with
these powers, just as they must maintain relationships with other human persons. In many
societies, this is expressed by the idea that people have to look after or care for the country
in which they live, by ensuring that proper relationships are maintained. This means
treating the country, and the animals and plants that dwell in it, with due consideration
and respect, doing all one can to minimise damage and disturbance.
Let me present one example, which will serve to direct our attention from the general
context of hunters’ and gatherers’ relations with the environment towards the more speciﬁc
context of the hunters’ relations with their animal prey. The Cree of northeastern Canada,
as we saw in Chapter One (pp. 13–14), suppose that animals intentionally present themselves to the hunter to be killed. The hunter consumes the meat, but the soul of the
animal is released to be reclothed with ﬂesh. Hunting here, as among many northern
peoples, is conceived as a rite of regeneration: consumption follows killing as birth follows
intercourse, and both acts are integral to the reproductive cycles, respectively, of animals
and humans. However, animals will not return to hunters who have treated them badly
in the past. One treats an animal badly by failing to observe the proper, respectful procedures in the processes of butchering, consumption and disposal of the bones, or by causing
undue pain and suffering to the animal in killing it. Above all, animals are offended by
unnecessary killing: that is, by killing as an end in itself rather than to satisfy genuine
consumption needs. They are offended, too, if the meat is not properly shared around all
those in the community who need it. Thus, meat and other usable products should on
no account be wasted (see Feit 1973, Tanner 1979, Brightman 1993, cf. Ingold 1986a:
246–7).
This emphasis on the careful and prudent use of resources, and on the avoidance of
waste, seems a far cry from the image, presented by Sahlins, of original afﬂuence, of people
opportunistically collecting whatever is on offer. Moreover the idea that success in present
hunting depends on personal relationships built up and maintained with animal powers
through a history of previous hunts, quite contradicts Woodburn’s notion of immediate
returns. For in the Cree conception, the meat that the hunter obtains now is a return on
the investment of attention he put in on a previous occasion – when hunting the same
animal or its conspeciﬁcs – by observing the proper procedures. Indeed it could be argued
that in their concern to look after their environments, and to use them carefully, huntergatherers practise a conscious policy of conservation. They could, in other words, be said
to manage their resources, as has actually been suggested in one recent collection of anthropological studies of North American and Australian hunter-gatherers, which was pointedly
entitled Resource Managers (Williams and Hunn 1982).
Yet the environmental conservation practised by hunter-gatherers, if such it is, differs
fundamentally from the so-called ‘scientiﬁc’ conservation advocated by Western wildlife
protection agencies. Scientiﬁc conservation is ﬁrmly rooted in the doctrine, which I have
already spelled out, that the world of nature is separate from, and subordinate to, the
world of humanity. One corollary of this doctrine is the idea that merely by virtue of
inhabiting an environment, humans – or at least civilised humans – are bound to transform it, to alter it from its ‘natural’ state. As a result, we tend to think that the only
environments that still exist in a genuinely natural condition are those that remain beyond
the bounds of human civilisation, as in the dictionary deﬁnition of a wilderness: ‘A tract
of land or a region . . . uncultivated or uninhabited by human beings’. Likewise the wild
animal is one that lives an authentically natural life, untainted by human contact. It will,
of course, have contacts with animals of many other, non-human species, but whereas

Livelihood
these latter contacts are supposed to reveal its true nature, any contact with human beings 1
is supposed to render the animal ‘unnatural’, and therefore unﬁt as an object of properly 2
scientiﬁc inquiry. Juliet Clutton-Brock (1994) has drawn our attention to the way in 3
which, by according to domestic animals a second-class status in this regard, the investi- 4
gation of their behaviour has been impeded. Domestic animals, it seems, are to be exploited 5
but not studied; wild animals to be studied but not exploited.
Scientiﬁc conservation operates, then, by sealing off portions of wilderness and their 7
animal inhabitants, and by restricting or banning human intervention. This is like putting 8
a ‘do not touch’ notice in front of a museum exhibit: we can observe, but only from a 9
distance, one that excludes direct participation or active ‘hands-on’ involvement. It is 10
consequently no accident that regions designated as wilderness, and that have been brought 1
under externally imposed regulations of conservation, are very often regions inhabited by 2
hunters and gatherers. Allegedly lacking the capability to control and transform nature, 3
they alone are supposed to occupy a still unmodiﬁed, ‘pristine’ environment. The pres- 4
ence of indigenous hunter-gatherers in regions designated for conservation has often proved 5
acutely embarrassing for the conservationists. For there is no way in which native people 6
can be accommodated within schemes of scientiﬁc conservation except as parts of the 7
wildlife, that is as constituents of the nature that is to be conserved. They cannot them- 8
selves be conservers, because the principles and practice of scientiﬁc conservation enjoin 9
a degree of detachment which is incompatible with the kind of involvement with the 20
environment that is essential to hunting and gathering as a way of life.
The sense in which hunters and gatherers see themselves as conservers or custodians of 2
their environments should not, then, be confused with the Western scientiﬁc idea of 3
conservation. This latter, as I have shown, is rooted in the assumption that humans – as 4
controllers of the natural world – bear full responsibility for the survival or extinction of 5
wildlife species. For hunter-gatherers this responsibility is inverted. In the last resort, it is 6
those powers that animate the environment that are responsible for the survival or extinc- 7
tion of humans. Summarising the view of the Koyukon of Alaska, Richard Nelson writes: 8
The proper role of humankind is to serve a dominant nature. The natural universe is 30
nearly omnipotent, and only through acts of respect and propitiation is the well-being 1
of humans ensured . . . In the Koyukon world, human existence depends on a morally 2
based relationship with the overarching powers of nature. Humanity acts at the behest 3
of the environment. The Koyukon must move with the forces of their surroundings, 4
not attempting to control, master or fundamentally alter them. They do not confront 5
nature, they yield to it.
(Nelson 1983: 240) 7
For the Koyukon, as for other hunting and gathering peoples, there are not two separate 9
worlds, of humanity and nature. There is one world, and human beings form a rather 40
small and insigniﬁcant part of it.
Given this view of the world, everything depends on maintaining a proper balance in 2
one’s relationships with its manifold powers. Thus, rather than saying that hunters and 3
gatherers exploit their environments, it might be better to say that they aim to keep up 4
a dialogue with it. I shall turn in the next section to what this means in terms of hunters’ 5
relations with animals. At this juncture, the point I wish to stress is that for hunters and 6
gatherers, there is no incompatibility between conservation and participation. It is through a 7
direct engagement with the constituents of the environment, not through a detached, 118

From trust to domination

hands-off approach, that hunters and gatherers look after it. Indeed, caring for an environment is like caring for people: it requires a deep, personal and affectionate involvement,
an involvement not just of mind or body but of one’s entire, undivided being. We do
not feel forced in the social world – for example in the ﬁeld of our relations with kin –
to choose between either exploiting others for personal proﬁt or avoiding all direct contact.
Yet in the context of relations with animals, this is precisely the choice that is forced on
us by the conventional dichotomy between wildness and domestication. It is time now to
suggest some alternative terms.

FROM TRUST TO DOMINATION
Trust
It should by now be clear that the characterisation of hunting as the human pursuit of
animals that are ‘wild’, though it speaks volumes about our Western view of hunters,
is quite inappropriate when it comes to the hunters’ view of animals. For the animals are
not regarded as strange, alien beings from another world, but as participants in the same
world to which the people also belong. They are not, moreover, conceived to be bent on
escape, brought down only by the hunter’s superior cunning, speed or force. To the
contrary, a hunt that is successfully consummated with a kill is taken as proof of amicable
relations between the hunter and the animal that has willingly allowed itself to be taken.
Hunters are well-known for their abhorrence of violence in the context of human relations,5 and the same goes for their relations with animals: the encounter, at the moment
of the kill, is – to them – essentially non-violent. And so, too, hunting is not a failed
enterprise, as it is so often depicted in the West: a failure marked by the technical inability
to assert or maintain control; pursuit that is not ultimately crowned by capture. It is
rather a highly successful attempt to draw the animals in the hunters’ environment into
the familiar ambit of social being, and to establish a working basis for mutuality and
coexistence.
For hunters and gatherers, animals and plants in the environment play a nurturing role,
as do human caregivers. This is the kind of understanding that Nurit Bird-David seeks
to convey by means of her notion, introduced in the previous chapter (pp. 43–4), of
‘the giving environment’ (Bird-David 1990). Focusing on peoples of the tropical forest
for whom gathering is rather more important than hunting, Bird-David suggests that
hunters and gatherers model their relationships with life-giving agencies in their environments on the institution of sharing, which is the foundation for interpersonal relations
within the human community. Thus in their nurturing capacity, these non-human
agencies ‘share’ with you, just as you share what you receive from the environment with
other people. Both movements, from non-human to human beings and among the
latter themselves, are seen to constitute a single ‘cosmic economy of sharing’ (Bird-David
1992a). However, while people may indeed draw an analogy between the relations with
animals and plants activated in hunting and gathering, and the relations among humans
activated in sharing, it seems to me that these two sets of relations are, at a more fundamental level of principle, not just analogous but identical. This principle which, I maintain,
inheres equally in the activities of sharing and in those of hunting and gathering, is that
of trust.
The essence of trust is a peculiar combination of autonomy and dependency. To trust
someone is to act with that person in mind, in the hope and expectation that she will do

Livelihood
likewise – responding in ways favourable to you – so long as you do nothing to curb her 1
autonomy to act otherwise. Although you depend on a favourable response, that response 2
comes entirely on the initiative and volition of the other party. Any attempt to impose a 3
response, to lay down conditions or obligations that the other is bound to follow, would 4
represent a betrayal of trust and a negation of the relationship. For example, if I force 5
my friend to assist me in my enterprise, this is tantamount to a declaration that I do not 6
trust him to assist me of his own accord, and therefore that I no longer count him as a 7
friend at all. Offended by my inﬁdelity, his likely response will be to withdraw his favour 8
towards me. Trust, therefore, always involves an element of risk – the risk that the other 9
on whose actions I depend, but which I cannot in any way control, may act contrary to 10
my expectations (see Gambetta 1988, for some excellent discussions of this point).
Now this combination of autonomy and dependency is, I believe, the essence of what 2
is commonly reported in ethnographic studies of hunting and gathering societies under 3
the rubric of sharing. People in hunter-gatherer communities do depend on one another 4
for food and for a variety of everyday services, though these exchanges may be the surface 5
expression of a deeper concern with companionship, characterised by Tom Gibson as ‘shared 6
activity in itself ’ (Gibson 1985: 393). Noteworthy in Gibson’s account is the connection 7
he draws between companionship and autonomy: ‘a relationship based on companionship 8
is voluntary, freely terminable and involves the preservation of the personal autonomy of 9
both parties’ (1985: 392). He contrasts this kind of relationship with the kind that is 20
involuntary, non-terminable and places the parties under obligation (see Ingold 1986a: 1
116–17). Bird-David (1990) draws essentially the same contrast under the terms ‘giving’ 2
and ‘reciprocating’, referring respectively to the relationships that hunter-gatherers and 3
cultivators see themselves as having with the environment of the tropical forest. Clearly, 4
both hunter-gatherers and cultivators depend on their environments. But whereas for culti- 5
vators this dependency is framed within a structure of reciprocal obligation, for 6
hunter-gatherers it rests on the recognition of personal autonomy. In my terms, the contrast 7
is between relationships based on trust and those based on domination. I shall turn to the 8
latter in a moment, but ﬁrst I should like to specify more precisely the meaning of trust 9
in the context of relations between hunters and their animal prey.
I shall do so by drawing a further, analytic distinction between trust and conﬁdence 1
(following Luhmann 1988). Both terms are commonly and casually used in characterisa- 2
tions of hunter-gatherer attitudes towards the environment. Sahlins, for example, uses 3
the terms freely and interchangeably in his account of the ‘pristine afﬂuence’ of hunter- 4
gatherer economic arrangements, marked, he claims, by
a trust in the abundance of nature’s resources rather than despair at the inadequacy of 7
human means. My point is that otherwise curious heathen devices became under- 8
standable by the people’s conﬁdence, a conﬁdence which is the reasonable human 9
attribute of a generally successful economy.
(1972: 29, my emphases) 1
Now Sahlins writes as though, for hunters and gatherers, the environment existed as a 3
world of nature ‘out there’, quite separate from the world of human society and its inter- 4
ests. In this he uncritically projects onto the hunter-gatherer way of thinking a 5
nature/society dichotomy which, as we have seen, is of Western provenance. According 6
to this view, nature – which the people make no attempt to control or modify – is seen 7
to go its own way, subject to ups and downs regardless of human actions or dispositions 118

From trust to domination

towards it. If it yields, or fails to yield, this is not because it has the hunter-gatherer in
mind. And the hunter-gatherer has to assume that it will yield, since life itself is predicated on this expectation. The alternative, in Luhmann’s words, ‘is to withdraw
expectations without having anything with which to replace them’ (1988: 97).
Now all of us have to make these kinds of assumptions all the time: they are what
enable us to get by in a world full of unforeseen and unconsidered dangers. The world
may stop revolving or be knocked off course by a meteoric collision, but we have to
assume that it will not, and for the most part the possibility never enters our heads.
Likewise, according to Sahlins, hunter-gatherers assume the providence of nature and do
not consider the possibility of starvation. It is this attitude that I denote by the concept
of conﬁdence. And the crucial aspect of conﬁdence to which I wish to draw attention is
that it presupposes no engagement, no active involvement on our part, with the potential sources of danger in the world, so that when trouble does strike it is attributed to
forces external to the ﬁeld of our own relationships, forces which just happen to set the
‘outside world’, under its own momentum, on a collision course with our expectations.
But with the attitude that I denote by the concept of trust, it is quite otherwise. Trust
presupposes an active, prior engagement with the agencies and entities of the environment on which we depend; it is an inherent quality of our relationships towards them.
And my contention is that in this strict sense, trust rather than conﬁdence characterises
the attitude of hunters and gatherers towards their non-human environment, just as it
characterises their attitude towards one another.
The animals in the environment of the hunter do not simply go their own way, but
are supposed to act with the hunter in mind. They are not just ‘there’ for the hunter to
ﬁnd and take as he will; rather they present themselves to him. The encounter, then, is a
moment in the unfolding of a continuing – even lifelong – relationship between the hunter
and the animal kind (of which every particular individual encountered is a speciﬁc
instance). The hunter hopes that by being good to animals, they in turn will be good to
him.6 But by the same token, the animals have the power to withhold if any attempt is
made to coerce what they are not, of their own volition, prepared to provide. For coercion, the attempt to extract by force, represents a betrayal of the trust that underwrites
the willingness to give. Animals thus maltreated will desert the hunter, or even cause him
ill fortune. This is the reason why, as I mentioned above, the encounter between hunter
and prey is conceived as basically non-violent. It is also the reason why hunters aim to
take only what is revealed to them and do not press for more. To describe this orientation as ‘opportunism’ is misleading, for it is not a matter of taking what you can get but
of accepting what is given. The same applies in the context of intra-community sharing:
one may indeed ask for things that others have, but not for more. ‘Practically, would-berecipients request what they see in the possession of others and do not request them to
produce what they do not appear to have’ (Bird-David 1992a: 30).
By regarding the relation between hunters and their prey as one of trust, we can also
resolve the problem inherent in Woodburn’s distinction between immediate-return and
delayed-return systems. Woodburn was concerned to discover the basis for the pronounced
emphasis on personal autonomy in many hunter-gatherer societies, and he put it down
to the lack of speciﬁc commitments and enduring relationships in an immediate-return
economy. Yet we ﬁnd that at least among hunters, people are enmeshed in highly particularistic and intimate ties with both human and non-human others. Contrary to
expectations, however, their sense of autonomy is not compromised. Woodburn’s error,
as we can now see, was to assume that dependency on speciﬁc other people entails loss

Livelihood
of autonomy. This is not necessarily so, for it is precisely in relations of trust that autonomy 1
is retained despite dependency. But trust, as I have noted, inevitably entails risk, and this 2
is as much the case in hunters’ relations with animals as it is within the human commu- 3
nity. Thus, of the ‘other-than-human’ persons that inhabit the world of the Ojibwa, 4
Hallowell observes – taking up the perspective of an Ojibwa subject – that
I cannot always predict exactly how they will act, although most of the time their behav- 7
iour meets my expectations . . . They may be friendly and help me when I need them 8
but, at the same time, I have to be prepared for hostile acts, too. I must be cautious 9
in my relations with other ‘persons’ because appearances may be deceptive.
(1960: 43) 1
That is why hunters attach such enormous importance to knowledge and its acquisition. 3
This is not knowledge in the natural scientiﬁc sense, of things and how they work. It is 4
rather as we would speak of it in relation to persons: to ‘know’ someone is to be in a 5
position to approach him directly with a fair expectation of the likely response, to be 6
familiar with that person’s past history and sensible to his tastes, moods and idiosyncrasies. 7
You get to know other human persons by sharing with them, that is by experiencing their 8
companionship. And if you are a hunter, you get to know animals by hunting. As I shall 9
show in Chapter Sixteen, the weapons of the hunter, far from being instruments of control 20
or manipulation, serve this purpose of acquiring knowledge. Through them, the hunter 1
does not transform the world, rather the world opens itself up to him. Like words, the 2
hunter’s tools are caught up in chains of personal (not mechanical) causation, serving to 3
reveal the otherwise hidden intentions of non-human agents in a world where, recalling 4
Feit’s remark concerning the Cree, it is ‘always appropriate to ask “who did it?” and 5
“why?” rather than “how does that work?”’ (1973: 116). In short, the hunter does not 6
seek, and fail to achieve, control over animals; he seeks revelation. Robin Ridington has 7
put the point concisely in his observation that hunter-gatherers, ‘instead of attempting to 8
control nature . . . concentrate on controlling their relationship with it’ (1982: 471).
Domination
It is quite otherwise with pastoralists.7 Like hunters, they depend on animals, and their 3
relationship with these animals may similarly be characterised by a quality of attentive, 4
and at times even benevolent regard. Herdsmen do indeed care for their animals, but it 5
is care of a quite different kind from that extended by hunters. For one thing, the animals 6
are presumed to lack the capacity to reciprocate. In the world of the hunter, animals, too, 7
are supposed to care, to the extent of laying down their lives for humans by allowing 8
themselves to be taken. They retain, however, full control over their own destiny. Under 9
pastoralism, that control has been relinquished to humans. It is the herdsman who takes 40
life-or-death decisions concerning what are now ‘his’ animals, and who controls every 1
other aspect of their welfare, acting as he does as both protector, guardian and execu- 2
tioner. He sacriﬁces them; they do not sacriﬁce themselves to him (Ingold 1986a: 272–3). 3
They are cared for, but they are not themselves empowered to care. Like dependants in 4
the household of a patriarch, their status is that of jural minors, subject to the authority 5
of their human master (Ingold 1980: 96). In short, the relationship of pastoral care, quite 6
unlike that of the hunter towards animals, is founded on a principle not of trust but of 7
domination.8

From trust to domination

These principles of relationship are mutually exclusive: to secure the compliance of the
other by imposing one’s will, whether by force or by more subtle forms of manipulation,
is – as we have seen – an abrogation of trust, entailing as it does the denial rather than
the recognition of the autonomy of the other on whom one depends. The very means by
which the herdsman aims to secure access to animals would, for the hunter, involve a
betrayal which would have the opposite effect of causing them to desert. The instruments
of herding, quite unlike those of hunting, are of control rather than revelation: they include
the whip, spur, harness and hobble, all of them designed either to restrict or to induce
movement through the inﬂiction of physical force, and sometimes acute pain (I return to
these in Chapter Fifteen, pp. 306–8). Should we conclude, then, that while the concept
of wildness is clearly inapplicable to describe the hunter’s perception of animals with
whom he enjoys a relation of trust and familiarity, the opposite concept of domestication
– with its connotations of mastery and control – is perfectly apt to describe the pastoralist’s
relation with the animals in his herd?
The answer depends on precisely how we understand the nature of this mastery and
control, and this, in turn, hinges on the signiﬁcance we attach to the notion of physical
force. Consider the slave-driver, whip in hand, compelling his slaves to toil through the
brute inﬂiction of severe pain. Clearly the autonomy of the slave in this situation to act
according to his own volition is very seriously compromised. Does this mean that the
slave responds in a purely mechanical way to the stroke of the whip? Far from it. For
when we speak of the application of force in this kind of situation, we impute to the
recipient powers of resistance – powers which the inﬂiction of pain is speciﬁcally intended
to overwhelm. That is to say, the use of force is predicated on the assumption that the
slave is a being with the capacity to act and suffer, and in that sense a person. And when
we say that the master causes the slave to work, the causation is personal, not mechanical: it lies in the social relation between master and slave, which is clearly one of
domination. In fact, the original connotation of ‘force’ was precisely that of action intentionally directed against the resistance of another sentient being, and the metaphorical
extension from the domain of interpersonal relations to that of the movements of inanimate and insentient things, like planets or billiard balls, is both relatively recent and highly
specialised (see Walter 1969: 40 for a discussion of this point).
Now if by the notion of domestication is implied a kind of mastery and control similar
to that entailed in slavery, then this notion might indeed be applicable to describe the
pastoralist’s relation with the animals in his herd. Richard Tapper argues, along precisely
these lines, that where ‘individual animals are taken out of their natural species community and subjugated to provide labour for the human production process, . . . their feeding
under the control of their human masters’, one may reasonably describe the ‘human–
animal relations of production’ thereby established as ‘slave-based’ (Tapper 1988: 52–3).
In those societies of the ancient world in which slavery was the dominant relation of
production, the parallel between the domestic animal and the slave appears to have been
self-evident. The Romans, for example, classiﬁed slaves and cattle, respectively, as instrumentum genus vocale and instrumentum genus semi-vocale (Tapper 1988: 59 fn. 3), while
Vedic texts, according to Benveniste (1969: 48), have a term pasu for animate possessions
that admits two varieties, quadrupedal (referring to domestic animals) and bipedal (referring to human slaves). Perhaps the most extraordinary piece of evidence comes from
the work of the Japanese scholar, K. Maekawa, on the temple economy of Sumeria in
the third millennium BC. From his analysis of Sumerian texts, Maekawa shows that the
temple-state of Lagash maintained one population of captured female slaves to work as

Livelihood
weavers, and another population of cattle for the supply of milk. In each population, 1
female offspring were retained to secure its continuation, while male offspring were 2
castrated and put to work: the men in hauling boats up-river, the oxen in pulling the 3
plough (cited in Tani 1996: 404–5).
In a remarkable extension of the argument for the parallel between the domestic animal 5
and the slave, Yutaka Tani has drawn attention to a technique for managing pastoral herds 6
of sheep or goats that is widely distributed in the Mediterranean and Middle East. A 7
selected male animal is castrated and trained to respond to the vocal commands of the 8
shepherd. On rejoining the herd, this animal, known as a ‘guide-whether’, acts as an inter- 9
mediary between the shepherd (the dominator) and his ﬂock (the dominated). For while 10
obedient to its master, the whether also sets an example, in its behaviour, which is followed 1
by all the other animals in the ﬂock. Now barring a small number of males kept for 2
breeding purposes, most of these animals are female. The position of the whether, a 3
castrated male charged with the guidance of a herd of females, is thus functionally anal- 4
ogous to the position of the human eunuch, in the court of the emperor, charged with 5
guarding the females of his harem. The reliability and trustworthiness of the eunuch, like 6
that of the guide-whether, derives from his exclusion from the reproductive process. But 7
despite his high rank, the eunuch remains a slave, wholly dependent on imperial favour 8
for his position. Noting the similarity between the techniques of management employed, 9
respectively, by the shepherd to control his ﬂock and by the emperor to control his harem, 20
Tani wonders whether the latter might be derived from the former (or, less probably, vice 1
versa). The idea may seem far-fetched, and the historical evidence, as Tani admits, is 2
inconclusive. Yet it seems more than coincidental that the technique of using the guide- 3
whether is distributed ‘in the same areas of the Mediterranean and Middle East as where 4
the political institution of the eunuch ﬁrst appeared and from where it diffused’ (Tani 5
1996: 388–91, 403).
However obvious the parallel may have seemed, to people of the ancient world, between 7
the domination and control of slaves and of pastoral herds, it is an idea that is deeply 8
alien to modern Western thought. For viewing both kinds of relationship, with slaves and 9
with livestock, through the lens of a dichotomy between humanity and nature, we are 30
convinced that the master–slave relationship, occurring between human beings, exists 1
on the level of society, whereas domestication amounts to a social appropriation of – or 2
intervention in – the separate domain of nature, within which animal existence is fully 3
contained. In a revealing comment, Marx argued that relations of domination, such as 4
obtain between master and slave, cannot obtain between humans and domestic animals, 5
because the latter lack the power of intentional agency: ‘Beings without will, such as 6
animals, may indeed render services, but their owner is not thereby lord and master’ (1964: 7
102; see Ingold 1980: 88). Domination and domestication are here distinguished, on 8
the premise that the one is a form of social control exercised over subject-persons, and 9
the other a form of mechanical control exercised over object-things. But this is not, to 40
my knowledge, a distinction that any pastoral people make themselves. They may rank 1
animals hierarchically below humans, as in ancient society slaves were ranked hierarchi- 2
cally below freemen, but they are not assigned to a separate domain of being. And although 3
the relations pastoralists establish with animals are quite different from those established 4
by hunters, they rest, at a more fundamental level, on the same premise, namely that 5
animals are, like human beings, endowed with powers of sentience and autonomous action 6
which have either to be respected, as in hunting, or overcome through superior force, as 7
in pastoralism.

From trust to domination

To sum up: my contention is that the transition in human–animal relations that in
Western scholarly literature is described as the domestication of creatures that were once
wild, should rather be described as a transition from trust to domination. I have suggested
that the negative stereotype of the hunter’s relation to his prey, marked by the absence
of control, be replaced by a more positive characterisation as a certain mode of engagement. But I have also shown that the emergence of pastoralism does not depend, as
orthodox deﬁnitions of domestication imply, upon humans’ achieving a state of being that
takes them above and beyond the world in which all other creatures live. Thus the transition from trust to domination is not to be understood as a movement from engagement
to disengagement, from a situation where humans and animals are co-participants in the
same world to one in which they hive off into their own separate worlds of society and
nature. Quite to the contrary, the transition involves a change in the terms of engagement.
Whether the regime be one of hunting or of pastoralism, humans and animals relate to
one another not in mind or body alone but as undivided centres of intention and action,
as whole beings. Only with the advent of industrial livestock management have animals
been reduced, in practice and not just in theory, to the mere ‘objects’ that theorists of
the Western tradition (who, barring the occasional pet, had little or no contact with
animals in the course of their working lives) had always supposed them to be (Tapper
1988: 52–7). Indeed this objectiﬁcation of animals, having reached its peak in the agropastoral industry, is as far removed from the relations of domination entailed in traditional
pastoral care as it is from the relations of trust entailed in hunting.
Moreover, as alternative modes of relationship, neither trust nor domination is in any
sense more or less advanced than the other. It is important, in particular, to guard against
the tendency to think of relations based on trust as morally, or intrinsically ‘good’, and
of those based on domination as intrinsically ‘bad’. They are simply different. Trust, as
I have shown, is a relation fraught with risk, tension and ambiguity. It is well to remember
Hallowell’s point, apropos Ojibwa ontology, that ‘appearances my be deceptive’ (1960:
43). The underside of trust, as Hallowell shows so clearly, is chronic anxiety and suspicion. Thus to argue that hunter-gatherer relations with the environment are based on a
principle of trust is not to present yet another version of the arcadian vision of life in
harmony with nature. Nor, by the same token, should the movement from trust to domination be regarded as one that replaced harmony by discord, or that set humanity on the
path of its irrevocable alienation from nature. When hunters became pastoralists they
began to relate to animals, and to one another, in different ways. But they were not taking
the ﬁrst steps on the road to modernity.

CONCLUSION
Writing of Koyukon hunters of Alaska, Nelson remarks that, for them, ‘the conceptual
distance between humanity and nature is narrow’ (1983: 240). On the evidence of his
own account, and many others, it would be more true to say that there is no conceptual
distance at all, or rather that what we distinguish as humanity and nature merge, for them,
into a single ﬁeld of relationships. And indeed, we ﬁnd nothing corresponding to the
Western concept of nature in hunter-gatherer representations, for they see no essential
difference between the ways one relates to humans and to non-human constituents of the
environment. We have seen how both sharing (among humans) and hunting (of animals
by humans) rest on the same principle of trust, and how the sense in which hunters claim
to know and care for animals is identical to the sense in which they know and care for

Livelihood
other human beings. One could make the same argument for pastoralism: I have shown 1
elsewhere, in the case of northern Eurasian reindeer herdsmen, how the transition from 2
hunting to pastoralism led to the emergence, in place of egalitarian relations of sharing, 3
of relations of dominance and subordination between herding leaders and their assistants 4
(Ingold 1980: 165–9). Evidently a transition in the quality of relationship, from trust to 5
domination, affects relations not only between humans and non-human animals, but also, 6
and equally, among human beings themselves. Hallowell’s observation that in the world 7
of the Ojibwa, ‘vital social relations transcend those which are maintained with human 8
beings’ (1960: 43) could apply just as well to other hunting peoples, and indeed to pastoral- 9
ists as well.
This observation, however, plays havoc with the established Western dichotomies 1
between animals and society, or nature and humanity. The distinction between the human 2
and the non-human no longer marks the outer limits of the social world, as against that 3
of nature, but rather maps a domain within it whose boundary is both permeable and 4
easily crossed. It comes as no surprise, then, that anthropology, as an intellectual product 5
of the Western tradition, has sought to contain the damage by relativising the indigenous 6
view and thereby neutralising the challenge it presents to our own suppositions. Thus we 7
are told that the hunter-gatherer view is just another cultural construction of reality. When 8
hunters use terms drawn from the domain of human interaction to describe their rela- 9
tions with animals, they are said to be indulging in metaphor (Bird-David 1992a). But 20
to claim that what is literally true of relations among humans (for example, that they 1
share), is only ﬁguratively true of relations with animals, is to reproduce the very dichotomy 2
between animals and society that the indigenous view purports to reject. We tell ourselves 3
reassuringly that this view the hunters have, of sharing with animals as they would with 4
people, however appealing it might be, does not correspond with what actually happens. 5
For nature, we say, does not really share with man.9 When hunters assert the contrary it 6
is because the image of sharing is so deeply ingrained in their thought that they can no 7
longer tell the metaphor from the reality. But we can, and we insist – on these grounds 8
– that the hunters have got it wrong.
This strikes me as profoundly arrogant. It is to accord priority to the Western meta- 30
physics of the alienation of humanity from nature, and to use our disengagement as the 1
standard against which to judge their engagement. Faced with an ecological crisis whose 2
roots lie in this disengagement, in the separation of human agency and social responsi- 3
bility from the sphere of our direct involvement with the non-human environment, it 4
surely behoves us to reverse this order of priority. I began with the point that while both 5
humans and animals have histories of their mutual relations, only humans narrate such 6
histories. But to construct a narrative, one must already dwell in the world and, in the 7
dwelling, enter into relationships with its constituents, both human and non-human. I 8
am suggesting that we rewrite the history of human–animal relations, taking this condition 9
of active engagement, of being-in-the-world, as our starting point. We might speak of it 40
as a history of human concern with animals, insofar as this notion conveys a caring, attentive 1
regard, a ‘being with’. And I am suggesting that those who are ‘with’ animals in their 2
day-to-day lives, most notably hunters and herdsmen, can offer us some of the best possible 3
indications of how we might proceed.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Five

Making things, growing plants,
raising animals and bringing up
children
We have . . . large and various orchards and gardens . . . And we make (by art) in the
same orchards and gardens trees and ﬂowers to come earlier or later than their seasons,
and to come up and bear more speedily than by their natural course they do. We make
them also by art greater much than their nature, and their fruit greater and sweeter
and of differing taste, smell, colour and ﬁgure, from their nature . . . We have also
parks and inclosures of all sorts of beasts and birds . . . By art likewise we make them
greater or taller than their kind is, and contrariwise dwarf them, and stay their growth;
we make them more fruitful and bearing than their kind is, and contrariwise barren
and not generative. Also we make them differ in colour, shape, activity, many ways.
So wrote Francis Bacon in 1624, outlining his Utopian vision of the New Atlantis, a
society dedicated to the mastery of nature through rigorous application of the principles
of rational science (Bacon 1965: 449–50). In this society every kind of living thing, both
animal and vegetable, can be made by art so that it better serves human purposes. In what
follows I aim to show how this notion of making has come to rest at the heart of what
we mean by production, in relation not only to the manufacture of artefacts but also, and
more especially, to the breeding – or ‘artiﬁcial selection’ – of plants and animals. The
idea of production as making, I argue, is embedded in a grand narrative of the human
transcendence of nature, in which the domestication of plants and animals ﬁgures as the
counterpart of the self-domestication of humanity in the process of civilisation. I go on
to consider how people who actually live by gardening, tilling the soil or keeping livestock understand the nature of their activity, drawing on examples from South America,
Melanesia and West Africa. Taking these understandings as a starting point, I shall then
take a fresh look at what it means to cultivate plants and to husband animals. My conclusion is that the work of the farmer or herdsman does not make crops or livestock, but
rather serves to set up certain conditions of development within which plants and animals
take on their particular forms and behavioural dispositions. We are dealing, in a word,
with processes of growth.

THE HUMAN TRANSFORMATION OF NATURE
According to the received categories of archaeological and anthropological thought, there
are basically just two ways of procuring a livelihood from the natural environment,
conventionally denoted by the terms collection and production. The distinction between
them was ﬁrst coined by Friedrich Engels. In a note penned in 1875, Engels pointed
to production as the most fundamental criterion of what he saw as a kind of ‘mastery’

Livelihood
of the environment that was distinctively human: ‘The most that the animal can achieve 1
is to collect; man produces, he prepares the means of life . . . which without him nature 2
would not have produced. This makes impossible any unqualiﬁed transference of the laws 3
of life in animal society to human society’ (1934: 308). The essence of production, for 4
Engels, lay in the deliberate planning of activity by intentional and selfconscious agents. 5
Animals, through their activities, might exert lasting and quite radical effects on their 6
environments, but these effects are by and large unintended: the non-human animal, 7
Engels thought, did not labour in its surroundings in order to change them; it had no 8
conception of its task. The human, by contrast, always has an end in mind.
Curiously, however, whenever Engels turned to consider concrete examples of human 10
mastery in production, he drew them exclusively from the activities of agriculture and 1
pastoralism, through which plants, animals and the landscape itself had been demonstrably 2
transformed through human design (1934: 34, 178–9). Opposing the foraging behaviour 3
of non-human species to the human husbandry of plants and animals, Engels left a gap 4
that could only be ﬁlled by calling into being a special category of humans known to him 5
and his contemporaries as ‘savages’. As a hunter of animals and a gatherer of plants, the 6
savage had, as it were, come down from the trees but had not yet left the woods: suspended 7
in limbo between evolution and history, he was a human being who had so far failed to 8
realise the potential afforded by his unique constitution. Ever since, the humanity of 9
hunter-gatherers has been somehow in question. They may be members of the species, 20
Homo sapiens, but their form of life is such as to put them on a par with other animal 1
kinds which also derive their subsistence by collecting whatever is ‘to hand’ in the environ- 2
ment. As the archaeologist Robert Braidwood wrote in 1957, ‘a man who spends his whole 3
life following animals just to kill them to eat, or moving from one berry patch to another, 4
is really living just like an animal himself’ (Braidwood 1957: 22).
This latent ambiguity also allowed the archaeologist, V. Gordon Childe, to take up the 6
distinction between collection and production – in terms virtually identical to those 7
proposed by Engels – to draw a line not between humans and animals, but between 8
‘neolithic’ people and their successors on the one hand, and ‘palaeolithic’ hunters and 9
gatherers on the other. In crossing this line, the ancestors of present-day farmers, herdsmen 30
and urban dwellers were alleged to have set in motion a revolution in the arts of subsis- 1
tence without parallel in the history of life. Ushered in by the invention of the science 2
of selective breeding, it was a revolution that turned people, according to Childe, into 3
‘active partners with nature instead of parasites on nature’ (1942: 55). Though contem- 4
porary authors might phrase the distinction somewhat differently, the notion of 5
food-production as the singular achievement of human agriculturalists and pastoralists has 6
become part of the stock-in-trade of modern prehistory. And understanding the origins 7
of food-production has become as central a preoccupation for prehistorians as has under- 8
standing the origins of humankind for palaeoanthropologists: where the latter seek the 9
evolutionary origins of human beings within nature, the former seek the decisive moment 40
at which humanity transcended nature, and was set on the path of history.
Underlying the collection/production distinction, then, is a master narrative about how 2
human beings, through their mental and bodily labour, have progressively raised them- 3
selves above the purely natural level of existence to which all other animals are conﬁned, 4
and in so doing have built themselves a history of civilisation. Through their trans- 5
formations of nature, according to this narrative, humans have also transformed them- 6
selves. It is a fact about human beings, states Maurice Godelier, that alone among animals, 7
they ‘produce society in order to live’ – and in so doing, ‘create history’ (1986: 1, original 118

Things, plants, animals and children

emphases). By this he means that the designs and purposes of human action upon the
natural environment – action that yields a return in the form of the wherewithal for
subsistence – have their source in the domain of social relations, a domain of mental realities (‘representations, judgements, principles of thought’) that stands over and above the
sheer materiality of nature (1986: 10–11).
Godelier goes on to distinguish ﬁve ‘kinds of materiality’, depending upon the manner
and extent to which human beings are implicated in their formation. First is that part of
nature which is wholly untouched by human activity; secondly there is the part that has
been changed on account of the presence of humans, but indirectly and unintentionally;
the third is the part that has been intentionally transformed by human beings and that
depends upon their attention and energy for its reproduction; the fourth part comprises
materials that have been fashioned into instruments such as tools and weapons, and the
ﬁfth may be identiﬁed with what we would conventionally call the ‘built environment’ –
houses, shelters, monuments, and the like (Godelier 1986: 4–5). In this classiﬁcation the
critical division falls between the second and third kinds, for it is also taken to mark the
distinction between the wild and the domestic. The third part of nature is taken to consist,
primarily, of domesticated plants and animals, whereas the biotic components of the ﬁrst
and second parts are either wild or, at most, in a condition of pre-domestication. Moreover
Godelier points to the domestication of plants and animals as a paradigmatic instance
of the transforming action of humanity upon nature. This leaves us, however, with two
unresolved problems.
The ﬁrst concerns the status of hunters and gatherers who have sought not to transform their environments but rather to conserve them in a form that remains, so far as
possible, unscarred by human activity. If, as Godelier claims, ‘human beings have a history
because they transform nature’ (1986: 1), are we to conclude that humans who do not
transform nature lack history? For his own part, Godelier resists this conclusion: ‘I cannot
see any theoretical reason to consider the forms of life and thought characteristic of hunters,
gatherers and ﬁshers as more natural than those of the agriculturalists and stockbreeders
who succeeded them’ (1986: 12). The activities of hunter-gatherers, he asserts, are like
those of all human beings at all times, and unlike those of all non-human animals, in
that they are prompted by mental representations that have their source in the intersubjective domain of society. Yet apart from the construction of tools and shelters
(corresponding to the fourth and ﬁfth kinds of materiality), these representations are not
materialised in the physical substrate of nature. Hunter-gatherers have a history, but theirs
is a history that is written neither in the pages of documents nor upon the surface of the
land. It is inscribed exclusively upon the plane of mental rather than material reality.
Overturning the classical conception of hunter-gatherers as arch-representatives of
humanity in the state of nature, Godelier reaches the rather paradoxical conclusion that
it is in their societies that the boundary between the mental and the material, between
culture and nature, is most clearcut. The more that the material world is subordinated to
the ends of art, the more the world of ideas is rendered in physical form, the less clearcut
the nature/culture distinction appears to be (1986: 4).
The second problem is one to which Godelier alludes in a footnote, but fails to take
further. It is that for most non-Western people, ‘the idea of a transformation of nature
by human beings has no meaning’ (1986: 2, fn. 1). Thus the peoples of the past who
were initially responsible for domesticating plants and animals must have had quite
different ideas about what they were doing. In the next section I shall present a range of
comparable ideas drawn from the ethnography of contemporary non-Western societies.

Livelihood
The point to stress at this juncture is that the idea of history as consisting in the human 1
transformation of nature, like the ideas of nature itself and of society as an entity coun- 2
terposed to nature, has a history of its own in the Western world. By tracing this history 3
back to its roots we may ﬁnd that it has grown out of a set of understandings very different 4
from those familiar to us today, yet much closer to the apparently exotic cosmologies of 5
non-Western ‘others’.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to document the history of Western thinking 7
about humanity and nature (Glacken’s [1967] massive treatise on the subject remains 8
unsurpassed). Sufﬁce it to note that the essence of the kind of thought we call ‘Western’ 9
is that it is founded in a claim to the subordination of nature by human powers of reason. 10
Entailed in this claim is a notion of making things as an imprinting of prior conceptual 1
design upon a raw material substrate. Human reason is supposed to provide the form, 2
nature the substance in which it is realised. We have already encountered this idea of 3
making in the writings of Bacon, but more than two hundred years later it served as the 4
fulcrum of Marx’s theory of value, according to which it was the work of shaping up the 5
material from its raw to its ﬁnal state that bestowed value on what was already ‘given’ in 6
nature. It made no difference, in principle, whether that work was represented by the 7
labour of the artisan, in the manufacture of equipment, or by that of the farmer or stock- 8
breeder, in the husbandry of plants and animals. Both were conceived as instances of 9
productive making – the human transformation of nature.
Yet in arriving at his theory of value, Marx turned on its head an idea of even greater 1
antiquity, though one whose systematic elaboration had to await the writings of the French 2
Physiocrats, Quesnay and Turgot, in the eighteenth century. For these writers too, the 3
role of the artisan was to imprint a rational design upon material supplied by nature. But 4
in doing so, he created no new value. To the contrary, his work was understood to involve 5
nothing more than a rearrangement of what nature had already brought into existence. 6
The real source of wealth, according to Physiocracy, was the land, and lay in its inherent 7
fertility. And for this reason, the activities of those who worked the land, in growing crops 8
and raising animals, were understood to be fundamentally different in character from the 9
activities of those whose tasks lay in the ﬁeld of manufacture.
In an elegant analysis, Stephen Gudeman (1986: 80–4) has shown how the economic 1
doctrines of Physiocracy were closely modelled on the theory of perception and cognition 2
proposed some seventy years previously by John Locke. In Locke’s economy of know- 3
ledge, the natural world is a source of raw sensations impinging upon the receptor organs 4
of the passive human observer. The mind then operates on these received sensory data, 5
separating and combining them to form complex ideas. In just the same way, according 6
to the Physiocrats, the land furnishes its inhabitants with basic raw materials, to which 7
human reason adds form and meaning. As Gudeman puts it, ‘in this “intellectual” 8
economics, agriculture is to artisanship as sensation was to mental operation’ (1986: 83). 9
The role of the farmer is to receive the substantive yield of the land, that of the artisan 40
is to deliver the formal designs of humanity. Where the farmer’s work is productive, in 1
that it results in an inﬂux of wealth to the human community, it is nevertheless passive 2
since the creative agency in bringing forth this wealth was attributed to the land itself 3
and, behind that, to divine intervention. Conversely the artisan’s work is non-productive, 4
since it adds nothing to human wealth, but is nevertheless active since it is impelled by 5
reason (Gudeman 1986: 87).
In this view, although it would still be fair to describe the act of making things as a 7
human transformation of nature, such making is not the equivalent but the very opposite 118

Things, plants, animals and children

of production, just as artisanship is the opposite of agriculture. Production is a process of
growing, not making. The farmer, and for that matter the raiser of livestock, submits to
a productive dynamic that is immanent in the natural world itself, rather than converting
nature into an instrument to his own purpose. Far from ‘impressing the stamp of their
will upon the earth’, to adopt Engels’s imperialistic phrase (1934: 179), those who toil
on the land – in clearing ﬁelds, turning the soil, sowing, weeding, reaping, pasturing their
ﬂocks and herds, or feeding animals in their stalls – are assisting in the reproduction of
nature, and derivatively of their own kind.
In classical Greece, too, agriculture and artisanship were clearly opposed, belonging –
as Vernant remarks (1983: 253) – ‘to two different ﬁelds of experience which are to a
large extent mutually exclusive’. The contrast between growing things and making things
was delightfully phrased by the Sophist author Antiphon, writing in the ﬁfth century BC,
who invites us to imagine an old wooden bed, buried in the ground, taking root and
sprouting green shoots. What comes up, however, is not a new bed, but fresh wood! Beds
are made, but wood grows (Vernant 1983: 260). As a grower of crops rather than a maker
of artefacts, the farmer was not seen to act upon nature, let alone to transform it to human
ends. Work on the land was more a matter of falling into line with an overarching order,
at once natural and divinely ordained, within which the ﬁnalities of human existence were
themselves encompassed. Even were it technically possible to transform nature, the very
idea would have been regarded as an impiety (Vernant 1983: 254).
If there is a certain parallel here with the doctrines of Physiocracy, despite the immense
lapse of time, it is doubtless because both classical Greek and eighteenth century
Physiocratic authors were able to draw on a fund of practical experience in working on
the land. When it came to farming, they knew what they were talking about. But with
regard to artisanship, their respective notions could not have been more different. For
according to classical Greek writers, the forms which the artisan realised in his material
issued not from the human mind, as constructs of a rational intelligence, but were themselves inscribed in the order of nature. Thus the idea of making as an imposition of
rational design upon raw material would have been entirely alien to Greek thought. ‘The
artisan is not in command of nature; he submits to the requirements of the form. His
function and his excellence is . . . to obey’ (Vernant 1983: 294). This, of course, is the
precise inverse of Godelier’s assertion that in the husbandry of plants and animals, in
making tools and constructing buildings – that is, in the production of the third, fourth
and ﬁfth kinds of materiality – it is nature that submits to the requirements of human
form. The idea that production consists in action upon nature, issuing from a superior
source in society, is an essentially modern one.

INDIGENOUS UNDERSTANDING: FOUR ETHNOGRAPHIC EXAMPLES
Our next step is to turn to consider some of the ways in which contemporary non-Western
people understand their relations with cultivated plants and domestic animals. In what
follows I shall present four ethnographic examples. The ﬁrst is taken from Philippe
Descola’s (1994) study of the Achuar Indians of the Upper Amazon, the second draws
on Marilyn Strathern’s (1980) work on the people of the Mount Hagen region of the
Papua New Guinea Highlands, and the third comes from a study by Walter van Beek
and Pieteke Banga (1992) of the Dogon of Mali, in West Africa. For my fourth and ﬁnal
example I return to South America, and to the study by Stephen Gudeman and Alberto
Rivera (1990) of the peasant farmers of Boyacá, in Colombia.

Livelihood
The Achuar cultivate a great variety of plant species, of which the most ubiquitous is 3
manioc, in gardens that have been cleared through a ‘slash-and-burn’ technique from 4
primary forest. The focus of domestic life is the house, which stands at the centre of its 5
garden, surrounded in turn by a vast expanse of forest. Though a man is expected to 6
prepare a garden plot for each of his wives, the cultivation, maintenance and harvesting 7
of plots is exclusively women’s work. All members of the household regularly participate 8
in gathering activities, which are concentrated in familiar areas of the forest within close 9
reach of the garden. Beyond that is the zone of hunting, a risky space in which men 10
dominate, and to which women venture only when accompanied by their husbands.
Gathering, for the Achuar, is a relaxed affair – an occasion for a pleasant day out. But 2
hunting is a quite different matter. Men’s relations with the animals they hunt are modelled 3
on the human relation of afﬁnity: like human in-laws, the creatures of the forest are 4
inclined to be touchy, and their feelings have continually to be assuaged with liberal doses 5
of seductive charm. Above all, it is necessary to keep on the right side of the ‘game 6
mothers’, the guardian spirits of the animals, who exercise the same kind of control over 7
their charges as do human mothers over their own children and domestic animals (Descola 8
1994: 257). Motherhood, however, also extends to a woman’s relations with the plants 9
she grows in her garden. She has, as it were, two sets of offspring, the plants in her garden 20
and the children in her home, and since the two are in competition for the nurturance 1
she can provide, relations between them are far from harmonious. Manioc, for example, 2
is attributed with the power to suck the blood of human infants. Thus despite its peaceful 3
appearance, the garden is as full of menace as is the surrounding forest (1994: 206).
Applying orthodox concepts of anthropological analysis, we might be inclined to oppose 5
the forest and the garden along the lines of a distinction between the wild and the domes- 6
ticated, as though the edge of the woods also marked the outer limits of the human 7
socialisation of nature, and the point of transition at which production gives way to collec- 8
tion. But this, as Descola shows, would be profoundly at odds with Achuar understandings. 9
For in the construction and maintenance of their gardens, the Achuar do not see them- 30
selves as engaged in a project of domesticating the pristine world of the forest; indeed the 1
colonial image of the conquest of nature is entirely foreign to their way of thinking. For 2
them, the forest is itself a huge garden, albeit an untidy one, and the relations between 3
its constituents are governed by the same principles of domesticity that structure the 4
human household, yet on a superhuman scale. The tension between garden plants and 5
children mirrors, on a reduced scale, the tension between forest creatures and human 6
hunters; likewise a woman’s care for her crops and domestic animals is writ large in the 7
care of the ‘game mothers’ for the species in their charge. In short, the Achuar garden 8
ﬁgures as a microcosm of the forest: ‘it is not so much the cultural transformation of a 9
portion of wild space as the cultural homology in the human order of a cultural reality 40
of the same standing in the superhuman order’. Human society is a scaled-down version 1
of the society of nature, the garden plot ‘temporarily realizes the virtualities of a homely 2
wilderness’ (Descola 1994: 220).
The people of Mount Hagen
The people of the Mount Hagen region of Papua New Guinea (henceforth ‘Hageners’) 7
grow crops – especially taro, yams and sweet potato – in forest clearings; they also raise 118

The Achuar of the Upper Amazon

Things, plants, animals and children

pigs. They have a word, mbo, for the activity of planting, which is also used for things
that are planted such as cuttings pushed into the ground. By extension it can refer to any
other point of growth within the general ﬁeld of human relations: thus a breeding pig
can be mbo in respect of the herd it will engender, and people can be mbo in respect of
their placement in clan territory. The antithesis of mbo is rømi. This latter term is used
for things or powers that lie beyond the reach of human nurture. The principal cultivated
tubers have their wild counterparts, and these are rømi, as are wild pigs and other forest
creatures. There are also rømi spirits who tend these wild plants and animals, just as people
tend their gardens and pigs (Strathern 1980: 192). Indeed at ﬁrst glance, the terms mbo
and rømi seem to have their more or less exact equivalent in our conventional notions of
‘wild’ and ‘domestic’ respectively.
Completely absent from the Hagen conception, however, is the notion of a domestic
environment ‘carved out’ from wild nature. Mbo does not refer to an enclosed space of
settlement, as opposed to the surrounding bush or forest. Hageners do not seek to subjugate or colonise the wilderness; while the spirit masters of forest creatures have their spheres
of inﬂuence as humans have theirs, the aim is ‘not to subdue but to come to terms with
them’ (1980: 194). Rømi is simply that which lies outside the limits of human care and
sociability. Signiﬁcantly, while the opposed term mbo takes its primary meaning from the
act of planting, it is not used for any other stage of the horticultural process, nor for
garden land itself (1980: 200). In planting one does not transform nature, in the sense
of imposing a rational order upon a given materiality. Rather, one places a cutting in the
ground so that it may take root and grow.1 As its roots extend into the soil, so the plant
draws nourishment from its environment, gradually assuming its mature form.
Like the Achuar, Hageners draw a parallel between growing plants and growing children. The child, placed at birth within a ﬁeld of nurture – as the plant is placed in the
soil – steadily grows into maturity as a responsible, self-aware being, drawing sustenance
from its relationships with others even as the latter, like the plant’s roots, extend ever
further outwards into the social environment (1980: 196). There is no sense, however, in
which the child starts life as a thing of nature, to which a moral dimension of rules and
values is added on through a process of socialisation. The child does not begin as rømi,
and become mbo. It is mbo from the outset, by virtue of its planting within the ﬁeld of
human relationships. So too, in their cultivation of tubers and raising of pigs, Hageners
do not impose a social order upon an environment consisting of ‘nature in the raw’. They
rather constitute, as inherently social, the very environment within which their plants and
animals come into being, take root and grow to maturity.

The Dogon of Mali
Like many other African peoples (Morris 1995: 305–6), the Dogon draw a sharp contrast
between the categories of ana (village) and oru (bush). In and around the village, people
cultivate the staple crop of millet, and keep gardens of onions and tobacco. But they also
depend on the bush in many ways. It is a source of ﬁrewood for cooking, brewing and
ﬁring pottery. Timber is needed, too, for building houses and granaries, and for fencing
gardens. The bush also yields meat, relishes and treefruits, leaves for use as cattle fodder,
and various medicinal herbs. However, the dependence of the village on the bush goes
much deeper than this list of products would indicate. For in the Dogon view, the bush
is nothing less than the source of life itself, and with it of all knowledge, wisdom, power
and healing. But by the same token, it is greatly to be feared. It is a zone of movement

Livelihood
and ﬂux, in which all the ﬁxedness and certainties of village life are dissolved. Everything 1
shifts and changes – even trees and rocks can walk from place to place. The many spirits 2
that roam the bush can exchange body parts with living people, human hunters venturing 3
there become like the animals they hunt, and as they do so their existence in the present 4
is swallowed up in a temporal horizon that merges past and future, life and death (van 5
Beek and Banga 1992: 67–8).
Dogon cosmology envisages a kind of entropic system in which the maintenance of 7
the village depends upon a continual inﬂow of vital force from the bush, which is worn 8
down and used up in the process. If the village is a place of stability, where things stay 9
put and proper distinctions are maintained, it is also a place of stagnation. In an almost 10
exact inversion of the modern Western notion of food production as the manifestation 1
of human knowledge and power over nature, here it is nature – in the form of the bush 2
– that holds ultimate power over human life, while the cultivated ﬁelds and gardens are 3
sites of consumption rather than production, where vital force is used up. ‘Knowledge 4
dissipates . . . and power evaporates unless reinvigorated from the bush’ (van Beek and 5
Banga 1992: 69).
Peasant farmers of Boyacá
The rural folk of Colombia say that it is the earth that gives them their food; the role of 20
human beings is to assist it in bringing forth its crops. As one farmer is reported to have 1
put it: ‘Man helps the land; the earth produces the fruit’ (Gudeman and Rivera 1990: 2
25). Likewise hens give eggs, sheep give lambs and cows calves. Here, too, the farmer is 3
called upon to assist in the animals’ labour much as a midwife assists at a birth. But the 4
ultimate source of the ‘strength’ or ‘force’ (la fuerza) that enables people to work, animals 5
to reproduce and crops to grow lies in the land itself. The earth is conceived as a repos- 6
itory of strength created and sustained by God (1990: 18). Thus crops draw strength 7
from the land, humans in turn gain strength by consuming their crops (or the produce 8
of animals whose strength was drawn from their consumption of fodder), and expend 9
that strength in work on the land that enables it to yield up yet more of its strength to 30
the cycle.
Gudeman and Rivera detect in this folk model distinct echoes of eighteenth-century 2
Physiocracy. Indeed they go so far as to suggest that it offers a window on much earlier 3
notions current among farming peoples of the Old World, which still resonate through 4
the practices of Colombian rural folk as well as through the texts of European political 5
economists. The Physiocratic view that only the land yields value, which the farmer 6
harnesses on behalf of society, has its counterpart in the Colombian farmers’ notion that 7
human life is powered by the strength of the earth. Both views, moreover, invert the 8
modern Western conception that sees in the land not an active agent but an inert source 9
of raw materials to be shaped up to a human design. Marx wrote of the earth as fore- 40
most among the instruments of labour, and ever since we have tended to think of 1
production as a process wherein land is placed in the service of humanity (Meillassoux 2
1972). But Colombian rural folk place themselves in the service of the land. And they 3
regard their capacity to work not as some inner aspect of their being, as in the Marxian 4
concept of ‘labour-power’, but as God’s gift of strength, bestowed through the land and 5
its produce, and expended in their activity (Gudeman and Rivera 1990: 103–4).

Things, plants, animals and children

MAKING THINGS, FINDING THINGS AND GROWING THINGS
Let me now return to the opposition with which I began, between production and collection. There is no doubt that the primary meaning of production in the age of manufacture
is, to recall Bacon’s phrase, ‘making by art’. The term refers, in other words, to the
construction of artiﬁcial objects by rearranging, assembling and transforming raw materials supplied by nature. And if the opposite of ‘to produce’ is ‘to collect’, then collection
must mean picking up one’s supplies, as it were ‘ready-made’, from the environment. But
how can you ‘make’ a pig, a yam, or a crop of millet? And how, for that matter, can
such things be made in advance?
I believe this modern emphasis on production as making accounts for the special significance that tends to be attached to the so-called ‘artiﬁcial selection’ of plants and animals
as the key criterion for distinguishing food-production from food-collection, and hence
for determining the point of transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture and
pastoralism. The ability that Bacon dreamed of, literally to ‘make’ an animal or plant in
any way we want it, is only now coming to be realised due to developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering. For farmers and herdsmen of the past, it has never been
a realistic possibility. What they could do, however, was isolate a breeding population
within which they could select individuals for reproduction according to their conformity
to an ideal type. Just as the distinction between the artefact and the naturally given object
(such as a living organism) depends on the notion that the former is built upon a design
that is extrinsic rather than intrinsic to the material (Monod 1972: 21), so likewise artiﬁcial selection can only be distinguished from natural selection on the grounds that it is
guided by a ‘preconceived end’, an ideal suspended within the collective representations
of the human community. This is probably why the notion of domestication has come
to be so closely tied up with that of breeding: it is the closest thing to constructing the
forms of plants and animals to blueprints of human design. And this, in turn, is why
prehistorians investigating the origins of food-production are inclined to look for evidence
of the morphological divergence of the plant or animal species in question from its original ‘wild’ form, as proof that production was going on.
This procedure, however, generates its own anomalies. For in many parts of the world,
both in the past and still today, people are apparently engaged in the husbandry of plants
and animals that do not differ appreciably from their wild counterparts. Kept as pets in
the houses of the Achuar are a range of ‘domestic wild animals’ – various primates, birds
and peccary (Descola 1994: 90). The forests of Highland New Guinea are full of wild
domestic pigs, as well as a variety of plants that also appear in cultivated swiddens. And
the ﬁelds of neolithic villagers in Southwest Asia were sown with ‘domesticated wild
barley’ (Jarman 1972). Now the source of these anomalies lies in the very dichotomy
between collection and production. In terms of this dichotomy, human beings must either
ﬁnd their food ready-made in nature or make it themselves. Yet ask any farmer and he
or she will say, with good cause, that the produce of the farm is no more made than it
is found ready-made. It is grown. So our question must be as follows. Granted that by
making things we mean the transformation of pre-existing raw materials, what do we mean
by growing things? On the answer to this question must hinge the distinctions between
gathering and cultivation, and between hunting and animal husbandry.
Two common themes to emerge from the ethnographic cases presented in the previous
section point towards a solution. First, the work that people do, in such activities as ﬁeld
clearance, fencing, planting, weeding and so on, or in tending their livestock, does not

Livelihood
literally make plants and animals, but rather establishes the environmental conditions for 1
their growth and development. They are ‘mothered’, nurtured, assisted – generally cosseted 2
and helped along. Secondly, growing plants and raising animals are not so different, in 3
principle, from bringing up children. Of course it is true that modern Western discourse, 4
too, extends the notions of cultivation and breeding across human, animal and plant 5
domains, referring in the human case to a reﬁnement of taste and manners (Bouquet 6
1993: 189–90). Such reﬁnement, however, is represented as a socially approved form of 7
mastery over supposedly innate human impulses, and is the counterpart to the kind of 8
mastery over the environment that is implied by the notion of domestication as the social 9
appropriation of nature. When Achuar women compare their children to the plants in 10
their gardens, or when Hageners use the language of planting for both children and pigs, 1
they do not have this model of socialisation in mind. As Strathern puts it: ‘the child grows 2
into social maturity rather than being trained into it’ (1980: 196). What each generation 3
provides, whether in growing plants, raising animals or bringing up children, are precisely 4
the developmental conditions under which ‘growth to maturity’ can occur.2
Where does this leave the distinctions between gathering and cultivation, and between 6
hunting and animal husbandry? The difference surely lies in no more than this: the rela- 7
tive scope of human involvement in establishing the conditions for growth. This is not only 8
a matter of degree rather than kind, it can also vary over time. Weeds can become culti- 9
gens, erstwhile domestic animals can turn feral. Moreover a crucial variable, I would 20
suggest, lies in the temporal interlocking of the life-cycles of humans, animals and plants, 1
and their relative durations. The lives of domestic animals tend to be somewhat shorter 2
than those of human beings, but not so short as to be of a different order of magnitude. 3
There is thus a sense in which people and their domestic animals grow older together, 4
and in which their respective life-histories are intertwined as mutually constitutive strands 5
of a single process. The lives of plants, by contrast, can range from the very short to the 6
very long indeed, from a few months to many centuries.
Now as Laura Rival has pointed out, the planned intervention in and control over 8
nature that we conventionally associate with the idea of domestication can only be envis- 9
aged in respect of plants ‘whose growth is much faster relative to human growth and 30
maturation processes’ (Rival 1993: 648). It is as though humans could stand watch over 1
the development of their crops without growing signiﬁcantly older themselves. But the 2
more slow-growing and long-lived the plant, the more artiﬁcial this assumption appears 3
to be. In the case of the most enduring plants of all – such as certain large trees – the 4
assumption becomes wholly untenable. Indeed for the most part, trees do not ﬁt at all 5
comfortably within the terms of the orthodox distinction between the wild and the domes- 6
ticated, which may account for the curious fact that despite their manifest importance to 7
people (as our Dogon example shows), they are all but absent from archaeological and 8
anthropological discussions of the nature and origins of food production. Of an ancient 9
tree that has presided over successive human generations it would seem more appropriate 40
to say that it has played its part in the domestication of humans rather than having been 1
domesticated by them.3 In short, what is represented in the literature, under the rubric 2
of domestication, as a transcendence and transformation of nature may be more a reﬂec- 3
tion of an increasing reliance on plants and animals that, by comparison with humans, 4
are relatively fast-growing and short-lived.
I have suggested that regimes of plant and animal husbandry may best be distinguished 6
in terms of the ways in which human beings involve themselves in establishing the condi- 7
tions for growth. For example, in the cultivation of gardens, more is done to assist the 118

Things, plants, animals and children

growth of plants than when they are gathered from the bush. To grasp this idea, all that
is required is a simple switch of perspective: instead of thinking about plants as part of
the natural environment for human beings, we have to think of humans and their activities as part of the environment for plants. But behind this switch there lies a point of
much more fundamental signiﬁcance. If human beings on the one hand, and plants and
animals on the other, can be regarded alternately as components of each others’ environments, then we can no longer think of humans as inhabiting a social world of their own,
over and above the world of nature in which the lives of all other living things are
contained. Rather, both humans and the animals and plants on which they depend for a
livelihood must be regarded as fellow participants in the same world, a world that is at
once social and natural. And the forms that all these creatures take are neither given in
advance nor imposed from above, but emerge within the context of their mutual involvement in a single, continuous ﬁeld of relationships.4
With this conclusion in mind, let me return to Godelier’s ﬁve kinds of materiality,
which were also distinguished according to the manner and extent of human involvement
in their existence. In what way does Godelier’s formulation differ from our own? The
answer is that for Godelier, the formative role of humans lies in their capacity as beings
who, to various degrees, act upon, intervene in, or do things to, a domain of nature that
is external to their socially constituted selves. According to the argument I have presented,
by contrast, human beings do not so much transform the material world as play their
part, along with other creatures, in the world’s transformation of itself (I return to this
formulation in Chapter Eleven, pp. 200–1). In this view, nature is not a surface of materiality upon which human history is inscribed; rather history is the process wherein both
people and their environments are continually bringing each other into being. This is one
way of interpreting Marx’s celebrated yet enigmatic remark that ‘history itself is a real
part of natural history – of nature developing into man’ (Marx 1964: 143, original
emphases). By the same token, it is also man developing into nature. Or in other words,
human actions in the environment are better seen as incorporative than inscriptive, in the
sense that they are built or enfolded into the forms of the landscape and its living inhabitants by way of their own processes of growth.
I have been concerned, in this chapter, to dissolve the conventional dichotomy between
production and collection. In so doing, however, I seem to have ended up with another,
equally intractable dichotomy, namely between making and growing. I have observed that
in the tradition of Western thought, the idea of making – understood as the inscription
of conceptual form upon material substance – has been extended from the manufacture
of artefacts to the breeding of plants and animals, as exempliﬁed in the passage from
Bacon’s New Atlantis with which I began. It has even been extended to the raising of
children – insofar as this is regarded as a process of socialisation whereby approved norms
and values are superimposed upon the raw material of new-born human infants. In every
case it is supposed that a design or representation that has its source in the domain of
society is imprinted upon the substrate of external nature. In arguing against this view, I
have suggested that bringing up children or raising livestock, just as much as the cultivation of crops, is a process in which plants, animals or people are not so much made as
grown, and in which surrounding human beings play a greater or lesser part in establishing the conditions of nurture.
I have but one further point to make in conclusion. The orthodox Western account,
as we have seen, extends the idea of making from the domain of inanimate things to that
of animate beings. I want to suggest, quite to the contrary, that the idea of growing might

Livelihood
be extended in the reverse direction, from the animate to the inanimate. What we call 1
‘things’, too, are grown. In practice, there is more to the manufacture of artefacts than 2
the mechanical transcription of a design or plan, devised through an intellectual process 3
of reason, onto an inert substance. For as I shall show in Chapter Eighteen, the forms of 4
artefacts are not given in advance but are rather generated in and through the practical 5
movement of one or more skilled agents in their active, sensuous engagement with the 6
material. That is to say, they emerge – like the forms of living beings – within the rela- 7
tional contexts of the mutual involvement of people and their environments. Thus there 8
is, in the ﬁnal analysis, no absolute distinction between making and growing, since what 9
we call ‘making things’ is, in reality, not a process of transcription at all but a process of 10
growth.

Culture, nature, environment

Chapter Six

A circumpolar night’s dream

Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a ﬁre;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, ﬁre, at every turn.
William Shakespeare, A Midsummer
Night’s Dream (3, i, 97–100)

INTRODUCTION: OF THINGS AND BEINGS
We are accustomed to calling animals and plants ‘living things’. But we call ourselves
‘human beings’. Let us agree that plants and animals, human and non-human, are all
organisms. The question then arises: is an organism a thing or a being? This is by no
means an issue of mere semantics, for on the answer hangs our understanding of life
itself. If life is a property of things, then it must be reducible to some internal principle,
the possession of which distinguishes the class of objects we call organisms from classes
of other kinds, and which – from its position within the organism – drives the latter’s
development and its interactions with the environment. But if life is tantamount to
being, then we have to regard the organism not so much as a living thing than as the
material embodiment of a certain way of being alive. In other words, we should think of
the organism not as containing life, or expressing it, but as emergent within the life
process itself.
Now natural science, including the science of evolutionary biology, has developed in
the West as an inquiry into the objective properties of things. Thus the applicability of
evolutionary biology to humans depends upon our accepting that they, in a sense, are
things as well. Yet they are us, and were we but things, how would we be able to recognise ourselves for what we are? Paradoxically, if organisms are things, then to see ourselves
as organisms we must be more than organisms. Indeed it is precisely by this ‘excess’ that
we are inclined to deﬁne the scope of our common humanity. Whereas an animal such
as a bear or a chimpanzee is all organism, the human being is said to be an organism
‘plus . . .’ (Collins 1985). Its organic nature is supposedly topped up with some additional
factor – call it mind or self-awareness – that can be found not by external observation
but only by the knowledge we have of ourselves as possessing speciﬁc identities, feelings,
memories and intentions.
Herein lies the curious, split-level image of human existence which is such a characteristic feature of modern thought and science. Surely, as science insists, humans are part
of nature. They are biological organisms, composed of the same stuff, and having evolved

Livelihood
according to the same principles, as organisms of every other kind. Like other creatures, 1
they are born, grow old and die, they must eat to live, protect themselves to survive and 2
mate to reproduce. But if that were all there is to it, how could there be science? It would 3
seem that the very possibility of a scientiﬁc account of humankind as a species of nature 4
is only open for a creature for whom being is knowing, one that can so detach its conscious- 5
ness from the trafﬁc of its bodily interactions in the environment as to treat the latter as 6
the object of its concern. To be human in this sense – to exist as a knowing subject – 7
is, we commonly say, to be a person. So is the scientist a person rather than an organism? 8
How can we exist both inside the world of nature and outside of it, as organisms and 9
persons, at one and the same time?
There seems to me to be only one way out of the paradoxes and contradictions entailed 1
in modern science’s attitude to humanity. This is to build on the premise that all organ- 2
isms, including human ones, are not things but beings. As beings, persons are organisms, 3
and being organisms, they – or rather we – are not impartial observers of nature but 4
participate from within in the continuum of organic life. In order to demonstrate the 5
possibility of an account of the living world founded on this premise, and to spell out 6
some of its implications, I shall draw in this chapter on one particular anthropological 7
study of how people in a non-Western society perceive themselves and the world around 8
them. This is the account by A. Irving Hallowell of what it means to be a person among 9
the northern Ojibwa, indigenous hunters and trappers of the forests to the east of Lake 20
Winnipeg and north of Lake Superior in Canada.1
Hallowell’s article, ‘Ojibwa ontology, behavior and world view’ (OO), ﬁrst published 2
in 1960, is in my estimation one of the great classics of northern circumpolar ethnog- 3
raphy.2 I have turned to it over and over again for inspiration, and every reading has 4
yielded some new insight. I must emphasise, however, that what follows is not intended 5
as a contribution to Ojibwa ethnography. I have not carried out ﬁeldwork in the region, 6
nor do I have the deep familiarity with the literature on these people that would qualify 7
me for such a task. Rather, I offer some reﬂections which, though stimulated by a reading 8
of Hallowell’s work, are primarily motivated by the goal set out above – that is, of restoring 9
human beings to the organic lifeworld in a way that does not, at the same time, reduce 30
them to mere objects of nature. These reﬂections are not, however, entirely without ethno- 1
graphic substance, for they resonate both with themes that crop up with remarkable 2
regularity in the literature on northern circumpolar societies,3 and with my own outlook 3
which has undoubtedly been shaped by the experience of working in this region.
ANIMALS AS PERSONS
It is customary, in the West, to assume that to speak of persons is to tell of the thoughts, 8
intentions and actions of human beings. ‘Person’ and ‘human’ are all but synonyms – to 9
the extent that to ask whether non-human animals can be persons seems almost perverse. 40
Nevertheless, people in Western societies do very often treat animals, or speak of them, 1
as if they were persons. Let me brieﬂy present two examples of this tendency. The ﬁrst 2
lies in attitudes towards household pets. Many people who are convinced that, as a general 3
rule, animals cannot be persons, are quick to make an exception of their pets. But if you 4
ask them why pets are persons, or at least rather like persons, whereas other animals are 5
not, they will probably say that on account of having been raised in human households, 6
virtually as members of the family, these particular animals have become almost human 7
themselves. They are credited with human feelings and responses, spoken to and expected 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

to understand, given names, put through life-cycle rituals, and sometimes even dressed in
clothing. Thus, far from softening or obscuring the boundary between humanity and
animality, the special treatment of pets constitutes the exception that proves the rule:
namely that, in the West, to be a person is to be human. Animals can only be persons
to the extent that some of our humanity has, so to speak, ‘rubbed off’ on them through
close contact with human members of the household. And just as the animal can never
become fully human, its personhood, too, can never be more than partially developed.
That is why pets are often treated as somehow retarded, locked in perpetual childhood.
However old they are, they are never allowed to grow up, but are rather treated as cases
of arrested development.
The second example of the Western tendency to liken animals to persons concerns
fables, especially those composed for children. Our story-books are full of tales in which
human characters are turned or turn themselves into wolves, bears, mice, frogs, birds, ﬁsh,
and a host of other creatures. Some of these stories are of great antiquity. But whatever
they may have meant for people in the distant past, for contemporary audiences and
readers there is never any suggestion that they are anything but stories. The animal characters, often depicted in strikingly human form, stand in metaphorically for human ones,
and serve to illustrate distinctively human dispositions and foibles – the cunning fox, the
innocent deer, the conceited toad, the noble lion, and so on. In short, the animal characters are used to deliver a commentary on the nature of human society. Moreover no
child, raised in contemporary Western society, would make the mistake of confusing such
animal stories with natural history books, of supposing that ‘The Princess and the Frog’
is an observer’s account of the behaviour of amphibians, or that ‘Little Red Riding Hood’
is an account of the habits of the wolf. Children are taught, at a very early age, to distinguish between telling stories and recounting the ‘facts’.
Both these examples, of pet-keeping and fables, illustrate a propensity, technically known
as anthropomorphism, to ascribe human qualities to non-human beings. In the one case,
the ascription is metonymic (the animal is an extension of the human), in the other case
it is metaphoric (the animal substitutes for the human). Either way, so long as we continue
to assume that only humans can truly be persons, the attribution of personhood to animals
is bound to be anthropomorphic.4 The Ojibwa, however, do not make this assumption.
Persons, in the Ojibwa world, can take a great variety of forms, of which the human is
just one. They can also appear in a variety of animal guises, as meteorological phenomena
such as thunder or the winds, as heavenly bodies such as the sun, and even as tangible
objects such as stones that we would have no hesitation in regarding as inanimate. None
of these manifold forms in which persons appear is any more basic, or ‘literal’, than the
others. Moreover, as we shall see, persons can be encountered not only in waking life but
also, and equally palpably, in dreams and in the telling of myths. And most importantly,
they can change their form. Indeed for the Ojibwa this capacity for metamorphosis is one
of the key aspects of being a person, and is a critical index of power: the more powerful
the person, the more readily a change of form may be effected.
Though persons may appear in animal form, not all animals are persons. One can
usually tell if an animal is a person, because its behaviour will be out of the ordinary.
But some animals are always extraordinary. One such is the bear. The hunter, on encountering a bear, will act towards it as a person who can understand what is being said and
will respond according to its own volition (OO, p. 36). There is nothing in the least
anthropomorphic about this. The hunter is not regarding the bear as if it were human.
To the contrary, it is perceived to be unequivocally ursine. Unlike the pet in a Western

Livelihood
society, the personhood of the bear does not depend upon its previous contacts with 1
humans – indeed it need not have had any such contacts at all. For the same reason, the 2
bear is just as much a ‘full person’ as is the human hunter. Ojibwa relate to persons in 3
animal form as grown-ups, not as children. And whereas anthropomorphised animal- 4
persons in the West are treated as beings that need to be looked after and controlled by 5
their human guardians, the animal-persons in the environment of the Ojibwa are consid- 6
ered to be on the same level as, if not more powerful than, human beings themselves. 7
Likewise, the animals that ﬁgure as persons in the traditional narratives of the Ojibwa 8
are not anthropomorphic characters. Their tales, like our own, are replete with incidents 9
in which humans turn into animals, or marry animals, or give birth to animals, and vice 10
versa. But these are not fables, nor are they intended to deliver an allegorical commen- 1
tary on the human condition. They are tales about events that really took place, in the 2
histories of real persons, and in the same world that people ordinarily experience in the 3
course of their quotidian lives. What they recount is based on detailed, accurate observa- 4
tion of the landscape, of weather conditions and of the behaviour of animals. The 5
mythological ﬁgure of the Thunder Bird, for example, can make itself manifest in the 6
form of a peal of thunder or a kind of hawk. There is a striking correspondence between 7
the normal seasonal occurrence of thunderstorms and the period during which migratory 8
birds wintering in the south appear in Ojibwa country. In one myth, a man who marries 9
a Thunder Bird woman and goes off to live with his in-laws (the mythic ‘masters’ of 20
various species of hawk) ﬁnds himself having to eat what they call ‘beaver’, but what to 1
him are frogs and snakes – which are, indeed, the principal foods of the sparrow hawk.5 2
And the nests of the Thunder Birds can be physically identiﬁed in the landscape as collec- 3
tions of stones in high, inaccessible locations (OO, pp. 32–3).
In short, what distinguishes the Thunder Bird from any ordinary hawk is nothing like 5
what, for us, distinguishes the Wolf of Little Red Riding Hood from the wolf of the 6
forest. The distinction is not between animals of fantasy and of fact, but rather between 7
animals that are persons and animals that are not. Animal persons are no more fantastic 8
than human ones. Ojibwa do, nevertheless, differentiate between narratives of past expe- 9
rience of these two sorts of person. Hallowell calls them ‘myths’ and ‘stories’ respectively 30
(OO, pp. 26–7). Stories recount events in the lives of human beings, from the anecdotal 1
to the legendary. Myths, by contrast, tell of the lives of non-human persons – or, to be 2
more precise, the myths are these persons, who, in the telling, are not merely commem- 3
orated but actually made present for the assembled audience, as though they had been 4
brought to life and invited in. For this reason, the narration of myth is a ritualised event, 5
and there are restrictions on who can tell it and when it can be told. But despite these 6
formalities, myths are no less true, or more phantasmagoric, than stories. The difference 7
is simply that in myths, the protagonists are persons of the ‘other-than-human’ class, other- 8
wise known and addressed by the inclusive kinship term, ‘grandfathers’.
OTHER-THAN-HUMAN GRANDFATHERS
All persons, whether human or not, share the same fundamental structure. This structure 3
consists, in Hallowell’s words, of ‘an inner vital part that is enduring and an outward 4
form which can change’ (OO, p. 42). The inner essence, or soul, holds the attributes of 5
sentience, volition, memory and speech. Any being that possesses these attributes is a 6
person, irrespective of the intrinsically unstable form in which it appears. Now while 7
human persons and other-than-human grandfathers are alike in this regard, such that no 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

absolute division in kind can be drawn between them, they do differ in degree – that is,
in the amount of power a person possesses and hence in their capacity for metamorphosis.
Grandfathers are more powerful than living humans. Most powerful are the Sun, the Four
Winds, the Thunder Birds, and the spirit ‘masters’ of all the different species of animals.
These beings are immortal, but can change their form with relative ease, appearing now
as a human, now as an animal, now perhaps as some meteorological phenomenon – as
we have seen with the Thunder Bird. In myth the Bird can ﬁgure as a man or woman,
in dreams it shows up as a hawk, in waking life it announces its presence as a thunderclap. By contrast, only the most powerful human persons, such as sorcerers and shamans,
can change into a non-human form and make it back again – and then only with some
danger and difﬁculty. Sorcerers, for example, can transform themselves into bears in order
better to pursue their nefarious activities.
However for most humans, metamorphosis means death: indeed the only change of
form that all humans undergo is brought about upon their demise. As with any metamorphosis, death involves an alteration of manifest appearance, while the vital essence of
the person continues its existence in some other form. Spirits of the dead are that much
more powerful, and can manifest themselves in the guise of either ghosts (which may be
seen or heard) or animals, often birds.6 But whereas the power of human persons always
increases when they die, there is only one way in which they can grow in power during
their lifetimes, and that is through the guardianship or tutelage of one or more grandfathers. For men in particular, grandfatherly assistance is considered crucial for coping with
the vicissitudes of life. In the past, every boy, on reaching puberty, would embark upon
a prolonged period of fasting. Alone in the forest, he would hope to dream of his future
guardian, from whom he would receive blessings that would see him through all kinds of
difﬁculties in later life – so long as he met certain necessary obligations towards the grandfather concerned. In one account, for example, a boy encountered a human-like ﬁgure in
his dream, who then turned into a golden eagle. This person was the ‘master’ of the eagles.
The boy, too, was transformed into an eagle in his dream – thus winged and feathered,
he ﬂew to the south with his new protector, before returning to the point whence he
originally departed (Hallowell, Culture and Experience (CE), 1955, p. 178).
Now the idea that a human being can be turned into a bear prowling in the forest, or
an eagle soaring in the sky, is simply inconceivable within the normal canons of Western
thought. Any creature born of human parents, it is supposed, is bound within the limitations of the human bodily frame, whatever environmental circumstances may be
encountered during its lifetime. It is these bodily speciﬁcations that are ﬁxed and enduring,
whereas ways of thinking, feeling, speaking and behaving – adding up to what is conventionally known as ‘culture’ – are variable, even within the life-history of a single individual.
This seems to be the precise inverse of the Ojibwa model of the person, according to
which it is the variable body that clothes a constant spiritual essence comprising the powers
of self-awareness, intentionality, sentience, and speech. In their encounter with EuroAmericans, Ojibwa were evidently troubled by the incompatibility between these different
ontologies of personal being. John Tanner, a white man who grew up among Ojibwa
people during the early nineteenth century and subsequently wrote of his experiences,
claimed that the ursine sorcerer, prowling around at night, was actually a man dressed up
in a bear skin (CE, p. 177). This, and other similar statements by both native and nonnative informants, may be understood, according to Hallowell, as ‘rationalizations advanced
by individuals who are attempting to reconcile Ojibwa beliefs and observation with the
disbelief encountered in their relations with whites’ (OO, p. 37).

Livelihood
Rendering metamorphosis as a kind of dressing up is certainly one way of explaining it 1
– or rather, explaining it away – in terms that Westerners would understand. The person’s 2
bodily form does not actually change, it is merely concealed beneath an outer clothing, a 3
disguise. Yet as Viveiros de Castro has noted (1998), the description of metamorphosis 4
as an enclothing of the soul, far from being a peculiar response to ontological disjuncture, 5
is very widely reported in the ethnography of native Amerindian peoples. Contrary to 6
Hallowell’s interpretation, it seems that the idea of dressing up is not, in itself, foreign 7
to indigenous understanding. What is foreign is rather the idea that the function of cloth- 8
ing is to disguise or conceal. In Amerindian cosmology, clothing does not cover up the 9
body, it is a body (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 482). It serves, in other words, not to conceal 10
but to enable, furnishing the distinctive equipment – including skills and dispositions as 1
well as anatomical devices – by which a person can carry on a particular kind of life in the 2
world. Viveiros de Castro (ibid.) likens the adoption of a speciﬁc bodily form to the diver’s 3
donning of a wet-suit, the purpose of which is not to disguise the wearer as a ﬁsh, but to 4
enable him to swim like one. Thus metamorphosis is not a covering up, but an opening 5
up, of the person to the world. A person who can take on many forms can turn up in all 6
kinds of situations, now in one form, now in another, each one affording a different 7
perspective. The greater the person’s powers of metamorphosis, the wider the range of their 8
practical possibilities of being, and hence the more extensive the breadth of their experience 9
and the scope of their phenomenal presence.
The idea that by clothing himself with the bodily forms of one animal after another, 1
the wearer is enabled to proceed through a series of trials calling for diverse strengths and 2
capabilities, is beautifully illustrated by an Ojibwa story collected by Homer Huntington 3
Kidder in the 1890s. The storyteller was Jacque LePique, a character of mixed parentage 4
and ﬂuent in English and Canadian French as well as Ojibwa and Cree. The tale concerns 5
a man named Iron Maker who, along with eleven companions, sank to the bottom of a 6
lake after their boat had capsized. Following an encounter at the lake bottom with an old 7
man, an old woman and a snake, Iron Maker found himself gasping for breath at the 8
surface of the water.
He thought of the beaver, whereupon the beaver came to him and gave him his body. 1
He swam towards the shore, but before he could reach it, he felt himself losing the 2
power to keep the shape of the beaver. So he thought of the otter. Then the otter gave 3
him his body, and in that form he reached land.
There Iron Maker found himself naked in his own body. It was freezing weather 5
. . . He would have died of cold but for the help of four other animals which, one after 6
another, lent him their bodies to get home: First the bear, in whose shape he went a 7
good way, then the lynx, then the raccoon, and after that the ox (buffalo).
When Iron Maker no longer had the power to keep the shape of the ox, he was 9
pretty near his lodge. He ran home naked and fell at the door half dead with cold. 40
(in Bourgeois 1994: 69) 1
Like Puck in Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream – whose lines head this chapter, 3
and who threatened to appear in the forms, successively, of a horse, a hound, a hog, a 4
headless bear and a ﬁre – Iron Maker made it home from the bottom of the lake, ﬁrst 5
as a beaver, then as an otter, then as a bear, a lynx, a raccoon and an ox.
Now all of this leaves us with a problem of the following kind. We may accept that a 7
person can change their form at will, knowing all the while that the character in question 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

exists, like Shakespeare’s Puck, only as a dramatis persona in a masque or play, who is
actually being impersonated by an ordinary human actor. But if I were to report, in all
sincerity, having encountered such a character as Puck or Iron Maker in real life, I doubt
whether much credence would be given to my claims. People would say that if I was not
actually lying, then I must be suffering from delusions, leaving me incapable of telling
fact from fantasy, or reality from dreams. Yet these are precisely the sorts of claims that
Ojibwa make. Are they, then, lying or deluded?
Accusations of both kinds have been levelled often enough, against Ojibwa people and
others who think like them, reinforcing the stereotype of the primitive Indian who can
neither think logically nor be trusted. Anthropologists, by temperament and training, are
inclined to be rather more sympathetic to native accounts. By and large, however, they
adopt an expository strategy not unlike that of the theatre-goer attending a performance
of Shakespeare’s Dream, amounting to a willing suspension of disbelief. This strategy
makes it possible to get on with the job of understanding what people are telling us,
without our having to worry about whether there is any foundation in reality for what
they have to say (see Chapter One, p. 14). Hallowell himself does just this, when he
argues that what, for the Ojibwa, are attributes of personhood form part of a comprehensive ‘worldview’ that is projected onto reality-as-we-know-it. His concern is to
understand the world view, not the fundamental nature of reality. Yet he goes on to stress
that Ojibwa do not, themselves, ‘personify’ natural objects (OO, p. 29). For example, the
sun is perceived as a person of the ‘other-than-human’ class; it is not perceived initially
as a natural object onto which ‘person’ attributes are subsequently projected. It is not, in
other words, made into a person; it is a person, period.
Now there is more than a hint of duplicity here. It would be a mistake, says Hallowell,
to suppose that Ojibwa personify objects, yet from his standpoint as an anthropological
observer, this appears to be precisely what they are doing. Evidently what Hallowell takes
to be a particular cultural construction of an external reality is, in Ojibwa eyes, the only
reality they know. For the Ojibwa, the sun is a person because it is experienced as such;
for Hallowell the sun is not really a person but is constructed as such in the minds of
the Ojibwa. And if it is not really a person, then it cannot really undergo metamorphosis.
By this move, Ojibwa metaphysics appear to pose no challenge to our own ontological
certainties. Turning our backs on what Ojibwa people say, we continue to insist that ‘real’
reality is given independently of human experience, and that understanding its nature is
a problem for science. Must we then conclude that the anthropological study of indigenous understandings, whatever its intrinsic interest, can tell us nothing about what the
world is really like, and that it therefore has no bearing on natural scientiﬁc inquiry?

LIVING THINGS AND BEING ALIVE
This question returns us to the paradox I raised in the introduction. The notion that
persons, as beings in the world, can appear in both human and other-than-human forms
may sound strange, but it is not half as strange as the notion that to become a person –
to be in a position to know and reﬂect upon the nature of existence – means taking
oneself out of the world. The challenge for us now is to bring the person, as it were, back
‘down to earth’, to restore it to the primary context of its engagement within an environment. Taking this condition of engagement as our point of departure, can we ﬁnd some
way of making sense of Ojibwa understandings concerning such matters as metamorphosis? Can we, in other words, ground these understandings in the real experience of

Livelihood
persons in a lifeworld rather than attributing them to some overarching cosmological 1
schema for its imaginative reconstruction? To begin to address this challenge, we need to 2
go back to a question which is even more fundamental than that of what makes a person. 3
What makes something alive, or animate?
Hallowell recounts a fascinating anecdote concerning the nature of stones:
I once asked an old man: Are all the stones we see about us here alive? He reﬂected a 7
long while and then replied, ‘No! But some are.’ This qualiﬁed answer made a lasting 8
impression on me.
(OO, p. 24) 10
Now Hallowell had been led to ask this question on account of a peculiarity in the gram- 2
matical structure of the Ojibwa language. Like other languages in the Algonkian family 3
to which it belongs, a formal distinction is allegedly made in this language between 4
‘animate’ and ‘inanimate’ nouns. Stones are grammatically animate, and Hallowell was 5
keen to know why. The answer he received, however, was puzzling in two respects. First, 6
there is the general question of how something as apparently inert as a stone can possibly 7
be alive. But secondly, why should some stones be animate and others not? As Hallowell 8
recognises (OO, p. 23), the categorical distinction between animate and inanimate is not 9
one that Ojibwa articulate themselves, but was rather imposed by Western linguists who 20
brought with them their own conventional understanding of what these terms mean. 1
Before attempting to resolve the puzzle of the stones, we have, therefore, to pause to 2
consider the meaning of the animate as a category of Western thought.
Ever since Plato and Aristotle, it has been customary in the West to envisage the world 4
of nature as made up of a multitude of discrete objects, things, each with its own integrity 5
and essential properties. These things may be grouped into classes of varying degrees of 6
inclusiveness on the basis of selected properties that they are perceived to possess in 7
common. One major class, known as ‘animate’, comprises all those things that are said 8
to possess the property of life. All remaining things, that do not possess this property, are 9
‘inanimate’. There has been much debate about what it takes for something to be alive: 30
vitalists argued for the existence of some mysterious life-force that they thought was infused 1
into all organisms; mechanists dismissed the idea as unscientiﬁc hocus-pocus, but in their 2
enthusiasm to reduce organisms to clockwork they virtually dissolved the animate into the 3
category of the inanimate. The problem was only resolved, after a fashion, by the discovery 4
of the DNA molecule, popularly hailed as the ‘secret of life’, which seemed to offer a 5
basis for distinguishing living things that satisﬁed the objective canons of natural science. 6
Throughout all this debate, however, one fundamental idea has remained unquestioned, 7
namely that life is a qualifying attribute of objects. We look for it in a world that already 8
consists of things-in-themselves, whose essential nature is given without regard to their 9
positioning and involvement within wider ﬁelds of relations.
Now these are the kinds of things – stones, trees, birds, and so on – that are denoted 1
by words of the class grammarians call ‘nouns’. Thus to place the Ojibwa word for stone 2
in the grammatical category ‘animate noun’ is to assume that so far as the language is 3
concerned, all stones are things with the essential attribute of life. The same would go 4
for trees, the sun and moon, thunder, and artefacts like kettles and pipes, the words for 5
which are likewise placed in the ‘animate’ class (OO, p. 23). Judging from his qualiﬁed 6
response, this is something that even the old man whom Hallowell questioned on the 7
matter would have found hard to accept. Reﬂecting on his answer, Hallowell concludes 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

that ‘the Ojibwa do not perceive stones, in general, as animate, any more than we do.
The crucial test is experience. Is there any personal testimony available?’ (OO, p. 25).
And indeed, such testimony can be adduced: Hallowell heard tell of an instance in which,
during a ceremony, a stone was observed to roll over and over, following the master of
the ceremony around the tent, another in which a boulder with contours like a mouth
would actually open its ‘mouth’ when tapped by its owner with a knife, and yet another
where a man asked a particular stone whether it belonged to him and received a negative
response!
The critical feature of all these examples is that the liveliness of stones emerges in the
context of their close involvement with certain persons, and relatively powerful ones at
that. Animacy, in other words, is a property not of stones as such, but of their positioning
within a relational ﬁeld which includes persons as foci of power.7 Or to put in another
way, the power concentrated in persons enlivens that which falls within its sphere of inﬂuence. Thus the animate stone is not so much a living thing as a ‘being alive’. This
immediately makes sense of the old man’s remark, for whether a stone is alive or not will
depend upon the context in which it is placed and experienced. It also explains why
animacy is attributed to artefacts (like kettles and pipes) that are closely bound up with
the lives of persons. But by the same token, it makes a nonsense of the categorical distinction between living and non-living things. It is simply not the case, as Scott Atran
conﬁdently asserts, that people universally divide ‘natural objects’ into two classes, such
that every object either is, or is not, of a ‘living kind’ (Atran 1990: 56). The point is not
that Ojibwa draw classiﬁcatory distinctions along different lines, but rather that in their
ontology, life is not a property of objects at all, but a condition of being.
Indeed strictly speaking, there are no ‘natural objects’ in the Ojibwa world to classify.
As Mary Black has shown through a reanalysis of Hallowell’s ethnography, it is not by
their natures that Ojibwa identify the objects in their everyday environment, as though
each were independently endowed with a ﬁxed combination of distinctive features. Rather
these objects are apprehended ‘in terms of characteristics that deﬁne them as unstable,
changing and inconsistent’. The nature of the things one encounters, their essence, is not
given in advance but is revealed only ‘after-the-fact’, and sometimes only after the lapse
of some considerable period of time, in the light of subsequent experience – which of
course may differ from one person to another. This Ojibwa way of dealing with perception is, as Black puts it, fundamentally antitaxonomic, reducing to a shambles any attempt
to bring it within the bounds of a neatly ordered system of classiﬁcatory divisions (Black
1977a: 101–4). Black’s own ﬁeld research, conducted among the Ojibwa in the 1960s,
lends support to these conclusions. The one thing on which her informants were agreed
was in their dismissal of the tidy classiﬁcations of formal linguistic analysis. They did not
regard classes such as animate and inanimate as mutually exclusive, and objects could
freely shift from one class to the other, depending on the context (Black 1977b: 143).
Most signiﬁcantly for our current concerns, Black also notes that the Ojibwa term
bema.diziwa.d, which comes closest to ‘living things’, literally translates as ‘those who
continue in the state of being alive’. Yet the term might be more accurately glossed, she
suggests, as ‘those who have power’. Now Hallowell tells us that the Ojibwa word for life
‘in the fullest sense’, including health, longevity and good fortune, is pimädäziwim. As
such, it is something that every person strives to achieve (OO, p. 45). But life in this
sense is not given, ready-made, as an attribute of being that may then be expressed in
one way or another. It is rather a project that has continually to be worked at. Life is a
task.8 As an ongoing process of renewal, it is not merely expressive of the way things are,

Livelihood
but is the very generation of being. And power, in effect, is the potential of the life process 1
to generate beings of manifold forms. Thus conceived, it is a property not of individuals 2
in isolation but of the total ﬁeld of relations in which they are situated. Only within such 3
a ﬁeld can a person strive for pimädäziwim (OO, p. 48).
Let me return, for a moment, to the case of the rolling stone that followed its master 5
around the ceremonial tent. On what grounds was it judged to be alive? Clearly, the crit- 6
ical criterion was that it had been observed to move. It did not move of its own volition, 7
since it was controlled by the power of the master; nevertheless the stone acted, it was 8
not acted upon – for example by being pushed or pulled. But once again, in coming to 9
terms with this phenomenon, we must be wary of the characteristically Western assump- 10
tion that the world is full of things which may or may not move of their own accord, 1
depending on whether they are of the animate or inanimate class. As we have seen, it 2
would make no more sense to the Ojibwa than it does to us to suppose that the stone 3
exists as a living thing, as though the property of life were an aspect of its substantive 4
nature, of its ‘thinginess’, as distinct from its movement in the world.9 The movement is 5
not an outward expression of life, but is the very process of the stone’s being alive. The 6
same could be said of trees, which are included in Hallowell’s list of things formally clas- 7
siﬁed in Ojibwa grammar as ‘animate’ (OO, p. 23). The Western biologist would doubtless 8
be more inclined to regard the tree than the stone as a ‘living thing’, by appeal to some 9
aspect of its substantive nature such as DNA or carbon chemistry. For the hunter in the 20
woods, however, what makes a tree alive are its distinctive movements as they are regis- 1
tered in experience: the swaying of its boughs in the wind, the audible ﬂuttering of leaves, 2
the orientation of branches to the sun. Recall that the winds and the sun are persons for 3
the Ojibwa, and can move trees much as powerful humans can move stones.
Different beings, whether or not they qualify as persons, have characteristic patterns of 5
movement – ways of being alive – which reveal them for what they are. The sun, for 6
example, has its own regular pattern of rising and setting, a regularity that, in Hallowell’s 7
words, ‘is of the same order as the habitual activities of human beings’ (OO, p. 29). If 8
we were to consider the sun in abstraction from its observed movement across the sky, 9
then it would indeed appear to be a mere physical body, and its movement a mechan- 30
ical displacement. But this is not how it is presented to us in immediate experience. 1
Rather, the movement is as much a part of the way the sun is as my own habitual move- 2
ments are of the way I am. And these movements, of the sun in the heavens, of trees in 3
the wind, of animals and human beings as they go about their everyday tasks, do not take 4
place against the backdrop of a nature that is ﬁxed, with its locations and distances all 5
laid out in advance. For they are part and parcel of that total life process, of continuous 6
generation, through which the world itself is forever coming into being. In short, living 7
beings do not move upon the world, but move along with it.10 I return to this theme in 8
Chapter Eleven (pp. 198–201).
THE MEANING OF EXPERIENCE
At this point I would like to return to Hallowell’s observation, apropos the vitality of 3
stones, that ‘the crucial test is experience’ (OO, p. 25). What are we to understand by 4
this key word, ‘experience’? And what, precisely, is being tested? One approach to answering 5
these questions might be to argue as follows. There exists on the one hand a real world 6
‘out there’, customarily called nature, whose forms and composition are given quite inde- 7
pendently of the human presence, and on the other hand a world of ideas or mental 118

A circumpolar night’s dream

representations, which bears a relation of only partial correspondence to this external
reality. Some things in the world are not represented in the mind, but some images in
the mind have no counterpart in the real world. It is experience that mediates between
the two worlds, providing both the raw material – in the form of sensory data – from
which ideas are constructed, and the opportunities to test them by empirical observation.
Thus at ﬁrst glance we might form the impression that a certain stone actually moved;
this could then be checked by further examination which would either conﬁrm or refute
the initial hypothesis.
For the Ojibwa, however, knowledge does not lie in the accumulation of mental content.
It is not by representing it in the mind that they get to know the world, but rather by
moving around in their environment, whether in dreams or waking life, by watching,
listening and feeling, actively seeking out the signs by which it is revealed. Experience,
here, amounts to a kind of sensory participation, a coupling of the movement of one’s
own awareness to the movement of aspects of the world. And the kind of knowledge it
yields is not propositional, in the form of hypothetical statements or ‘beliefs’ about the
nature of reality, but personal – consisting of an intimate sensitivity to other ways of
being, to the particular movements, habits and temperaments that reveal each for what it
is. Indeed such knowledge, closely analogous to that which the skilled craftsman has of
his raw material, is not easily articulated in propositional form, and would seem to be
devalued by any attempt to do so – to disembed it from its grounding in the context of
the knower’s personal involvement with the known. This is probably the reason why a
young man who, through a dream encounter, has secured the blessing of an other-thanhuman ‘grandfather’, is forbidden under normal circumstances to speak of his experience
in any detail (OO, p. 46). You keep such things to yourself – although others can tell,
from your subsequent attitudes and behaviour, that you have a new guardian in your life.
‘The concept of the “natural”’, Hallowell tells us, ‘is not present in Ojibwa thought’
(OO, p. 28).11 Experience, therefore, cannot mediate between mind and nature, since
these are not separated in the ﬁrst place. It is rather intrinsic to the ongoing process of
being alive to the world, of the person’s total sensory involvement in an environment. What
then does experience put to the test? Let me try to answer this question by way of another
example. Visual sightings of the Thunder Bird in its hawk-like manifestation are exceedingly rare, yet one boy’s report of such a sighting – initially greeted with some scepticism
– was ﬁnally accepted when his description was found to match precisely that offered by
another man who had encountered the same bird in a dream (OO, p. 32, see also Callicott
1982: 305). People can lie about their encounters with other-than-human persons, sometimes with dire consequences, but in this case the boy must have been telling the truth.
How, otherwise, could he have described the bird so accurately? However the conditions
of truth, in this case, lie not in the correspondence between an external reality and its
ideal representation, but in the authenticity of the experience itself. Rather than conﬁrming
the factual existence of the Thunder Bird as an experience-independent datum of nature,
the boy’s vision was proof of his exceptional powers of perception. It is these powers that
are being constantly tested by experience.
Moreover experiences of this kind are formative. They contribute to the shaping of a
person’s own sense of self, and of their attitudes and orientations towards the world. Or
in short, experience is intrinsic to the generative process wherein persons – both human
and other-than-human – come into being and pursue the goal of life, each within the
ﬁeld of their relations with others. And as Hallowell pointed out in his classic article on
‘The self and its behavioral environment’ (CE, Ch. 4), the process is a mutual one. The

Livelihood
formation of the self is, at one and the same time, the formation of an environment for 1
that self, and both emerge out of a common process of maturation and personal experi- 2
ence. Through this process, ‘an intelligible behavioral environment has been constituted 3
for the individual that bears an intimate relation to the kind of being he knows himself 4
to be and it is in this behavioral environment that he is motivated to act’ (CE, pp. 85–6). 5
The self, in this view, is not the captive subject of the standard Western model, enclosed 6
within the conﬁnes of a body, and entertaining its own conjectures about what the outside 7
world might be like on the basis of the limited information available to it. On the contrary, 8
for Hallowell – as indeed for the Ojibwa who have exercised such an obvious and profound 9
inﬂuence on his thought – the self exists in its ongoing engagement with the environ- 10
ment: it is open to the world, not closed in.
At ﬁrst glance, however, this view of the self seems inconsistent with the structure of 2
personhood that Hallowell attributes to the Ojibwa. Recall that this structure consists of 3
an inner part that endures and an outward appearance that is susceptible to transforma- 4
tion. Does this not imply that the self is enclosed within its bodily garb? We have already 5
seen how the Ojibwa, in common with many other Amerindian peoples, liken the body 6
to a suit of clothing donned by the soul. Not infrequently, indeed, it is compared to a 7
box-like container. But just as clothing does not necessarily imply disguise or cover-up, 8
so containment is not equivalent to enclosure, conﬁnement, or immobilisation. Rather, 9
the body as container is conceived as a kind of vehicle that serves to extend the spatiotem- 20
poral range of a person’s movement, inﬂuence and experience. Thus what Hallowell, in 1
his characterisation of the Ojibwa person, calls its inner essence is not trapped inside the 2
outward form but rather lies behind it – behind the superﬁcial world of appearances. To 3
penetrate beneath the surface of the person is not, then, to go inside into the mind rather 4
than outside into the world. It is rather to dissolve the very boundary that separates mind 5
from world, and ultimately to reach a level where they are one and the same. Nothing 6
better illustrates this point than the difference between Western and Ojibwa interpreta- 7
tions of dreaming.
DREAMING AND METAMORPHOSIS
People in the West are encouraged to think of dreams as hallucinations, comprising a 2
stream of free-ﬂoating images that exist only in the interiority of the unconscious mind, 3
a mind that is freed during sleep from its bodily bearings in the real world. Thus we 4
consider the dreamworld to be the very opposite of the solid, physical world ‘out there’, 5
just as illusion is opposed to reality, fantasy to fact. For the Ojibwa, by contrast, the world 6
of dreams, like that of myth, is continuous with that of one’s waking life. Just as myths 7
are understood as the past experiences of other-than-human persons, so dreams are among 8
the past experiences of human selves (CE, p. 181). In their dreams, humans meet the 9
grandfatherly protagonists of myth, and carry on activities with them in a familiar land- 40
scape, albeit viewed from an unfamiliar perspective, revealing secrets of the environment 1
that one may not have noticed before but whose presence is invariably conﬁrmed by subse- 2
quent inspection. This is not to say that Ojibwa confuse dream experiences with those 3
they have while wide awake. The difference is that in dreams, the vital essence of the 4
person – the self – is afforded a degree of mobility, not only in space but also in time, 5
normally denied in waking life. While the body of the sleeper is readily visible at some 6
ﬁxed location, the self may be roaming far aﬁeld (OO, p. 41). A sorcerer, for example, 7
may be observed lying asleep in his tent, but in his dream he meets you while you were 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 101 •

out hunting in the forest. And sure enough, when you were hunting recently, you had
an unnerving encounter with a bear. The bear was the sorcerer, who was ‘bearwalking’
(OO, p. 36).12
Both Western and Ojibwa people might agree that in a certain sense, dreaming liberates the mind from its bodily housing. But whereas in the Western conception, this
amounts to a taking leave of reality, for the Ojibwa it allows complete freedom of
movement within the earthly and cosmic space of ordinary life (Callicott 1982: 304). The
dreaming mind, far from cutting its already tenuous and provisional connection with
the real world, is able to penetrate that world to the point where mind and world become
indistinguishable. This difference of interpretation has its roots in fundamental ontological
assumptions. Mainstream Western philosophy starts from the premise that the mind is
distinct from the world; it is a facility that the person, presumed human, brings to the
world in order to make sense of it. When it is not busy making sense of the world, during
‘time off’, it dreams. For the Ojibwa, on the other hand, the mind subsists in the very
involvement of the person in the world. Rather than approaching the world from a position
outside of it, the person in Ojibwa eyes can only exist as a being in the world, caught
up in an ongoing set of relationships with components of the lived-in environment.
And the meanings that are found in the world, instead of being superimposed upon it
by the mind, are drawn from the contexts of this personal involvement. Thus the dreaming
self in its nocturnal journeys, far from taking a break from the demands of coping with
reality, sets out in search of meanings that will help to make sense of the experiences of
waking life.
With these observations in mind, let me return to the problem of metamorphosis. How
are we to respond to the objections of the sceptic to the effect that whatever people may
say, humans cannot really turn into eagles or bears, or thunder into a kind of hawk, or
vice versa? From an Ojibwa perspective, this objection is not so much false as beside the
point. Metamorphosis may not occur in ordinary waking life, but it certainly occurs in
dreams. And as Hallowell is at pains to stress, ‘there is nothing psychologically abstruse
about the incorporation of dreams into the category of self-related experiences’ (CE,
p. 96). The awareness of the self is as phenomenally real when one is dreaming as when
one is awake, and these dream experiences are built into the constitution of the self by
memory processes that are no different from those working on the experiences of waking
life. Consider the case of the boy who, in the midst of a storm, witnessed the Thunder
Bird in its hawk-like guise. What if he was only dreaming? Even when awake, we too
can sometimes let our imaginations wander, and see things that are not ‘really’ there. But
from the point of view of the experience of the self, it makes no difference whether the
boy was awake, day-dreaming or actually asleep. He still saw the bird, was moved to
wonder by its presence, and remembered the encounter for the rest of his life. Experiences
undergone when asleep are just as much a part of autobiographical memory as are experiences when awake (OO, p. 42).
If, then, we accept that whether awake or asleep, the person’s encounters are those of
a being-in-the-world, it follows, as Hallowell puts it, ‘that metamorphosis can be personally experienced’ (CE, p. 180). Far from covering over a solid substrate of literal reality
with layer upon layer of illusion, what dreams do is to penetrate beneath the surface of
the world, to render it transparent, so that one can see into it with a clarity and vision
that is not possible in ordinary life. In dreams, for the Ojibwa, the world is opened up
to the dreamer, it is revealed. This is why they attach such a tremendous importance to
dreaming as a source of knowledge, for the knowledge revealed through dreams is also a

Livelihood
source of power. Of course this knowledge is of a different kind from what people in the 1
West call science. As I pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, the very project 2
of natural science is premised on the detachment of the human subject from the world 3
that is the object of his or her inquiry. The Ojibwa, starting off from the opposite premise 4
– that the subject can exist only as a being in the world – have arrived at something quite 5
different: not a natural science but a poetics of dwelling (on this contrast, see Chapter 6
One, pp. 25–6). And it is within the context of such a poetics that Ojibwa ideas about 7
metamorphosis, the personhood of the sun, the winds and thunder, the liveliness of stones, 8
and so on, should be understood.
THE SOUNDS OF SPEECH
I shall return, in the conclusion to this chapter, to the relation between poetics and science. 3
Before doing so, I should like to elaborate further on the contrast between Western and 4
Ojibwa models of the person with particular reference to the criterion which, more than 5
anything else, is adduced to justify claims to the unique status of humanity: namely the 6
capacity for speech. For the Ojibwa, according to Hallowell, the essential powers of person- 7
hood include, besides speech, sentience, volition and memory. Those of us brought up in 8
the Western tradition of thought would have no particular problem with this idea. We 9
do have a problem, however, when it comes to the attribution of these powers to non- 20
human animals, and even more of a problem in attributing them to things that we would 1
regard as inanimate. To give a lead into this problem, let me recount one more anecdote 2
from Hallowell’s Ojibwa study. An old man and his wife are sitting in their tent, and a 3
storm is raging outside. There is thunder and lightning. The thunder comes in a series 4
of claps. The old man listens intently. Then he turns to his wife and asks, quite casually 5
and in a matter-of-fact tone of voice, ‘Did you hear what was said?’ ‘No’, she replies, ‘I 6
didn’t catch it’ (OO, p. 34). What are we to make of this?
Certainly, so long as we remain with a Western view of the nature of sentience, voli- 8
tion, memory and speech, the story seems incredible. The language of agency that we are 9
accustomed to use posits a being, the agent, who is endowed with will and purpose, and 30
whose existence and identity are given independently of any action that he or she chooses 1
to initiate. Thus I may or may not choose to speak, or I may decide to say one thing 2
rather than another, but as a being with intentions and purposes – that is, as a person – 3
I am not the same as my speech. Likewise I may choose to clap my hands, but as a phys- 4
ical event in the world, the clap exists apart from myself – the person who claps. Notice 5
the similarity between this notion of agency, as an inherent attribute of persons as distinct 6
from their overt behaviour, and the notion of animacy built into the Western notion of 7
‘living things’, which, as we have already seen, construes life as a substantive property of 8
objects as distinct from their movement in the world.
Does the thunder, then, clap like I do? Though we might say ‘the thunder claps’, we 40
know perfectly well that we are speaking ﬁguratively, as though there were some being in 1
the heavens with intentions and purposes rather like our own, and who claps like a human 2
person, except on a more awesome scale. In reality, we are sure there is no such cosmic 3
being. And to get around the problem of how something can occur without an agent to 4
produce it, we may use an alternative form of words, such as ‘there was a clap of thunder’. 5
The point is that thunder does not exist separately from its clap, in the way that I am 6
supposed to exist separately from mine. Rather, the clap is thunder; it is the acoustic form 7
of thunder’s phenomenal presence in the world. Through the clap, the thunder audibly 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 103 •

exists for those who hear it. Let me put this contrast in another way, while keeping for
the moment to the terms of the Western model of personal agency. When I speak, or for
that matter when I clap, it is because I have an idea. My concern is to communicate that
idea, and I do so by means of coded signs or signals which travel in the medium of sound.
By converting ideas in the mind into physical impulses in the world, information is transmitted. But the thunder is not transmitting a message. Of course it affects us; we are
moved by the sound, perhaps a little scared. But we do not look for a message in the
sound or ask, as did the old man in Hallowell’s story, ‘Did you hear what was said?’
As this example shows, Western thought systematically distinguishes the sounds of
speech, along with other sound-producing gestures whose purpose is to give outward
expression to inner ideas or mental states, from the sounds of nature that are just there
but have not been produced by anybody. My clap and the thunderclap fall on either side
of this division. And the dichotomy between interior mental states and their outward
physical or behavioural expression that underwrites this conception of the distinctiveness
of speech also applies to the way we tend to think about other aspects of personhood –
sentience, volition, memory. Thus volition implies the intentionality of action, but Western
thought sees intentionality as residing not in the action itself but in a thought or plan
that the mind places before the action and which the latter is supposed to execute. Likewise
we are inclined to think of memory as a store of images in the mind, rather than of
remembering as an activity situated in the world. And we talk about sentience in terms
of inner states or ‘feelings’, instead of focusing on the perceptual activity of feeling the
world around us. In short the self, as the locus of ideas, plans, memories and feelings,
seems to exist as a substantive entity quite independently of where it is and what it does.
Behind all this is a model of the person which, as we have already seen, identiﬁes the
self with an interior intelligence, the conscious mind, enclosed by its physical container,
the body. According to this model, the body picks up sensory signals from the world
around it and passes them to the mind, which processes them to form images or representations. Through a logical manipulation of these representations, the mind formulates
plans of action, which are then passed as instructions for the body to execute in the world.
The mind itself may be envisaged as many-layered, with outer layers of consciousness
covering over deeper, more subterranean levels of the unconscious. Locked up in there,
directly known only to ourselves, are our thoughts, feelings and memories, which can only
be released, and made known to others, by way of their bodily enactment in speech and
gesture. The Ojibwa model of the person, however, is quite different. As shown schematically in Figure 6.1, this model does not posit the self in advance of the person’s entry
into the world; rather, the self is constituted as a centre of agency and awareness in the
process of its active engagement within an environment. Feeling, remembering, intending
and speaking are all aspects of that engagement, and through it the self continually comes
into being.
In short, the Ojibwa self is relational (Bird-David 1999: S77–8). If we were to ask
where it is, the answer would not be ‘inside the head rather than out there in the world’.
For the self exists, or rather becomes, in the unfolding of those very relations that are set
up by virtue of a being’s positioning in the world, reaching out into the environment –
and connecting with other selves – along these relational pathways. Taking this view of
the person, as Hallowell does, it is clear that no physical barrier can come between mind
and world. ‘Any inner–outer dichotomy’, he asserts, ‘with the human skin as boundary,
is psychologically irrelevant’ (CE, p. 88). But this is precisely the dichotomy, as we have
seen, by which speech and similar expressive gestures are conventionally distinguished from

Livelihood
MIND
WORLD
perceptual input
feelings
memories
plans
ideas
behavioural output
BODY
THE OJIBWA MODEL
SELF
ENVIRONMENT
 feeling
remembering
 intending
 speaking
Figure 6.1 Western and Ojibwa models of the person.
the sounds of nature. To take Hallowell at his word means having to adopt a quite 8
different view of speech, not as the outward expression of inner thoughts, but as one of 9
the ways in which the self manifests its presence in the world. Thus when I speak or clap, 30
I myself am not separate from the sound I produce – of my voice or the mutually percus- 1
sive impact of my hands. These sounds are part of the way I am, they belong to my being 2
as it issues forth into the environment. In other words, speech is not a mode of trans- 3
mitting information or mental content; it is a way of being alive.
Now if we take this view of speech, there is no longer anything so odd about supposing, 5
as the Ojibwa do, that thunder can speak, and that other people can hear. The rumbling 6
of thunder is the manifestation of its presence in the world, just as the sounds of human 7
speaking, singing, clapping or drumming are manifestations of ours. Likewise in ‘conjuring 8
performances’ (Hallowell 1942, 1976: 459), when the voices of grandfatherly other-than- 9
human persons are heard to issue from the interior of a barrel-shaped tent which is 40
constantly shaken about by their activity, each character makes his presence felt, and is 1
recognised by the audience, on account of the peculiarity of his speech, including features 2
of voice, vocabulary and intonation. Thus the world in which the Ojibwa dwell is poly- 3
glot, full of beings with their own diverse styles of speaking or singing.13 As people move 4
through the forest in hunting, or hear myths being recited, or sit around the outside of 5
the conjuring lodge, they constantly listen out for the sounds that are the signatures of 6
these manifold life-forms, and respond with speech-sounds of their own. Non-human 7
sounds like thunder or animal calls, the voices of other-than-human persons, and the 118
THE WESTERN MODEL

A circumpolar night’s dream • 105 •

speech of human beings are alike in that they not only have the power to move those
who hear them, but also take their meaning from the contexts in which they are heard.
In these respects, no fundamental line of demarcation can be drawn between the sounds
of nature and of human speech.
Is there any signiﬁcance, then, in the fact that the thunder was heard instead of seen?
There is a long tradition in the history of Western thought, which I review at length in
Chapter Fourteen, of distinguishing between vision and hearing along the lines that the
former is remote and objective, cutting the viewer off from things seen, whereas the latter
is intimate and subjective, establishing a kind of interpenetration or resonance between
the listener and the world. There are some hints, in Hallowell’s account, that the Ojibwa
might make a similar kind of distinction. Thus he tells us that under no circumstances can
the inner essence of the person, the soul, be a direct object of visual perception. ‘What
can be perceived visually is only that aspect of being that has some form or structure . . .
The only sensory mode under which it is possible to directly perceive the presence of souls
. . . is the auditory one’ (CE, pp. 179–80). This is why the other-than-human persons
of the shaking tent ceremony are heard but never seen. So far as the audience is concerned
these persons are their voices, just as thunder is its clap. In both cases sound is of
the essence of being rather than its outward expression. However there are counterindications, too, that Ojibwa might not, or at least not always, make such a radical distinction between seeing and hearing.
One such indication is that ghosts, the outward form of spirits of the dead, can be
heard as well as seen. They are known to whistle (CE, p. 174). But more signiﬁcantly,
the notion that vision presents us with a world of objective forms rests upon an assumption that is incompatible with the relational model of the person presented above. This
assumption, which is implicit in most studies of visual perception by Western psychologists, is that seeing things involves the formation of images in the mind on the basis of
sensory data drawn from the play of light upon the retinal surfaces of the eyes. Now in
an earlier section on the meaning of experience for the Ojibwa, I showed that for a being
who is alive to its surroundings, experience does not mediate between things in the world
and representations in the mind, but is intrinsic to the sensory coupling, in perception
and action, of the awareness of the self to the movement of those features of the environment selected as foci of attention. This view of experience calls for a quite different
understanding of vision. It would be premised on the notion of the perceiver as an active
participant in an environment rather than a passive recipient of stimuli, one whose vision
penetrates the world rather than holding up a mirror to it. David Smith, writing of the
Chipewyan of the northwest Canadian subarctic, has drawn attention to the importance
of precisely this kind of vision to their ‘bush sensibility’. The hunter and trapper, making
his way through bush or forest, has at all times to watch what is going on. Yet as Smith
also shows, regarded as a form of dynamic, sensory resonance, seeing does not differ in
principle from hearing, and when it comes to people’s pragmatic, ﬁrst-hand experience of
moving around in the environment, they are so closely intertwined as to be inseparable
(Smith 1998: 413–14, see also Chapter Fourteen, pp. 276–81). I suspect that this is as
true for the Ojibwa as it is for the Chipewyan, and therefore that vision and hearing are
not, in fact, sharply differentiated in their practice.14
Before leaving the topic of hearing and speech, one more issue remains to be dealt
with. It arises from Hallowell’s remark, apropos the old man’s questioning of his wife
about the thunder, that ‘he was reacting to this sound in the same way as he would
respond to a human being, whose words he did not understand’ (OO, p. 34). We have

Livelihood
seen that the Ojibwa lifeworld is polyglot, inhabited by manifold beings each with their 1
own particular pattern of speech. It is tempting to compare these different patterns to the 2
diverse languages of human communities, as though understanding the sounds of thunder, 3
the winds, the various forms of animal life, and so on were a problem of translation, of 4
rendering meanings expressed in a multitude of foreign tongues in terms of one’s own. 5
Was the old man, then, asking his wife to translate for him? Were the words of the 6
thunder spoken so quickly that, with his imperfect grasp of the language, he failed to 7
grasp what had been said? Now the metaphor of translation implies a certain view of 8
language or speech, as a vehicle for the outward expression of inner ideas. To translate 9
is, then, to ‘carry across’ an idea encoded in one expressive medium into the terms of 10
another. I have argued, however, that in attributing the power of speech to thunder, 1
Ojibwa do not suppose that it is trying to transmit ideas to humans, but rather that its 2
presence in the world, like that of other beings whether human or other-than-human, can 3
take an acoustic form. Responding to that presence with sensitivity and understanding is 4
not therefore a matter of translation. It is more a matter of empathy.
Consider, for example, the response of a mother to the cry of her baby. Because of the 6
special relationship between them, she hears that cry – it is immediately intelligible to her 7
in a way that the cries of other infants are not. To be understood, the cry does not ﬁrst 8
have to be rendered intelligible through translation into a language that she and others 9
can comprehend. I would suggest that the old man in Hallowell’s story may have heard 20
the thunder in the same way. He, too, must have had a special relationship with the 1
Thunder Bird. Indeed in one of his last papers on the Ojibwa, ﬁrst published in 1966, 2
Hallowell adds a crucial qualiﬁcation to his earlier interpretation of the story of the old 3
man, the old woman and the thunder. ‘By and large’, he observes, ‘the Ojibwa do not 4
attune themselves to receiving messages every time a thunderstorm occurs’. Thus to under- 5
stand the old man’s response we have to realise that he had had previous contacts with 6
the Thunder Bird in the dreams of his puberty fast (Hallowell 1976: 459). He was there- 7
fore sensitised to the sound of thunder in a way that ordinary Ojibwa (including his wife) 8
were not. He could empathise with it. Of course, total empathy is as impossible to achieve 9
as perfect translation. But they proceed in quite different ways. Rather than shifting into 30
another register of expression, the achievement of empathy means taking on another way 1
of being. Full understanding, in short, is attained not through translation but through meta- 2
morphosis. And this happens, above all, in dreams.
NATURALISM AND ANIMISM
Are the Ojibwa animists? In recent anthropology the concept of animism has had a rather 7
bad press, on account of its liberal use in the past to brand, as primitive superstition, 8
systems of belief which allegedly attribute spirits or souls to things, living or non-living, 9
which to any rational, thinking person are ‘obviously’ mere objects of nature (for a review 40
of these usages, see Bird-David 1999: S67–8). Philippe Descola, however, suggests a way 1
of considering animism that is rather more respectful of indigenous understandings. 2
Animism, he writes, is ‘a kind of objectiﬁcation of nature [which] endows natural beings 3
not only with human dispositions, granting them the status of persons with human 4
emotions and often the ability to talk, but also with social attributes – a hierarchy of posi- 5
tions, behaviours based on kinship, respect for certain norms of conduct’ (Descola 1992: 6
114). Though Descola draws his ethnographic illustrations from Amazonian societies, this 7
characterisation of what he calls ‘animic systems’ would seem readily applicable to the 118

A circumpolar night’s dream • 107 •

Ojibwa case as depicted in Hallowell’s account. Critically, in such a system, relations
between persons – that is, social relations – can override the boundaries of humanity as
a species. Thus, as Hallowell reports, ‘the world of personal relations in which the Ojibwa
live is a world in which vital social relations transcend those which are maintained with
human beings’ (OO, p. 43). To this one might add that a person’s social relations are
carried on in the same space as, and are continuous with, relations with other constituents
of their environment, that is with non-persons. There is, then, no radical break between
the domains of social and ecological relations.
Following Descola’s lead, we might set out to draw a systematic comparison between
the animism of peoples like the Ojibwa and the naturalism of Western thought and science.
Whereas animism takes the relational character of the world as an ontological a priori,
against which the ‘naturalness’ of beings – the material forms in which they appear –
stands out as unstable and problematic, naturalism takes it for granted that nature really
exists, as an ontological domain of order and necessity where things are what they are, in
themselves. Against this world of nature, it is the status and the forms of human culture
that appear problematic (Descola 1996a: 88, see also Viveiros de Castro 1998: 478). Yet
for Descola, animism and naturalism (along with totemism, consideration of which I
reserve for the next chapter) may be regarded as alternative ‘schemata of praxis’, in other
words as ‘mental models which organise the social objectivation of non-humans’ (1996a:
87). This appeal to the language of mental models, to the idea of accommodating beings
that are really non-human into schemes of representation that construct them as social
and therefore human, belongs squarely within a naturalist ontology, and it is from this
that the terms of the comparison are derived. For what these terms do is to preserve a
space for ‘really natural’ nature which is unaffected by the diverse constructions that the
human mind might place upon it. Thus the comparison between naturalism and animism,
since it is done on naturalism’s terms, is hardly a fair or balanced one (see Chapter Three,
pp. 41–2).
My purpose in this chapter has been to redress the balance. Instead of trying to comprehend Ojibwa understandings within a comparative framework which already presupposes
the separation of mind and nature, I have been concerned to place the mode of understanding of Western science within the context of the primary existential condition,
revealed in Ojibwa thought and practice, of being alive to the world. Let me summarily
take stock of these two approaches. The ﬁrst posits a world ‘out there’ full of objects,
animate and inanimate. The life process of animate objects, being the expression of their
essential nature (nowadays understood as their genetic constitution) under given environmental conditions, is understood to be purely consequential, an ‘effect’ (see Chapter One,
p. 19). Hence an additional principle, of mind or consciousness, has to be invoked to
account for the powers of intentionality and awareness that we normally attribute to
persons. In animic systems such as those of the Ojibwa, these powers are said to be
projected onto non-human kinds. So long as we follow Descola in assuming that in reality,
they are reserved for human beings, such projection is bound to be anthropomorphic. If,
in other words, only humans really have intentions, to represent non-humans such as bears
as though they were persons with intentions is necessarily to represent them as human (see
Kennedy 1992: 9). That is why Descola builds a component of anthropomorphism into
his very deﬁnition of animism, as a system that endows natural beings with human capacities. Only beings thus endowed, it seems, can have social relations.
Working from an Ojibwa notion of animacy, not as an empirical property of things
but as an existential condition of being, my argument has followed an alternative path.

Livelihood
This has been to envisage the world from the point of view of a being within it, as a 1
total ﬁeld of relations whose unfolding is tantamount to the process of life itself. Every 2
being emerges, with its particular form, dispositions and capacities, as a locus of growth 3
– or in Ojibwa terms, as a focus of power – within this ﬁeld. Mind, then, is not added 4
on to life but is immanent in the intentional engagement, in perception and action, of 5
living beings with the constituents of their environments. Thus the world is not an external 6
domain of objects that I look at, or do things to, but is rather going on, or undergoing 7
continuous generation, with me and around me. As such primary engagement is a condi- 8
tion of being, it must also be a condition of knowledge, whether or not the knowledge 9
in question is deemed to be ‘scientiﬁc’. All properly scientiﬁc knowledge rests upon obser- 10
vation, but there can be no observation without participation – without the observer’s 1
coupling the movement of his or her attention to surrounding currents of activity. Thus 2
the approach I have followed here is not an alternative to science, as animism is to natu- 3
ralism; it rather seeks to restore the practices of science to the contexts of human life in 4
the world. For it is from such contexts that all knowledge grows.
This approach has two further implications that I would like brieﬂy to explore. The 6
ﬁrst takes us back to the question of anthropomorphism, the second concerns what I shall 7
call the ‘genealogical model’. Natural science, as von Bertalanffy has put it (1955: 258–9), 8
approaches the world through a ‘progressive de-anthropomorphization’, that is, through 9
the attempt to expunge from its notion of reality all that can be put down to human 20
experience. Thus puriﬁed, nature is revealed to a detached human reason as a domain of 1
things in themselves. Now Ojibwa ontology, too, could be said to entail a process of de- 2
anthropomorphisation, but this operates in a quite different direction. Instead of severing 3
the link between reality and human experience, Ojibwa ontology recognises the reality of 4
the experience of other-than-human beings.15 All experience depends on taking up a posi- 5
tion in the world, tied to a particular form of life, but for the Ojibwa the human is but 6
one form out of many. This, of course, undermines the core assumption that Descola 7
brings to his characterisation of animic systems as inherently anthropomorphic, namely 8
that experience depends upon powers of awareness and intentionality that mark their 9
possessors as uniquely human.
The genealogical model is a way of thinking about the relations between animate beings 1
which rests on the idea that every such being is speciﬁed, in its essential nature, prior to 2
commencing its life in the world. According to the model, the elements of the speciﬁca- 3
tion are received as a kind of endowment, passed on independently of the being’s 4
interaction with its environment. And it is in the passing on or ‘inheritance’ of this endow- 5
ment, from generation to generation, that relations are constituted. I shall consider this 6
model and its implications at length in Chapter Eight. Sufﬁce it to say at this point that 7
the model is central not only to the way modern biology conceives of species and their 8
phylogenetic connections, but also to the conventional anthropological understanding of 9
kinship. Thus a simple line on a kinship diagram indicates that some component of the 40
essence of a person is received, by transmission, at the point of conception, ahead of that 1
person’s growth in an environment. Now from the genealogical model, it is easy to derive 2
the following propositions: ﬁrst, membership of the human – or any other – species is 3
ﬁxed by birth; secondly, the animals most closely related to humans are those (namely 4
the great apes) with which they have the closest genealogical connections; and thirdly, 5
human kinship relations cannot crosscut the species barrier.
From the Ojibwa perspective, none of these propositions is valid. We have seen that 7
beings can change from one species-form to another, that the animals closest to humans 118

