more to highlight the poverty of the argument itself. To show why, let me turn to another 4
example of spiral formation: the vortex of bathwater as it runs out of the plug-hole. Is 5
the form of the vortex a matter of chance? It is certainly not dictated by the speciﬁca- 6
tions of any design. You can determine whether the spiral runs clockwise or anticlockwise 7
by setting up a current through the water with your hand; beyond that, however, the 8
spiral appears to form of its own accord. But its formation is anything but an accident. 9
It can, in fact, be explained in terms of well-established principles of ﬂuid dynamics.
The example of the vortex is not my own; it is taken from the work of the biologist 1
Brian Goodwin (1982), who uses it to say something very important about the genera- 2
tion of spiral forms in living organisms. In a certain species of snail, the majority of 3
individuals have shells with a right-handed, logarithmic spiral, but in some the spiral is 4
left-handed. It has been shown that the direction of the spiral is controlled by the prod- 5
ucts of a particular gene, just as the direction of the spiral vortex in bathwater is controlled 6
by the intentional movement of your hand. But – and this is the crucial point – the form 7
of the shell is no more the product of a genetic programme than is the form of the vortex 8
the product of a design in your mind. There is, in short, no design for the spiral of the 9
gastropod shell. Rather, the form arises through a process of growth within what is known 40
technically as the ‘morphogenetic ﬁeld’ – that is, the total system of relations set up by 1
virtue of the presence of the developing organism in its environment. And the role of 2
genes in the morphogenetic process is not to specify the form, even incompletely, but to 3
set the parameters – such as handedness and spiral angle (see Figure 18.2B) – within 4
which it unfolds (Goodwin 1982: 111).

THE LIMITS OF DESIGN

On weaving a basket • 345 •

ON THE GROWTH OF ARTEFACTS
Returning from the growth of organisms to the manufacture of artefacts, a parallel argument applies. Just as organic form is generated in the unfolding of the morphogenetic
ﬁeld, so the form of the artefact evolves within what I have called a ﬁeld of forces. Both
kinds of ﬁeld cut across the developing interface between the object (organism or artefact) and an environment which, in the case of the artefact, critically includes its ‘maker’.
Where the organism engages its environment in the process of ontogenetic development,
the artefact engages its maker in a pattern of skilled activity. These are truly creative
engagements, in the sense that they actually give rise to the real-world artefactual and
organic forms that we encounter, rather than serving – as the standard view would claim
– to transcribe pre-existent form onto raw material. Moreover as a moment’s reﬂection
on the example of the vortex in bathwater will show, the properties of materials are directly
implicated in the form-generating process. It is therefore no longer possible to sustain the
distinction between form and substance that, as we have seen, is so central to the standard view of making things. Finally, the templates, measures and rules of thumb of the
artisan or craftsman no more add up to a design for the artefacts he produces than do
genes constitute a blueprint for the organism. Like genes, they set the parameters of the
process but do not preﬁgure the form.3
All these points apply to the making of a coiled basket. Thus the equable form of the
spiral base of the basket does not follow the dictates of any design; it is not imposed upon
the material but arises through the work itself. Indeed the developing form acts as its own
template, since each turn of the spiral is made by laying the longitudinal ﬁbres along the
edge formed by the preceding one. Now D’Arcy Thompson was of course right to point
out that there is a difference between bending material into shape, as in basketry, and an
organism’s growing into it, as with the shell of the gastropod, and that this can lead to
forms with contrasting mathematical properties. Nevertheless, if the unfolding of the
morphogenetic ﬁeld is described as a process of growth, would it not be fair to suggest
that there is a sense in which artefacts, whose forms likewise evolve within a ﬁeld of forces,
‘grow’ too – albeit according to different principles?
We could describe that growth as a process of autopoiesis, that is, the self-transformation over time of the system of relations within which an organism or artefact comes into
being. Since the artisan is involved in the same system as the material with which he
works, so his activity does not transform that system but is – like the growth of plants
and animals – part and parcel of the system’s transformation of itself. Through this autopoietic process, the temporal rhythms of life are gradually built into the structural properties
of things – or as Boas put it, with regard to artefacts:
The rhythm of time appears here translated into space. In the ﬂaking, adzing,
hammering, in the regular turning and pressing required in the making of coiled pottery,
in weaving, regularity of form and rhythmic repetition of the same movement are necessarily connected.
(Boas 1955 [1927]: 40)
The artefact, in short, is the crystallisation of activity within a relational ﬁeld, its regularities of form embodying the regularities of movement that gave rise to it.
I would like to conclude this comparison of the coiled basket and the gastropod shell
by commenting on the reasons for the remarkable durability of their respective forms.

Skill
According to the standard view, since form emanates from design, the persistence of form 1
can only be explained in terms of the stability of the underlying design speciﬁcations. In 2
the case of the organism these speciﬁcations are genetic, in the case of the artefact they 3
are cultural. The constancy of form is thus a function of the ﬁdelity with which genetic 4
or cultural information is copied from one generation to the next, combined with the 5
effects of natural selection – or its analogue in the realm of cultural ideas – in weeding 6
out less well-adapted variants.
The argument I have proposed here, however, is just the opposite. If forms are the 8
outcomes of dynamic, morphogenetic processes, then their stability can be understood in 9
terms of the generative principles embedded in the material conditions of their produc- 10
tion. For the shell the principle is one of invariant proportion; for the basket it is the 1
principle that every increment of longitudinal extension is coupled to what has gone 2
before by transverse attachment. Whereas the ﬁrst principle, through simple iteration, 3
will always and everywhere generate a logarithmic spiral, the second will just as reliably 4
generate an equable one. It is these generative principles, and not the ﬁdelity of genetic 5
or cultural copying, that underwrite the constancy of the respective forms, and explain 6
their persistence over immense spans of both historical and evolutionary time.
MAKING AS A WAY OF WEAVING
I now return to my earlier suggestion, that we reverse our normal order of priorities and 1
regard making as a modality of weaving, rather than the other way around. One intriguing 2
observation points us in this direction. Our word ‘loom’ comes from Middle English lome, 3
which originally referred to a tool or utensil of any kind. Does this not suggest that to 4
our predecessors, at least, the surface-building activity of weaving, rather than any of those 5
activities involving the application of force to pre-existing surfaces, somehow epitomised 6
technical processes in general?
The notion of making, of course, deﬁnes an activity purely in terms of its capacity to 8
yield a certain object, whereas weaving focuses on the character of the process by which 9
that object comes into existence. To emphasise making is to regard the object as the 30
expression of an idea; to emphasise weaving is to regard it as the embodiment of a rhythmic 1
movement. Therefore to invert making and weaving is also to invert idea and movement, 2
to see the movement as truly generative of the object rather than merely revelatory of an 3
object that is already present, in an ideal, conceptual or virtual form, in advance of the 4
process that discloses it. The more that objects are removed from the contexts of life- 5
activity in which they are produced and used – the more they appear as static objects of 6
disinterested contemplation (as in museums and galleries) – the more, too, the process 7
disappears or is hidden behind the product, the ﬁnished object. Thus we are inclined to 8
look for the meaning of the object in the idea it expresses rather than in the current of 9
activity to which it properly and originally belongs. It is precisely this contemplative atti- 40
tude that leads to the redesignation of the ordinary objects of the quotidian environment 1
as items of ‘material culture’ whose signiﬁcance lies not so much in their incorporation 2
into a habitual pattern of use as in their symbolic function. In suggesting that the relation 3
between making and weaving be overturned, my purpose is to bring these products of 4
human activity back to life, to restore them to the processes in which they, along with 5
their users, are absorbed.4
In what way, then, does weaving epitomise human technical activity? What sense does 7
it make to say that the blacksmith in his forge, or the carpenter at his bench, in trans- 118

On weaving a basket • 347 •

forming the surfaces of metal and wood respectively, is actually weaving? Of course, to
adopt this idiom is to interpret the notion of weaving more broadly than is customary.
It does however help to draw attention to three points about skill which are exempliﬁed
in basketry but which are nevertheless common to the practice of any craft. First, the
practitioner operates within a ﬁeld of forces set up through his or her engagement with
the material; secondly, the work does not merely involve the mechanical application of
external force but calls for care, judgement and dexterity; and thirdly, the action has a
narrative quality, in the sense that every movement, like every line in a story, grows rhythmically out of the one before and lays the groundwork for the next. In the following
chapter, I shall explore these dimensions of skill at greater length.
This broad interpretation of weaving, though it may sound strange to modern, Western
ears, is fully in accord with the understandings of the Yekuana, a native people of southern
Venezuela. In his study of Yekuana baskets and basketry, David Guss observes that
the master craftsman in this society, a person accredited with exceptional wisdom, ‘not
only weaves the world when making a basket, but in everything he does’ (1989: 170,
my emphasis). Yet this creative process of world-weaving, Guss shows, is not limited to
the experts. It rather engages all Yekuana people throughout their lives – albeit at a lower
level of perfection – in their manufacture of the essential equipment of traditional livelihood. In every case, from building houses and canoes to fabricating manioc graters and
baskets, making is regarded as a way of weaving.
Paradoxically, however, in translating the indigenous term by which such locally
produced items are distinguished from imported, commercially manufactured ‘stuff ’ (such
as tin cans and plastic buckets), Guss renders them as things not woven but made. Moreover
the essence of making, in his view, lies in loading the object with metaphorical signiﬁcance or semiotic content, such that artefacts become a mirror in which people can see
reﬂected the fundamentals of their own culture. The symbolic capacity of artefacts, Guss
insists, ‘far outweighs their functional value’ (1989: 70). Weaving the world, then, turns
out to be a matter of ‘making culture’, of submitting the disorder of nature to the guidelines of traditional design.
Now the epistemology by which Guss converts the manifold products of world-weaving
back into ‘things made’, instances of the cultural transformation of nature (1989: 161),
is one that I reject. It is, as I have shown, an epistemology that takes as given the separation of the cultural imagination from the material world, and thus presupposes the
existence, at their interface, of a surface to be transformed. According to what I have
called the standard view, the human mind is supposed to inscribe its designs upon this
surface through the mechanical application of bodily force – augmented, as appropriate,
by technology. I mean to suggest, to the contrary, that the forms of objects are not imposed
from above but grow from the mutual involvement of people and materials in an environment. The surface of nature is thus an illusion: the blacksmith, carpenter or potter – just
as much as the basket-maker – works from within the world, not upon it. There are
surfaces of course, but these divide states of matter, not matter from mind (see Chapter
Thirteen, pp. 240–1, for further discussion of this point). And they emerge within the
form-generating process, rather than pre-existing as a condition for it.
The philosopher Martin Heidegger expressed the very same point through an exploration of the notions of building and dwelling (see Chapter Ten, pp. 185–6). Opposing
the modernist convention that dwelling is an activity that goes on within, and is structured by, an environment that is already built, Heidegger argued that we cannot engage
in any kind of building activity unless we already dwell within our surroundings. ‘Only

Skill
if we are capable of dwelling’, he declared, ‘only then can we build’ (1971: 160). Now 1
dwelling is to building, in Heidegger’s terms, as weaving is to making in mine. Where 2
making (like building) comes to an end with the completion of a work in its ﬁnal form, 3
weaving (like dwelling) continues for as long as life goes on – punctuated but not termi- 4
nated by the appearance of the pieces that it successively brings into being.5 Dwelling in 5
the world, in short, is tantamount to the ongoing, temporal interweaving of our lives with 6
one another and with the manifold constituents of our environment.
The world of our experience is, indeed, continually and endlessly coming into being 8
around us as we weave. If it has a surface, it is like the surface of the basket: it has no 9
‘inside’ or ‘outside’. Mind is not above, nor nature below; rather, if we ask where mind 10
is, it is in the weave of the surface itself. And it is within this weave that our projects of 1
making, whatever they may be, are formulated and come to fruition. Only if we are 2
capable of weaving, only then can we make.

Tools, minds and machines • 349 •

Chapter Nineteen

Of string bags and birds’ nests
Skill and the construction of artefacts

BEYOND ART AND TECHNOLOGY
‘Art’ and ‘technology’ are mere words. And as with all words, their meanings are not ﬁxed
but have changed signiﬁcantly in the course of their history. They are still changing. But
I believe it remains true of modern – if not post-modern – thought, that the meanings
of art and technology are held to be somehow opposed, as though drawn from ﬁelds of
human endeavour that are in certain respects antithetical. This opposition, however, is
scarcely more than a century old, and would have seemed strange to Anglophone ears as
late as the seventeenth century, when artists were still considered no different from artisans, when the methods of working in any particular branch of art could be described as
‘technical’, and when the term ‘technology’ had just been coined to denote the scientiﬁc
study of these methods (Williams 1976: 33–4). Etymologically, ‘art’ is derived from the
Latin artem or ars, while ‘technology’ was formed upon the stem of the classical Greek
tekhnē. Originally, tekhnē and ars meant much the same thing, namely skill of the kind
associated with craftsmanship (see Chapter Fifteen). The words were used, respectively in
Greek and Roman society, to describe every kind of activity involving the manufacture
of durable objects by people who depended on such work for a living, from the painter
to the cobbler, from the temple architect to the builder of pigsties. This is not to say that
customers failed to distinguish between aesthetic and utilitarian criteria in their estimations of the objects produced. But in every case, it was the craft skill of the practitioner
that was supposed to ensure a successful outcome (Burford 1972: 13–14).
The connotation of skill is preserved in many words derived from the same roots and
that remain in common currency today. On the one hand we have ‘technics’ and ‘technique’; on the other hand such terms as ‘artless’ – meaning clumsy or lacking in skill –
and, of course, ‘artefact’. Yet the apparent continuity masks an important shift, towards
abstracting the components of intelligence, sensibility and expression that are essential to
the accomplishment of any craft from the actual bodily movement of the practitioner in
his or her environment. Thus the technique of the pianist comes to refer to the practised
ability of his ﬁngers to ﬁnd their way around the keyboard and to hit the desired notes,
as distinct from the inherent musicality of the performance. ‘A player may be perfect in
technique’, wrote Sir Charles Grove, ‘and yet have neither soul nor intelligence’. Likewise,
we have come a long way from the days when, as in the year 1610, it was possible to
eulogise a certain composer as ‘the most artiﬁcial and famous Alfonso Ferrabosco’ (Rooley
1990: 5). As David Lowenthal has observed, ‘time has reversed the meaning of artiﬁcial
from “full of deep skill and art” to “shallow, contrived and almost worthless”’ (1996:
209). By the same token, the artefact is regarded no longer as the original outcome of a

Skill
skilled, sensuous engagement between the craftsman and his raw material, but as a copy 1
run off mechanically from a pre-established template or design. This debasement of craft 2
to the ‘merely technical’ or mechanical execution of predetermined operational sequences 3
went hand in hand with the elevation of art to embrace the creative exercise of the imag- 4
ination (Gell 1992b: 56). As a result, the artist came to be radically distinguished from 5
the artisan, and the art-work from the artefact (Coleman 1988: 7).
The decisive break, according to Raymond Williams, came in the England of the late 7
eighteenth century, with the exclusion of engravers from the newly formed Royal Academy, 8
which was reserved for practitioners of the ‘ﬁne’ arts of painting, drawing, and sculpture 9
(Williams 1976: 33). It was, of course, symptomatic of a general tendency to distinguish 10
intellectual from manual labour, along the common axis of a more fundamental series of 1
oppositions between mind and body, creativity and repetition, and freedom and deter- 2
mination. But the more that ‘art’ came to be associated with the allegedly higher human 3
faculties of creativity and imagination, the more its residual connotations of useful but 4
nevertheless habitual bodily skills were swallowed up by the notion of technology. For by 5
the beginning of the twentieth century this term, too, had undergone a crucial shift of 6
meaning. Where once it had referred to the framework of concepts and theory informing 7
the scientiﬁc study of productive practices, technology came to be regarded as a corpus 8
of rules and principles installed at the heart of the apparatus of production itself, whence 9
it was understood to generate practice as a programme generates an output. Technology, 20
now, did not discipline the scholar in his study of techniques, but rather the practitioner 1
in his application of them. He became, in effect, an operative, bound to the mechanical 2
implementation of an objective and impersonal system of productive forces.1
Here, then, lies the source of the now familiar division between the respective ﬁelds of 4
art and technology. An object or performance could be a work of art, rather than a mere 5
artefact, to the extent that it escapes or transcends the determinations of the technolog- 6
ical system. And its creator could be an artist, rather than a mere artisan, insofar as the 7
work is understood to be an expression of his or her own subjective being. Where tech- 8
nological operations are predetermined, art is spontaneous; where the manufacture of 9
artefacts is a process of mechanical replication, art is the creative production of novelty. 30
These distinctions can be multiplied almost indeﬁnitely, but they are all driven by the 1
same logic, which is one that carves out a space for human freedom and subjectivity in 2
a world governed by objective necessity. As I have shown in Chapter Seventeen (pp. 3
329–30), it is a logic that operates as much in the ﬁeld of exchange as in that of produc- 4
tion. Thus the modern distinction between the true work of art and the replicated artefact 5
has its parallel in that between the ‘pure gift’ and the market commodity: the former 6
given spontaneously and motivated (at least in theory) by personal feeling; the latter 7
exchanged in line with impersonal calculations of supply and demand. But in both ﬁelds 8
the distinctions are recent, and closely tied to the rise of a peculiarly modern conception 9
of the human subject.
The division between art and technology, as it has come to be institutionalised in 1
modern society, has affected anthropology as much as any other ﬁeld of inquiry. Until 2
fairly recently, the literatures in the anthropology of art and in the anthropology of tech- 3
nology remained almost completely isolated from one another. Technology was located 4
within the sphere of ecological adaptation, mediating the material relations between human 5
populations and their environments. For assorted cultural ecologists, cultural materialists, 6
and Marxists, the conjunction of environment and technology – if not actually determi- 7
nant of cultural form – constitutes the foundation upon which the house of culture is 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 351 •

built. Art, by contrast, along with such forms as myth and ritual, is supposed to comprise
the patterns on the walls, the world of sensory experience as it is refracted through the
ﬁlters and lenses of the cultural imagination. It mediates a dialogue, not between human
beings and nature, but among persons in society. Like language, it encodes meanings.
Thus technology works; art signiﬁes: technical action is aimed to produce results in a
mechanically determined way, whereas the purpose of art is to communicate ideas. In
short, art has been split from technology along the lines of an opposition between the
mental and the material, and between semiotics and mechanics (see Chapter Sixteen,
pp. 317–18).
Despite the apparent symmetry of this opposition, the respective trajectories of the
anthropologies of art and technology have been decidedly asymmetrical. Having been
placed beyond the pale of culture and society, as a quasi-autonomous system of productive
forces, technology was largely neglected as a subject of anthropological inquiry. Only very
recently has the anthropology of technology, as a subﬁeld, begun to acquire a signiﬁcant
momentum of its own. The anthropology of art, by contrast, has long held a secure place
in the discipline. But the very reasons that have led to the inclusion of art as an object
of study for anthropologists – namely, that it is clearly positioned within a social context
and embodies cultural meaning – have also given rise to persistent doubts about the crosscultural validity of the concept of art itself. How can a concept that carries such strong
evaluative overtones, and whose meaning is so closely bound up with widely held ideas
about the ascendancy of Western civilisation, possibly be applied without courting accusations of ethnocentrism? Not for the ﬁrst time, the very credentials that make a
phenomenon eminently worthy of anthropological study have cast a pall of uncertainty
over whether the phenomenon exists ‘as such’ at all. It happened with the study of kinship,
it happened with the study of art, and now that anthropologists are at last beginning to
recognise the social embeddedness of technological systems, it is happening to the study
of technology too. No sooner is technology reclaimed for anthropological inquiry, than
we cease to know, for sure, what we are dealing with.
The source of the problem, in my view, lies not in the concept of art, nor in that of
technology, but in the dichotomy between them. It is this, along with the idea that art
ﬂoats in an ethereal realm of symbolic meaning, above the physical world over which
technology seeks control, that is tainted by its association with modernity. The idea would
have made no sense to the craftsmen of Ancient Greece or Rome. They knew what they
meant by tekhnē or ars, and it was a matter neither of mechanical functioning nor of
symbolic expression, but of skilled practice. It is my contention that by going back to the
original connotations of ars and tekhnē as skill, we can overcome the deep divisions
that currently separate the anthropologies of art and technology, and develop a far more
satisfactory account of the socially and environmentally situated practices of real human
agents. In what follows I shall pursue three aspects of this task. First, I explain in more
depth what I mean by skill. Secondly, I show how the continuity of tradition in skilled
practice is a function not of the transmission of rules and representations but of the
coordination of perception and action. Thirdly, I show how a focus on skill explodes the
conventional dichotomy between innate and acquired abilities, forcing a radical reappraisal
of the ways we think about what is ‘cultural’ and ‘biological’ in humans. I shall illustrate
my argument by way of two examples: Maureen MacKenzie’s (1991) study of the looping
skills involved in making string bags (bilum) among Telefol people of Central New Guinea,
and the study by N. E. and E. C. Collias (1984) of the nest building skills of the male
weaverbird.

Skill
I begin by drawing attention to ﬁve points which I believe are crucial to a proper appre- 3
ciation of technical skills. The ﬁrst concerns what it means to say that practice is a form 4
of use, of tools and of the body. In one of his dialogues, Plato has Socrates debate with 5
a character called Alcibiades on precisely this question. ‘What are we to say of the shoe- 6
maker?’, asks Socrates, ‘Does he cut with his tools only, or with his hands as well?’ 7
Alcibiades is forced to concede that he does indeed cut with his hands, and moreover that 8
he uses not just his hands but his eyes – and by extension his whole body – to accom- 9
plish the work. Yet he had already agreed, with Socrates, that there is a fundamental 10
difference between the user and the things he uses. So who is this user? If it be man, 1
counters Socrates, it cannot be his body, which is used. Only one possibility remains, it 2
must be the soul. ‘So’, he concludes, ‘do you require some yet clearer proof that the soul 3
is man?’ Alcibiades is convinced (in Flew 1964: 35–7).
There is no reason, however, why we should have to follow suit. ‘It would be wrong 5
to assume’, as Roger Coleman caustically remarks, ‘that because Plato was a Greek he 6
knew what he was talking about’. He was no craftsman, and had no practical experience 7
whatever of shoemaking or any other trade. Plato’s objective, in forcing a division between 8
the controlling mind and subservient body, was to establish the supremacy of abstract, 9
contemplative reason over menial work, or of theoretical knowledge over practical appli- 20
cation, and thereby to justify the institution of slavery (Coleman 1988: 11–12). Resurrected 1
in the Renaissance, Plato’s division anticipated the debasement of craft that, as we have 2
seen, came to be one of the hallmarks of modernity. To recover the essence of skill we 3
need a different concept of use from the one invoked by Plato. Instead of thinking of use 4
as what happens when we put two, initially separate things together – an agent with 5
certain purposes or designs, and an instrument with certain functions – we can take it as 6
the primary condition of involvement of the craftsman, with his tools and raw materials, 7
in an environment. In this sense the hands and eyes of the shoemaker, as well as his 8
cutting tools, are not so much used as brought into use, through their incorporation into 9
an accustomed (that is usual) pattern of dextrous activity. Intentionality and functionality, 30
then, are not pre-existing properties of the user and the used, but rather immanent in the 1
activity itself, in the gestural synergy of human being, tool and raw material.
My second point follows from this. It is that skill cannot be regarded simply as a tech- 3
nique of the body. This was the position advocated in a now classic essay by Marcel 4
Mauss (1979[1934]). Taking his cue explicitly from Plato, Mauss observed that technique 5
does not, in itself, depend upon the use of tools. Song and dance are obvious examples. 6
The dancer, according to Mauss, uses his own body as an instrument; indeed so do we 7
all, he declares, for the body is surely ‘man’s ﬁrst and most natural technical object, and 8
at the same time technical means’. Moreover in the deployment of these means, the human 9
agent experiences the resulting bodily movements as ‘of a mechanical, physical or physico- 40
chemical order’ (p. 104). This reduction of the technical to the mechanical is an inevitable 1
consequence of the isolation of the body as a natural or physical object, both from the 2
(disembodied) agency that puts it to work and from the environment in which it oper- 3
ates. To understand the true nature of skill we must move in the opposite direction, that 4
is, to restore the human organism to the original context of its active engagement with 5
the constituents of its surroundings. As Gregory Bateson argued, by way of his example 6
of the skilled woodsman notching with an axe the trunk of a tree he is felling, to explain 7
what is going on we need to consider the dynamics of the entire man–axe–tree system 118

FIVE DIMENSIONS OF SKILL

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 353 •

(1973: 433). The system is, indeed, as much mental as physical or physiological, for these
are, in truth, but alternative descriptions of one and the same thing. Skill, in short, is a
property not of the individual human body as a biophysical entity, a thing-in-itself, but
of the total ﬁeld of relations constituted by the presence of the organism-person, indissolubly body and mind, in a richly structured environment. That is why the study of
skill, in my view, not only beneﬁts from, but demands an ecological approach.
Granted that the foundations of skill lie in the irreducible condition of the practitioner’s
embeddedness in an environment, it follows – and this is my third point – that skilled
practice is not just the application of mechanical force to exterior objects, but entails qualities of care, judgment and dexterity (Pye 1968: 22). Critically, this implies that whatever
practitioners do to things is grounded in an attentive, perceptual involvement with them,
or in other words, that they watch and feel as they work. As the Russian neuroscientist
Nicholai Bernstein argued some ﬁfty years ago, the essence of dexterity lies not in bodily
movements themselves, but in the responsiveness of these movements to surrounding
conditions that are never the same from one moment to the next (Bernstein 1996). Given
the freedom of movement of the limbs as well as the elasticity of the muscles, Bernstein
had observed, it is just not possible to control the movements of the body in the same
way as one might the workings of a machine made up of rigid, interconnecting parts.
From a close study of the movements of a skilled blacksmith, hitting the iron on the anvil
over and over again with a hammer, Bernstein found that while the trajectory of the tip
of the hammer was highly reproducible, the trajectories of individual arm joints varied
from stroke to stroke. At ﬁrst glance the situation appears paradoxical: how can it be that
the motion of the hammer rather than that of the limbs is reliably reproduced, when it
is only by way of the limbs that the hammer is made to move (cf. Latash 1996: 286)?
Clearly, the smith’s movements cannot be understood as the output of a ﬁxed motor
programme, nor are they arrived at through the application of a formula. The secret of
control, Bernstein concluded, lies in ‘sensory corrections’, that is in the continual adjustment or ‘tuning’ of movement in response to an ongoing perceptual monitoring of the
emergent task.
All this has implications for the way skills are learned, which brings me to my fourth
point. If, as Bernstein contended, skilled practice cannot be reduced to a formula, then
it cannot be through the transmission of formulae that skills are passed from generation
to generation. Traditional models of social learning separate the intergenerational transmission of information specifying particular techniques from the application of this
information in practice. First, a generative schema or programme is established in the
novice’s mind from his observations of the movements of already accomplished practitioners; secondly, the novice imitates these movements by running off exemplars of the
technique in question from the schema. Now I do not deny that the learning of skills
involves both observation and imitation. But the former is no more a matter of forming
internal, mental representations of observed behaviour than is the latter a matter of
converting these representations into manifest practice. For the novice’s observation
of accomplished practitioners is not detached from, but grounded in, his own active,
perceptual engagement with his surroundings. And the key to imitation lies in the intimate coordination of the movement of the novice’s attention to others with his own bodily
movement in the world. Through repeated practical trials, and guided by his observations,
he gradually gets the ‘feel’ of things for himself – that is, he learns to ﬁne-tune his own
movements so as to achieve the rhythmic ﬂuency of the accomplished practitioner (for an
example, see Gatewood 1985). And in this process, each generation contributes to the

Skill
next not by handing on a corpus of representations, or information in the strict sense, 1
but rather by introducing novices into contexts which afford selected opportunities for 2
perception and action, and by providing the scaffolding that enables them to make 3
use of these affordances. This is what James Gibson (1979: 254) called an ‘education of 4
attention’.
It is because practitioners’ engagement with the material with which they work is an 6
attentive engagement, rather than a mere mechanical coupling, that skilled activity carries 7
its own intrinsic intentionality, quite apart from any designs or plans that it may be 8
supposed to implement (see Chapter Twenty-three, p. 415). My ﬁfth point follows from 9
this, and has to do with what we mean by making things. Let me return for a moment 10
to the example of Socrates and the shoemaker. Socrates had asked what it means to say 1
of the shoemaker that he uses tools. The other side of the question is to ask what it means 2
to say that he makes shoes. If use, as Socrates maintained, is what happens when you put 3
an agent having a certain purpose together with objects having certain functions, then the 4
purpose must precede the use through which it is realised. In these terms, to refer to an 5
action as one of making is to refer back to the prior intention that motivates it. It is as 6
though the form of the manufactured object were already preﬁgured, as a design, in the 7
mind of its maker, such that the activity of making issued directly from the design and 8
served only to transcribe it onto the material. The assumption that every form is the 9
outward expression of design is, as we saw in the last chapter, as prevalent in biology as 20
it is in technology. Thus the form of an organism is said to be given in an evolved design 1
speciﬁcation, the genotype, in advance of its phenotypic ‘expression’ in an environment. 2
And in modern architecture the form of a construction is supposed exist in miniature, in 3
models, drawings and plans, before any building work begins (Coleman 1988: 16). To 4
take this view, however, is to deny the creativity of the very process of environmentally 5
situated and perceptually engaged activity, that is of use, through which real forms emerge 6
and are held in place. It is the activity itself – of regular, controlled movement – that 7
generates the form, not the design that precedes it. Making, in short, arises within the 8
process of use, rather than use disclosing what is, ideally if not materially, ready-made. 9
HOW TO MAKE A STRING BAG
Among the Telefol people of central New Guinea, and indeed throughout this region, 3
one of the most ubiquitous and multifunctional accessories to everyday life is the string 4
bag or bilum. It is made by means of a looping technique from two-ply string spun from 5
plant ﬁbres. Children are introduced to the techniques of bilum making from a very early 6
age. All young Telefol children, both boys and girls, help their mothers and elder sisters 7
in preparing ﬁbres for spinning. ‘From the age of about two onwards they begin to exper- 8
iment with roving, rolling the shredded ﬁbres down their thigh to make a single ply, and 9
progress to experiments with spinning. It is not uncommon to see very young girls, mere 40
toddlers, diligently attempting to loop the string they have made into bilum fabric’ 1
(MacKenzie 1991: 101). Boys, as they grow older, do not go on to master fully the skills 2
of looping, for the simple reason that they are soon removed, by the conventions of their 3
society, from the sphere of women’s activities. Men have no need to make their own bags, 4
as these are willingly supplied for them by women, who thus maintain an effective 5
monopoly on bilum making. Girls, by contrast, remain close to their mothers and other 6
female relatives, and continue to develop their skills, quietly and unobtrusively following 7
in their mothers’ footsteps.

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 355 •

All the points I have made about skill, in the previous section, apply to the making of
string bags. Apart from the maker’s body – and especially her ﬁngers – the only tools
used are the mesh gauge (ding), made from a strip of leaf, to maintain the constancy of
the mesh in an open weave (see Figure 19.1), and the needle (siil ), made of bone, which
is needed for making tightly looped baskets without the use of the gauge (MacKenzie
1991: 73). But in use the needle or the gauge, along with the ﬁngers that hold it, are as
much a part of the user as they are used. Moreover the accomplished bilum-maker does
not experience the movements of her body as being of a mechanical nature. Far from
answering to commands issued from a higher source, they carry their own intentionality,
unfolding in a continual dialogue with the material. Telefol people liken this movement
to the ﬂowing water of a river. Thus the body-in-use is not moved, like a rigid object,

Figure 19.1 The step-by-step procedure for looping a ﬂat strip of ‘open, spaced’ bilum fabric, as practised by Telefol
people of central New Guinea. Steps 1–4 show how the ﬁrst row of loops is constructed around the mesh gauge
(ding), in a series of ﬁgure-of-eight loops with each loop connecting into the preceding one. By stage 5 the ﬁrst row
of loops is completed to the desired width. On completion of each row the work must be turned over so that the
working thread is always on the left-hand side. In step 6 the work is thus reversed. Step 7 illustrates how a new
strip of ding is inserted at the beginning of each successive row. This linear way of working, with each row connecting
into the loops of the preceding one, is then repeated (step 8).
From MacKenzie, Androgynous Objects: string bags and gender in central New Guinea, published by Harwood Academic,
1991, pp. 86–7.

Skill
but rather becomes one with the ﬂow (p. 102). However, in order to maintain the even- 1
ness of the string, in spinning, or of the weave, in looping, it is necessary to make continual 2
adjustments in the course of the movement itself. ‘By adolescence’, MacKenzie writes, ‘all 3
girls have mastered the technique of spinning, gaining visual acuity in selecting equal 4
assemblages of ﬁlaments during the roving process; and a sensitivity or balance in the 5
amount of pressure applied between palm and thigh during the rhythmic plying motion’ 6
(p. 76). As this passage clearly reveals, dexterity in spinning depends on the ﬁne-tuning 7
of visual as well as haptic perception. And it is equally clear that the form of the bilum 8
is an emergent outcome of rhythmically repeated, controlled movement in the processes 9
of spinning and looping.
The issue on which I want to focus here, however, concerns how bilum-making skills 1
are passed from generation to generation. MacKenzie herself describes this in terms of a 2
fairly conventional model of social learning, according to which ‘observation is followed 3
by internalisation and then mimesis’ (p. 100). Thus by watching the activity of her mother, 4
a young girl absorbs and assimilates the ‘intrinsic rules’ of the craft. Once these are ﬁrmly 5
implanted in her mind, she can proceed to execute them in the production of her own 6
work. The fact that ‘each daughter follows exactly the motor habits and bodily motions 7
of her mother’ leads to a remarkable cultural conformity from one generation to the next 8
(p. 103). There is much in MacKenzie’s own account, however, to suggest that confor- 9
mity to tradition is not a consequence of the intergenerational transmission of rules or 20
formulae, however intrinsic, but rather the result of a process of guided rediscovery in 1
which the role of experienced bilum-makers is to set up the contexts within which novices 2
are enabled to gain in proﬁciency for themselves, or in other words to ‘grow into’ the 3
skills of spinning and looping.
First of all, it is clear that to advance in these skills it is not enough for the novice to 5
know how their constituent movements look ‘from the outside’; she has also to know 6
how they feel ‘from the inside’ (cf. Bernstein 1996: 184–5). One young woman, recalling 7
how she learned to loop as a child, told of how she had once tried to carry on with an 8
unﬁnished bilum that her mother had left in the rafters of the house before leaving to 9
work in the garden. She had been carefully watching the way her mother’s hands moved 30
as she looped the bilum. But on trying it out herself, the result was a disaster. When her 1
mother returned, it took her hours to undo the mess. At ﬁrst she was angry, but then 2
she lectured her daughter with the following words of wisdom:
You must practise to get the proper feel of looping. When you’ve made your ﬁrst bilum 5
it will be cranky but then we’ll throw it in the river. The river will carry your wonky 6
bilum away, and it will wash away your heavy handedness. Then your hands will be 7
good at making bilums, your hands will move easily like running water.
(from MacKenzie 1991: 102) 9
What does it mean to get the ‘feel’ of looping? It could mean that the observation on 1
which learning depends is as much tactile as visual, or that the skill is embodied as a 2
rhythmic pattern of movement rather than a static schema, or that the key to ﬂuent perfor- 3
mance lies in the ability to co-ordinate perception and action. All three are undoubtedly 4
important, but none more so than the third. For it is this, as MacKenzie herself observes, 5
that makes the difference between clumsiness and dexterity, between having heavy hands 6
and hands that ﬂow. ‘Clumsiness, iluum t’eb’e su [to be heavy handed], is deemed natural 7
at ﬁrst, and must be practically worked through’ (p. 103).

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 357 •

It seems, then, that progress from clumsiness to dexterity in the craft of bilum-making
is brought about not by way of an internalisation of rules and representations, but through
the gradual attunement of movement and perception. As in any craft, the skilled maker
who has a feel for what she is doing is one whose movement is continually and subtly
responsive to the modulations of her relation with the material. Conversely, the clumsy
practitioner is precisely one who implements mechanically a ﬁxed sequence of instructions, while remaining insensitive to the evolving conditions of the task as it unfolds. The
hand that is heavy is experienced as a resistance to be overcome, and has to be moved
from position to position in ways that seem contrary to its nature. The light hand, by
contrast, ﬁnds its way of its own accord. The heavy-handed novice does not, of course,
move in exactly the same way as her light-handed mother, nor can she be expected to
produce such satisfactory results. This is precisely where the standard model of the social
learning of technical skills goes wrong. For in attributing the intergenerational conformity
of movements to rules that are transmitted and internalised in advance of their practical
application in mimesis, the model assumes that practice is a matter of executing identical,
rule-governed movements over and over again, leading to gains in speed, efﬁciency and
automation. But a little girl, making her ﬁrst bilum, is quite unable to produce these
movements. Rather than repeatedly carrying out the same movements, generated from an
already internalised schema, she is repeatedly set the same task, generated within the social
context of mother–daughter relations. The ability to reproduce her mother’s movements
with precision, depending as it does on subtle sensory attunement, is not a natural foundation for enskilment but its consequence (cf. Reed and Bril 1996: 438).
Telefol women, according to MacKenzie, place great value on the standardisation of their
looping techniques, since this is a way of conﬁrming tribal identity (1991: 103). But I would
contend that this standardisation is not brought about, as MacKenzie claims, by conformity
to rules. Indeed there appear to be no rules, beyond general exhortations of the kind
delivered by the mother to her daughter in the case described above, or vague ‘rules of
thumb’ that help prepare the practitioner for her impending activity but in no way determine its course (Suchman 1987: 52). Like most commonplace practical skills, such as tying
shoelaces in Western society, looping resists codiﬁcation in the form of generative rules or
algorithms (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1987). One becomes aware of this simply by looking
at the elaborate diagrams, accompanied by written commentary, by means of which
MacKenzie attempts to explain the step-by-step procedure for open-spaced looping
(pp. 83–99, and for an example, see Figure 19.1). Though these diagrams are admirable for
their intended purpose, of ethnographic description, any attempt by the untutored reader
to follow them in practice would likely lead to the same kind of tangle that the inexperienced Telefol girl produces, on secretly attempting to carry on with her mother’s work. It
would be quite mistaken to suppose that anything remotely equivalent exists in the native
mind. But if standardisation does not follow from the application of rules, how are we to
account for the persistence of technique from one generation to the next?
Partly in an attempt to answer this question, a group of us in the Department of
Social Anthropology at the University of Manchester resolved to experiment with different
ways of making knots. One of our experiments was to try making a completely unfamiliar
and rather complicated knot, guided only by a manual which provided detailed verbal
instructions and step by step diagrams. It turned out to be an immensely difﬁcult and
frustrating task. The problem we all experienced lay in converting each instruction, whether
verbal or graphic, into actual bodily movement. For while the instruction was supposed
to tell you how to move, one could only make sense of it once the movement had been

Skill
accomplished. We seemed, almost literally, to be caught in a double bind, from which 1
the only escape was patient trial and error. Of course we had resort to the instructions, 2
but far from directing our movements, what they provided was a set of landmarks along 3
the way, a means of checking that we were still on track. If we were not – if the tangle 4
of string in front of us did not match the corresponding graph (and that, in itself, 5
was not easy to discern) – there was no alternative but to unravel the whole thing and 6
start again!
Our experiments seemed to lend strong empirical support for the view that the prac- 8
tices of knotting – which are, after all, among the most common and widely distributed 9
in human societies – cannot be understood as the output of any kind of programme. 10
They cannot, then, be learned by taking any such programme ‘on board’, as part of an 1
acquired tradition, as if all you needed to know to make knots could be handed down 2
as a package of rules and representations, independently and in advance of their practical 3
application. In our experiments, despite having a manual to consult, we had to develop 4
the necessary know-how from scratch. Generally speaking, of course, this is not a problem 5
that novices face in real life. They are shown what to do by more experienced hands, as 6
we have already seen in the case of the acquisition of looping skills by Telefol bilum- 7
makers. But in seeking to emulate the work of the tutor, the novice is guided by the 8
latter’s movements, not by formal instructions that have somehow been already copied into 9
his or her head. As Merleau-Ponty put it, citing the pioneering work of Paul Guillaume 20
on imitation in children, ‘we do not at ﬁrst imitate others but rather the actions of others, 1
and . . . ﬁnd others at the point of origin of these actions’ (1964b: 117, see also Bourdieu 2
1977: 87). It follows that the reproduction of movement patterns is a function not of the 3
ﬁdelity with which information specifying these patterns is copied from one generation 4
to the next, but of the co-ordination of perception and action that lies at the heart of 5
practical mimesis.
DISSOLVING THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN INNATE AND ACQUIRED
SKILLS
It is obvious that Telefol girls have to learn to make string bags. It is not a skill that they 1
are, in any sense, ‘born with’. As MacKenzie notes, ‘talent in bilum making, that is, having 2
hands which ﬂow, is [deﬁned as] a physically acquired attribute rather than an inherent 3
pre-disposition in the sense that westerners think of ability and talent’ (1991: 103). My 4
concern now is to look more closely at what it means to say that a particular skill is 5
acquired rather than innate. I shall do so by way of another example, this time taken 6
from the animal kingdom. For while we are used to thinking of human skills as belonging 7
to this or that cultural tradition, the skills of non-human animals are commonly regarded 8
as properties of their genetically encoded, species-speciﬁc nature. What are we to make, 9
then, of the male weaverbird, which carries out the most intricate knotting and looping 40
with its beak in the construction of its nest? The nest building of weaverbirds has been 1
investigated in a remarkable series of studies by ornithologists N. E. and E. C. Collias, 2
and in what follows I draw on their report (Collias and Collias 1984).
The nest is made from long strips torn from the leaves of grasses, which are intertwined 4
in a regular lattice formed by passing successive strips over and under, and in a direction 5
orthogonal to, strips already laid. It is held together, and attached to the substrate, by a 6
variety of stitches and fastenings, some of which are illustrated in Figure 19.2. The bird 7
uses its beak rather like a needle in sewing or darning; in this the trickiest part lies in 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 359 •

threading the strip it is holding under another, transverse one so that it can then be passed
over the next. The strip has to be pushed under, and through, just far enough to enable
the bird to let go with its beak in order to shift its hold and pull it up on the other side.
If the free end is left too short, the strip may spring back; pushed too far, it could fall
to the ground. Mastering this operation calls for a good deal of practice. From an early
age, weaverbirds spend much of their time manipulating all kinds of objects with their
beaks, and seem to have a particular interest in poking and pulling pieces of grass leaves
and similar materials through holes. In females this interest declines after about the
tenth week from hatching, whereas in males it continues to increase. Experiments showed
that birds deprived of opportunities to practise and denied access to suitable materials are
subsequently unable to build adequate nests, or even to build at all.
Indeed, ﬁddling about with potential nest material appears to be just
as essential for the bird, in preparing
itself for future building, as are
the ﬁrst experiments of Telefolmin
toddlers in roving and spinning
shredded ﬁbres for their future
bilum making (Collias and Collias
1984: 201, 206–7, 212, 215–20).
It is evident from the Collias’
account that all the ﬁve qualities of
skill which, as I have shown, are
exempliﬁed in the making of string
bags by people of central New
Guinea, are also manifest in the nest
building of weaverbirds. Though the
needle of the bilum-maker is detachable from the body whereas the
bird’s beak is not, in use both are not
so much moved as incorporated into
a habitual pattern of movement.
The abilities of the weaverbird, just
like those of the human maker of
string bags, are developed through
an active exploration of the possibilities afforded by the environment, in
the choice of materials and structural
supports, and of bodily capacities of
movement, posture, and prehension.
Furthermore, the key to successful
nest building lies not so much in the
movements themselves as in the Figure 19.2 Various common stitches and fastenings used by male
bird’s ability to adjust its movements weaverbirds in constructing their nests.
with exquisite precision in relation From N. E. Collias and E. C. Collias, Nest Building and Bird Behavior,
to the evolving form of its construc- © 1984 by Princeton University Press, reprinted by permission of
tion. As Collias and Collias report:
Princeton University Press.

Skill
In watching the numerous attempts of young male weavers to fasten initial strips of 1
nest materials and their gradual improvement in weaving ability, it seemed to us that 2
what every young male weaver has to learn is what in subjective terminology one would 3
call ‘judgement’.
(1984: 219) 5
One can sense the reluctance with which these hardnosed empirical observers ﬁnd 7
themselves having to resort to a notion of this kind. But the evidence leaves them with 8
no alternative. It is clearly judgement, rather than a programme of instructions or a set 9
of design speciﬁcations to be mechanically applied, that the bird acquires through mimetic 10
practice. Finally, the form of the nest results from the iteration of a small number of basic 1
movements, and from the fact that the bird stands throughout on the same spot while it 2
weaves all around – above, below and in front – pushing out the developing shell of the 3
main chamber as far as its beak will reach, and then tilting gradually backwards to complete 4
the antechamber and entrance (1984: 193, 209–10).
Given that weaverbirds, in their nest building, exhibit the same properties of skill as 6
are manifested in the looping techniques of the Telefolmin and their neighbours, wherein 7
lies the difference? The conventional answer is to claim that the human bilum-maker 8
follows the dictates of an acquired cultural tradition, while the bird works to a template 9
that is genetically transmitted and thus innate. But if, as our experiments with knot- 20
making suggested, there can be no programme for such tasks as knotting, looping, and 1
weaving that is not immanent in the activity itself, then it makes no more sense to inter- 2
pret the weaverbird’s behaviour as the output of a genetic programme than it does to 3
interpret the bilum-maker’s as the output of a cultural one. In all likelihood the human 4
maker of string bags has an idea in mind of the ﬁnal form of the construction, whereas 5
the weaverbird almost certainly does not. Yet in both cases it is the pattern of regular 6
movement, not some prespeciﬁed design, that generates the form. And the ﬂuency and 7
dexterity of this movement is a function of skills that are developmentally incorporated 8
into the modus operandi of the organism – whether avian or human – through practice 9
and experience in an environment.
This last point is absolutely critical. Recall that Telefol girls develop their looping skills 1
at a time of life when their bodies are also undergoing rapid growth. These skills, then, 2
far from being added on to a preformed body, actually grow with it. In that regard they 3
are fully part and parcel of the human organism, of its neurology, musculature, even 4
anatomy, and so are as much biological as cultural. After all, a human being, with its 5
particular aptitudes and dispositions, is a product of neither genes nor culture, nor of 6
both together, but is rather formed within a lifelong process of ontogenetic development. 7
To be sure, the skills of looping are acquired, in the sense that at whatever stage in the 8
life-cycle they may be identiﬁed, a history of development already lies behind them. But 9
the same would have to be said of the knotting and looping skills of the weaverbird, and 40
indeed of any skill, human or non-human. Moreover one could just as well claim that 1
such skills are innate, in the sense that so long as the necessary environmental conditions 2
are in place (including the presence and activity of already skilled practitioners) they are 3
more or less bound to develop. All Telefol girls learn to make string bags, just as they all 4
learn to walk or to speak. All male weaverbirds learn to make nests, unless opportunities 5
for practice are artiﬁcially removed. Conversely, Telefol boys and female weaverbirds never 6
develop full-blown looping and weaving skills, since their respective activities and concerns 7
take them too soon into other ﬁelds of practice. In short, whatever the difference between 118

Of string bags and birds’ nests • 361 •

the two sets of skills, avian and human, it cannot be aligned on the axis of a distinction
between the innate and the acquired.
This conclusion, however, leaves us with our earlier question unanswered. How, exactly,
do human skills, such as those exempliﬁed in the making of string bags, differ from those
of animals such as the weaverbird? To be frank, I do not pretend to know. I remain
perplexed by the question, and have yet to ﬁnd an answer that is wholly convincing. Once
again, however, MacKenzie’s study of the Telefol offers a possible clue. It lies in the observation, to which I have already alluded, that Telefol people liken the dextrous manual
movements of the ﬂuent bilum-maker to running water (MacKenzie 1991: 136). For these
inhabitants of intermontane valleys, the current of water in a river or stream is as familiar
a part of experience as is the motion of the hands in looping. Now it seems reasonable
to suppose, likewise, that the weaverbird has as much of a ‘feel’ for air currents, while on
the wing, as it has for nest materials in building with its beak. However what the bird
does not do, so far as we know, is to tie these different strands of perception and action
together. If birds were human, they would say that the good weaver is one whose beak
seems to ‘ﬂy’, just as Telefol say that the skilled looper is one whose hands ‘ﬂow’. But
they do not do this. Human beings, it seems, differ from other animals in that they are
peculiarly able to treat the manifold threads of experience as material for further acts of
weaving and looping, thereby creating intricate patterns of metaphorical connection. This
interweaving of experience is generally conducted in the idioms of speech, as in storytelling, and the patterns to which it gives rise are equivalent to what anthropologists are
accustomed to calling ‘culture’.
However, culture thus conceived cannot be understood to comprise a system of intrinsic
rules or schemata by means of which the mind constructs representations of the external
world from the data of bodily sensation, nor can speech be regarded simply as a vehicle
for the articulation of these mental representations. Speakers no more ‘use’ their voice, as
Plato would have had it, as the mere instrument of a language-based intelligence, than
they ‘make’ sense by superimposing their pre-existing designs upon the raw material of
experience. Rather, in speech, the voice is incorporated into a current of sensuous activity
– namely, narrative performance – from which, as it unfolds, form and meaning are continually generated. For speaking is itself a form of skilled practice, and as such, exhibits all
the generic properties of skill to which I have already drawn attention. Like any other
skill, speech develops along with the growth of the organism, is continually responsive to
perturbations in the perceived environment, and is learned through repeated practical trials
in socially scaffolded contexts. Above all, it cannot be reduced to the mechanical execution of a rule-governed system, or ‘grammar’. Yet speech is no ordinary skill. Weaving
together, in narrative, the multiple strands of action and perception speciﬁc to diverse
tasks and situations, it serves, if you will, as the Skill of skills. And if one were to ask
where culture lies, the answer would not be in some shadowy domain of symbolic meaning,
hovering aloof from the ‘hands on’ business of practical life, but in the very texture and
pattern of the weave itself.

Skill
There is a wonderful footnote in Marx’s Capital that sets a whole agenda for research. It 3
runs as follows:
Darwin has aroused our interest in the history of natural technology, that is to say in 6
the origin of the organs of plants and animals as productive instruments utilised for 7
the life purposes of these creatures. Does not the history of the origin of the produc- 8
tive organs of men in society, the organs which form the material basis of every kind 9
of social organisation, deserve equal attention? Since, as Vico says, the essence of the 20
distinction between human history and natural history is that the former is the work 1
of man and the latter is not, would not the history of human technology be easier to 2
write than the history of natural technology?1
(1930: 392–3, fn. 2) 4
This passage suggests three crucial questions. First, what exactly is the difference between 6
the ‘history of natural technology’ and the ‘history of human technology’? In modern 7
usage, we have grown accustomed to referring to the former as a process of evolution 8
while reserving the concept of history for the latter. The question then becomes: how, 9
if at all, can we distinguish between evolutionary and historical change in the ﬁeld of 30
technical phenomena? Secondly, Darwin was greatly perplexed by the issue of whether 1
there is anything inherently progressive about the process he called ‘descent with modiﬁ- 2
cation’. His considered conclusion was that progress, of a kind, has occurred, but that 3
there is nothing in the theory of variation under natural selection that stipulates that it 4
must occur. Is this also the case with technology? Finally, are the mechanisms of technical 5
change comparable to, or quite different from, those that Darwin adduced for the adap- 6
tive modiﬁcation of organic species? In other words, can we account for technical change 7
in terms of a principle of variation under selection? In this chapter, I shall deal with each 8
of these questions in turn.
THE EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY AND ITS HISTORY
Comparing what students of animal behaviour on the one hand, and social and cultural 3
anthropologists, on the other, have to say about technical change, one cannot help noting 4
a curious discrepancy. Looking for the causes of such change, animal behaviourists typi- 5
cally attribute it to the evolution under natural selection of the animal species itself. Tools 6
and tool-using behaviour are regarded as part of the phenotypic expression of an under- 7
lying genotype, and they change as the genotype changes – that is, as the species evolves. 118

Chapter Twenty

The dynamics of technical change

The dynamics of technical change • 363 •

Explaining the evolution of animal tool behaviour is thus no different, in principle, from
explaining the evolution of those functional attachments – the ﬁnch’s beak, the crab’s
pincers, the lion’s claws – that remain joined to the body. Anthropologists, by contrast,
often treat technology as an aspect of a cultural system that has a dynamic of its own,
undergoing progressive development without entailing any further change in the basic
biology of the species. It is as if, to all intents and purposes, technical change in humans
were fully decoupled from the process of evolution, for the designs that underwrite the
making process are supposed to lie in the minds of the makers, not in their genes, and
to be encoded in cultural symbols rather than in strands of DNA (Wynn 1994: 137–45).
This seems like a neat way of distinguishing between the history of technicity and its
evolution. But it poses a problem that has particularly exercised prehistorians, for it implies
that at some point or other, history must have ‘started up’. A threshold had to be crossed;
our ancestors had to step beyond the old world of nature into a new world of culturally
constructed meaning. This image of stone-age hunter-gatherers standing at the dawn of
history sounds suspiciously like an imposition onto the Palaeolithic of a decidedly modern
political rhetoric. And it has set prehistorians on a frantic and much publicised search for
the point of origin of what they nowadays call ‘modern humans’. I shall reserve my critique
of this notion for the next chapter, and merely note at this juncture the implication that
once the breakthrough to culture had been made, the history of technology must have
truly taken off, leading from the earliest tools to modern machinery, without entailing
any further change in the species-speciﬁc form of the human organism. History, as psychologists David and Anne James Premack maintain, consists in ‘a sequence of changes through
which a species passes while remaining biologically stable’, and of all species in the world,
only humans have it (1994: 350).
If we are to take this view, however, then we have also to admit that the artefactual
products of technological culture cannot be taken as reliable indicators of the fundamental
cognitive and biomechanical capabilities of their makers. A prehistorian of the future,
surveying the material remains of Western industrial civilisation, would be making a serious
error were he to infer that its people were considerably more advanced in their evolved
capacities than were their predecessors of earlier millennia. As the linguist Philip Lieberman
warns, ‘who would think that we had essentially the same biological endowment as the
human populations that lived 30,000 or 20,000 or 500 years ago if all he had to go on
were the preserved artefacts – stone tools versus the ruins of great cities, dams, interlocking
highways, etc.?’ (1985: 628).
But the same argument cuts the other way. Who would think that the common human
biological endowment was signiﬁcantly different from that of chimpanzees on the evidence
of the striking similarity between the toolkits of contemporary free-ranging chimpanzee
populations and those of certain ethnographically recorded populations of human huntergatherers? In his controversially entitled book Chimpanzee Material Culture, Bill McGrew
– one of the most experienced observers of chimpanzees in their natural habitat – attempts
a systematic comparison of the subsistence technology of chimpanzee populations inhabiting a number of study areas in western Tanzania with that of the Aboriginal people of
Tasmania, as documented in the early years of the nineteenth century. The Tasmanian
Aborigines are notorious in anthropological literature for allegedly having had the simplest
material culture ever recorded (Jones 1977: 197, see Figure 20.1). I shall not go into the
details here of how the comparison was made, though one could have serious reservations
about the selection of items for comparison and the terms in which they were rendered
commensurable. I merely wish to highlight McGrew’s principal conclusion, which is that

Skill

if we conﬁne our attention to the 1
respective toolkits, although the 2
human hunter-gatherer toolkit is 3
indeed more complicated than 4
that of the ape, ‘the difference is 5
far from wide, and the gap 6
between hominid and pongid is 7
bridgeable’ (1992: 144).
Not surprisingly, when McGrew 9
ﬁrst presented his ﬁndings, at a 10
conference
devoted 1
to the anthropology of hunter- 2
gatherer societies held in London 3
in 1986, they drew a storm of 4
protest. Was he really trying to tell 5
us that Tasmanian hunter-gather- 6
ers had scarcely advanced beyond 7
the apes, that they were stuck in 8
an evolutionary time-warp? In his 9
defence, his intention was no 20
more than to suggest the possi- 1
bility of an intermediate level 2
of technology in the transition 3
from our ape-like ancestors to the 4
earliest hominid forms. Yet in tak- 5
ing nineteenth-century Tasmanian 6
Aborigines as exemplars of early 7
hominids, McGrew comes close to 8
Figure 20.1 The Tasmanian toolkit.
returning to the overt racism of an 9
From J. Clark, The Aboriginal People of Tasmania, published by Tasmanian earlier era of anthropology, when 30
Museum and Art Gallery, 1983, p. 22.
it was quite usual to regard the 1
‘savage’ as representing an earlier 2
stage in human biological evolu- 3
tion, and thus as occupying a half-way stage in the transition from apes to ‘civilised’ (that 4
is, modern European) humans.
In fact the simplicity of the Tasmanian toolkit, even when compared with that of 6
Aboriginal hunter-gatherers on the Australian mainland, presents an enigma that has never 7
been adequately solved – though it may have something to do with Tasmania’s prolonged 8
and total isolation since rising sea-levels cut it off from the mainland some 11,000 years ago 9
(Jones 1977). What does seem incontrovertible, however, is that a Tasmanian Aborigine, 40
transported to the twentieth century and raised in an afﬂuent part of the world, would have 1
no particular difﬁculty in becoming, say, an airline pilot or a software engineer. But I would 2
not, for my money, take a plane piloted by a chimpanzee! Indeed we are drawn almost 3
irresistibly to the conclusion that behind the apparent similarity of chimpanzee and human 4
hunter-gatherer toolkits there lies a fundamental difference of capacity, a difference that is 5
manifested, above all, in the progression of human technology from the axe, spear and 6
digging stick to the airplane and the computer. Thus while we might reasonably attribute 7
the failure of chimpanzees to operate a complex technology to innate incapacity, we can 118

The dynamics of technical change • 365 •

only attribute the failure of Tasmanian Aborigines to do the same
to unfulﬁlled historical conditions.
Now the development of human technology is very commonly
presented as though it could be
arrayed on a continuum from the
earliest stone tools to modern
machinery and electronics. Figure
20.2 is an example of such a ﬁgure.
Yet if the conclusion we reached
in the last paragraph is accepted,
to posit such a direct line of
continuity from the Oldowan
chopper to the space shuttle would
be quite absurd. Comparing the
ﬁnely ﬂaked blades of Upper
Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers, dating from around 30–40,000 years
ago, with the crude pebble tools
used by Homo habilis at Olduvai
Gorge in East Africa two million
years ago, it is hard to deny that
the differences reﬂect real changes
in intellectual and manipulative
abilities – changes that are also
reﬂected in the increasing size of Figure 20.2 The development of material culture.
the brain and structural modiﬁca- From B. Cotterell and J. Kamminga, Mechanisms of Pre-industrial
tions to the hand. Homo habilis Technology, published by Cambridge University Press, 1990, p. 9.
was, after all, a very different kind
of creature than Homo sapiens, in
many ways much closer to an ape than a human being. On the other hand, it would appear
that once a recognisably human level of competence had been achieved, all subsequent
technological change – from Palaeolithic hunting and gathering to modern industry –
could take place without any signiﬁcant further change in the basic biological endowment
of the species.
In short, it appears that whereas the change from Lower to Upper Palaeolithic tools is
a chapter in the story of human evolution, the change from the latter to modern industrial technologies is a chapter of history. When we speak of evolution, it is assumed that
changes in tools depend on – and can therefore be taken as indices of – changes in the
forms and capacities of the creatures that use them. When we speak of history, by contrast,
it is as though technology had broken free from the bonds of genetic constraint, and
could henceforth undergo unlimited development without entailing any enhancement of
innate human capacities. At what point, then, does the evolution of technology become
the history of technology? How can we draw a dividing line between these two processes?
Is it possible even in principle, let alone in practice, to distinguish those actions and events
that carried forward the movement of human history from those that set it in motion in
the ﬁrst place? We are very far from resolving these questions, but I would like to conclude

Skill
my discussion of this theme with the suggestion that the processes of evolution and history 1
may not be so distinct after all.
The notion of capacity seems to imply a certain view of human nature, as comprising 3
a set of universal structures or compartments, fully formed in the life of every individual 4
from the start, and waiting to be ﬁlled up with all manner of particular cultural content. 5
Thus the capacities are said to be innate, the products of an evolutionary process; the 6
content acquired, changing through history. However my discussion of skill in the last 7
chapter led me to conclude that the capabilities of action of both human beings and non- 8
human animals are neither innate nor acquired but emergent properties of the total 9
developmental system constituted by the presence of the agent (human or non-human) 10
in its environment. In the case of humans, this is as true of the most widely distributed 1
skills such as walking and speaking as it is of those of more restricted distribution such 2
as swimming and writing.
We cannot, then, place universals on the side of evolution and particulars on the side 4
of history. Rather, if history be understood as the process wherein people, through their 5
activities, establish the conditions under which succeeding generations lead their lives, 6
developing as they do the skills appropriate to these various forms of life, then it cannot 7
differ in principle from the process in which organisms, quite generally, establish by their 8
own presence and actions the context of development for their successors. That process 9
is one of evolution. To understand evolution in this sense, however, is to make a clean 20
break with the conventions of modern biology, and with the neo-Darwinian paradigm 1
upon which they are founded. For it is to attribute the changing forms and capacities of 2
living creatures not to changes in an internal programme, design or building plan (the 3
genotype), but to transformations in the whole ﬁeld of relationships within which they 4
come into being. To take this idea further would be beyond the scope of the present 5
chapter. It is, however, my subject for the next.
MEASURING TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY
Is there, then, anything progressive about technical change? It is remarkable that although 30
the majority of anthropologists are deeply suspicious of the idea that there is any inherently 1
progressive tendency in the history of human culture, they are inclined to make an excep- 2
tion of technology, and are quite content to talk about peoples with ‘simple’ and with ‘com- 3
plex’ technologies. Precisely how the simplicity or complexity of a technology is to be 4
gauged, however, has remained far from clear. One of the few attempts to construct such 5
a measure has been made by Wendell Oswalt (1976). Oswalt deﬁned the complexity of a 6
tool by the number of ‘technounits’ that make it up. A technounit is a physically distinct 7
part that makes a particular contribution to the overall implement. It was in these terms 8
that McGrew compared the relative complexity of chimpanzee and human hunter-gatherer 9
technologies. He found that none of the tools used by chimpanzees in the procurement of 40
subsistence comprised more that one technounit, whereas the mean number of technounits 1
(1.2) for the Tasmanian Aboriginal repertoire was very slightly greater. In fact, no 2
Tasmanian implement was of more than one technounit; the raised mean is fully accounted 3
for by two kinds of ﬁxed facility used in hunting, involving two and four technounits respec- 4
tively (McGrew 1992: 138, 144). By contrast, the Inuit (Eskimo) sealing harpoon shown 5
in Figure 20.3 has no fewer than 26 structurally distinct components.
On the basis of a comparative survey of the toolkits of hunter-gatherers, farmers and 7
herdsmen, Oswalt was able to refute the common assumption that hunters and gatherers 118

The dynamics of technical change • 367 •

have simpler tools than any other human
groups. In fact the most complex tools were
found among specialised hunters, especially
hunters – like the Inuit – of large aquatic
mammals, who have to use considerable
ingenuity to obtain inaccessible or potentially dangerous prey. The herdsman, who
has ready access to comparatively docile animals, faces nothing like the same technical
challenges, and his toolkit is correspondingly
simpler: thus the lasso, the principal instrument by which the reindeer herdsman
catches hold of his animals, is no more than
a length of rope tied to a sliding toggle
(Ingold 1993b). The equipment of the gatherer tends to be simpler than that of the
hunter (plants do not attempt to escape
those who ‘hunt’ them, nor do they have to
be outwitted or outmanoeuvred), but again,
the tools of the farmer are no more complex.
For both gatherer and farmer, the essentials
may consist of just an axe or adze, digging
stick, and some form of carrying device for
transporting harvested produce.
But comparisons based on the structural
properties of the tools themselves can be Figure 20.3 Inuit (Angmagsalik) toggle-headed ‘feather’
and throwing board for hunting large seals from a
misleading. Returning the objects to the harpoon
kayak.
contexts of their use reveals a different
picture. The Inuit harpoon is a rather Drawing by Patrick Finnerty, from W. H. Oswalt, An
Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology, published
specialised piece of equipment, which is used by John Wiley & Sons, 1976, p. 100.
only for sealing. The reindeer herdsman’s
lasso, by contrast, can be put to use in all
manner of different ways. I have seen herdsmen use their lassos for setting traps, for tying
animals to sledges for transport home, and for countless other purposes. Likewise among
hunter-gatherers with an apparently simple inventory of tool types (including Tasmanian
Aborigines), it is common to ﬁnd that each kind of object is turned to an account for an
astonishing variety of different tasks.
Among the Aboriginal people of the Australian Western Desert there is a clear division
between men’s tools (principally the spear and spear-thrower) and women’s tools (principally digging sticks and wooden bowls). The spear-thrower, in the context of hunting, is
designed to enhance the ﬂight of the spear by imparting extra angular momentum to the
throw. But it has numerous other uses: as a friction stick in making ﬁre, a woodworking
tool (with the addition of a hafted stone adze-ﬂake), a mixing tray for pigments or tobacco,
a percussion instrument in songs and dances, a device for clearing an area of thorns and
pebbles when preparing a campsite, and (when embellished with decorative markings) a
mnemonic for recalling the sequence and locations of waterholes and other features of the
landscape (Gould 1970: 22, Figure 20.4). The woman’s digging stick is similarly multifunctional. It can be used to obtain burrowing animals as well as plants, as a weapon in

Skill
small-game hunting and in self-defence. Small wooden 1
bowls can be used to carry produce, but also to shovel 2
away soil when digging. Large bowls can be used to 3
carry both infants and drinking water (Hamilton 4
1980: 7).
Comparing Australian Aboriginal and Inuit 6
toolkits, it might seem at ﬁrst glance that the ﬁrst is 7
extremely simple and the second rather complex. But 8
a more signiﬁcant difference is between the economy 9
and versatility of the Australian toolkit and the diver- 10
sity and specialisation of the Inuit one. Australian 1
Aboriginal people have few tools, but use them in 2
whatever way they come in handy, for manifold 3
purposes that we might never come to think of when 4
we classify the objects by function – for example, as 5
spear-throwers or digging-sticks. Inuit have many 6
tools, some of them – like the harpoon – of great 7
complexity and ingenuity, but each is used for a 8
prescribed purpose which governs, at least to some 9
extent, the manner of its construction. It is only 20
because of a peculiar bias that leads us to look for 1
technical operations in the properties of the tools 2
themselves, rather than in the know-how of their 3
users, that we are led to conclude that Inuit are 4
somehow more ‘advanced’, in the technical sphere, 5
than Australian Aborigines. As I have already shown 6
(Chapter Sixteen, p. 315), the source of this bias lies 7
in the concept of technology itself.
These observations all point towards a single 9
conclusion: that to comprehend the technical accom- 30
plishments of hunter-gatherers, or of any other people 1
for that matter, it is not sufﬁcient just to look at their 2
tools. We have to understand their knowledge. Tools 3
are of no use if you don’t know how to work with 4
them; moreover up to a point, the simpler the tool, 5
the more knowledgeable and skilled you have to be 6
to be able to work it effectively. The reindeerman’s 7
lasso is a simple tool, but it requires immense skill to 8
Figure 20.4 Decorated spear thrower from the Nyatunyara 40
people of the Australian Western Desert. Designs depict water- 1
holes and landmarks along the track of a totemic snake.
From R. A. Gould, Spears and spear-throwers of the Western 3
Desert Aborigines of Australia, American Museum Novitates, 4
1970, p. 28. Courtesy of the American Museum of Natural 5
History

The dynamics of technical change • 369 •

use it effectively. The same could be said of an axe, digging stick, spear or boomerang.
The food processor on my kitchen table is, by contrast, an extremely complex tool, with
hundreds of interconnected parts. But it took only a few minutes to learn to use it.
As Robin Ridington has put it (1982: 470), understanding technical know-how means
focusing on artiﬁce rather than artefacts, on tool-use as skilled practice rather the mechanical operation of exterior devices. But by artiﬁce we do not mean the kind of objective,
generalisable, scientiﬁc knowledge which, in its application, might be covered by the
modern concept of technology. It is rather knowledge of a very personal kind, partly intuitive, largely implicit, and deeply embedded in the particularities of experience. One grows
into such knowledge much as one learns one’s country or one’s kinship system. It is knowledge that both enables a person to ﬁnd his or her way in a world of human and non-human
others, and that endows them with a speciﬁc identity. Thus, as we saw in Chapter Sixteen,
it is indistinguishably social and technical.

THE ORGANIC ANALOGY
The idea that in the history of human technology, tools and machines have evolved
according to principles similar to those governing the evolution of organic species is an
attractive one that has had numerous adherents, from Marx, Butler and Pitt-Rivers in the
nineteenth century to contemporary advocates of ‘evolutionary archaeology’ who argue
that mechanisms of variation, differential replication and retrospective selection will
account just as well for artefactual as for organic change.2 All the necessary conditions
seem to be present, in the technological domain, to support the analogy. There is diversity, which, if anything, is greater than that of species. George Basalla, for example, notes
that the number of patents issued in the United States since 1790 (4.7 million) is more
than three times the number of species of ﬂora and fauna yet identiﬁed (Basalla 1988:
2). There is continuity, in the sense that technical change, by and large, seems to be
gradual, amassed from a very large number of minor variations rather than punctuated
by momentous steps of absolute invention. There is novelty, insofar as all making activity,
however closely it strives to copy an existing model, is bound to diverge from it to some
degree. Replication, in practice, can never be perfect. And ﬁnally, there is selection, albeit
artiﬁcial rather than natural, in that it is guided by human intention in rather the same
way as in the practice of animal or plant breeding. In other words, the context for the
differential replication of technical variants is human, and therefore social and historical
(Basalla 1988: 25).
Arguments for the analogy between organic evolution and technical change, though
they vary in detail, generally run roughly as follows. In the replication of existing technical designs, innovations of one kind and another inevitably creep in. Some of these may
be entirely accidental, and in that respect resemble genetic mutations. Others are clearly
stimulated by the particular conditions in which the object or technique in question is to
be applied: to the extent that this is the case, the evolutionary process is often said to be
more ‘Lamarckian’ than ‘Darwinian’. Another way of putting this would be to deﬁne
Darwinian evolution as the special case in which the degree of coupling between a novel
variation and its environmental conditions of selection is reduced to zero (Ingold 1996b:
196–7). Whether accidental or premeditated, the majority of innovations will probably
turn out in practice to be useless or even detrimental. A small proportion, however, bring
evident beneﬁts. Variants that work well in the particular conditions prevailing in the
environment will tend to ‘catch on’, through extensive replication, while others will dwindle

Skill
and disappear. Thus in the long run, the more successful technical designs will undergo 1
a kind of adaptive radiation, splitting into diverse forms suited to speciﬁc contexts of use, 2
while others may become effectively extinct.
One of the virtues of the organic analogy is that it suggests a way of explaining how 4
the majority of extant techniques and artefacts have come to be so admirably adapted to 5
current requirements, without our having to suppose that they appeared from nowhere, 6
dreamt up in a moment of inspiration by a designer who was somehow able to see the 7
totality of every problem and conceive its solution in a vacuum. It is no more possible 8
in the history of artefacts than in the evolution of species for new forms to appear out 9
of thin air. Every object, and every technique, comes with a history attached, or as Basalla 10
puts it, ‘every novel artifact has an antecedent’ (1988: 208–9). True, in the history of 1
artefacts the selection involved carries a component of intentionality: human beings may 2
be able to author their own designs in a way that other animals cannot. What they cannot 3
do, however, is stand outside of history and treat the world as though it were a blank 4
slate. Every designer is a creature of his or her own time, and the objects and practices 5
with which each is surrounded, bequeathed through the activities of predecessors, form a 6
necessary resource for the design process itself. That is why, as Reuleaux pointed out in 7
his Kinematics of machinery of 1876, most of what goes for invention in the technical 8
sphere consists in hitting on new uses for old things.
‘The ﬁrst machinal arrangements’, Reuleaux argued, ‘were of a kind which we may 20
designate as make-shifts’. Cobbled together for one purpose, these arrangements were 1
pressed into service for others, coming up against new demands for improvement which 2
were met by further rearrangements, and so on.
Very gradually each invention came to be used for more purposes than those for which 5
it was originally intended, and the standard by which its excellence and usefulness were 6
judged was gradually raised. An external necessity thus demanded its improvement, and 7
from this cause machinal ideas slowly crystallised themselves out, and gradually assumed 8
forms so distinct that men could use them designedly in the solution of new problems. 9
These attempts resulted in further improvements, and these in their turn led once more 30
to new applications and more extended use.
(Reuleaux 1876: 231) 2
Only a few years previously, in his treatise of 1862 On the various contrivances by which 4
British and foreign orchids are fertilised by insects, Darwin had advanced a precisely analo- 5
gous argument to account for the evolution of mechanisms in nature. In order to facilitate 6
the transfer of pollen, Darwin showed, the orchid uses whatever parts happen to be avail- 7
able, parts that may have arisen as adaptations to quite different functions.
Although an organ may have been originally formed for some special purpose, if it now 40
serves for this end, we are justiﬁed in saying that it is especially contrived for it. On 1
the same principle if a man were to make a machine for some special purpose, but 2
were to use old wheels, springs and pulleys, only slightly altered, the whole machine, 3
with all its parts, might be said to be specially contrived for that purpose. Thus 4
throughout nature almost every part of each living being has probably served, in a 5
slightly modiﬁed condition, for diverse purposes, and has acted in the living machinery 6
of many ancient and distinct speciﬁc forms.
(Darwin 1862: 348) 118

The dynamics of technical change • 371 •

As Darwin showed, natural selection, in adapting organisms to their conditions of life,
continually puts old structures to work in new ways, having no other materials on which
to work. More than a century later we ﬁnd the same idea echoed in the work of the
distinguished biologist, François Jacob. The process of organic adaptation under natural
selection, for Jacob, is akin to ‘tinkering’. The mammalian ear, for example, is derived
from a part of the jaw of the ﬁsh, and birds’ feathers, with their aerodynamic properties,
are derived from hairs once designed for insulation (Jacob 1977).
As with organisms so with artefacts, every novelty is but an expedient solution to a
very speciﬁc, context-bound, local difﬁculty: it is a matter of getting by with what is
already available rather than producing the absolutely new. Thus it is an illusion to suppose
that anything is ever perfectly ﬁt for the purpose to which it is used. ‘Every thing we
design and make’, writes David Pye, ‘is an improvisation, a lash-up, something inept and
provisional. We live like castaways . . .’ (1964: 10). More often than not, the stock of
materials available to the maker consists of previously made things, constructed for other
purposes but now co-opted for the project in hand. This is the kind of making that
Claude Lévi-Strauss famously likened to bricolage. The bricoleur is someone who delights
in making novel contraptions out of the bits and pieces of old ones. The inventory of
tools and materials he has to work with, as Lévi-Strauss explains, ‘bears no relation to the
current project, or indeed to any particular project, but is the contingent result of all the
occasions there have been to renew or enrich the stock or to maintain it with the remains
of previous constructions or destructions’ (1966b: 17). In the history of human technology, perhaps the outstanding example of bricolage lies in the so-called ‘invention’ of
writing. Let me pause to say a few words about it.
The nameless inventors of the earliest scripts – and there seem to have been several,
who arrived at the same idea quite independently – did not ﬁrst conceive in the abstract,
and then proceed to construct, full-blown, purpose-built writing systems. They did not
even imagine the possibility of writing as we think of it now. What they did was simply
to hit on the idea that a graph or diagram depicting a thing could be used instead to
represent the sound of the word for that thing – a sound which could be homophonous
with words or parts of words for other things. This, the so-called rebus principle, has
been hailed as ‘one of the greatest inventions of human history’ (DeFrancis 1989: 50).
Yet its signiﬁcance has been hugely exaggerated by indirect and largely fortuitous consequences of which its originators can have known nothing. All they were doing was pressing
into service, on an ad hoc basis, well-known and easily identiﬁable icons for the new
purpose of representing speech sounds, in order to solve such limited problems as keeping
accounts, recording proper names or divining fortunes. What modern historians rather
grandly call ‘writing systems’ undoubtedly developed as accumulations of expediences of
this kind. DeFrancis is right to describe them as ‘jerry-built structures’ that ‘bear less
resemblance to carefully constructed schemes for representing spoken languages than they
do a hodgepodge of mnemonic clues that adept readers can use to arrive at coherent
messages’ (1989: 262). In short, they are more like Rube Goldberg devices than the exemplary instances of engineering design that the popular notion of writing as a technology
of language would lead us to expect.3
Now organisms, it would appear, have evolved in rather the same way as writing systems.
Jacob, it will be recalled, likened natural selection to a tinker, and a similar image is
invoked by another leading contemporary exponent of Darwinian thinking, Michael
Ghiselin: ‘organic mechanisms may be shown . . . to have been haphazardly thrown
together, out of whatever materials the moment happened to supply’ (Ghiselin 1969: 153).

Skill
In one respect, however, this kind of image is seriously misleading. For real, living organ- 1
isms are not pieced together out of ready-made components, however fragmentary, 2
heterogeneous and diverse in origin. Rather, they undergo growth and development in an 3
environment. Thus to be more precise, the tinkering – if such it is – must occur not in 4
ontogeny but in phylogeny, that is in the assemblage, by natural selection, of a design 5
or construction blueprint for the organism. This design is what is generally known as the 6
genotype. And if the same argument is to be applied by analogy to the construction of 7
artefacts, we would have to conclude that what is fashioned, through a process of variation 8
under selection, is likewise a design for the tool or machine in question rather than the 9
object itself.
My discussion in Chapter Eighteen, however, led me to question the very idea that the 1
making of artefacts consists of a simple transcription of a prior design onto raw material. 2
I argued, to the contrary, that the forms of artefacts emerge through the unfolding of a 3
system of relations comprised by the presence of the artisan in a richly structured environ- 4
ment that could include other persons, other examples of artefacts of the kind that it is 5
desired to make, a selection of materials, and a range of tools and supporting surfaces. 6
Should we conclude, then, that the analogy does not hold; that the processes that give 7
rise to organisms and artefacts are profoundly dissimilar? Could it be, in complete reversal 8
of commonsense understanding, that whereas organisms are built, artefacts grow?
I think not. The analogy is indeed sound. It is, in short, not that organisms are built 20
like artefacts, knocked together out of bits and pieces as the Darwinian model suggests, 1
but rather that artefacts grow like organisms, within the equivalent of a morphogenetic 2
ﬁeld. Where plans or blueprints exist, as they often do in the ﬁelds of architecture and 3
engineering, they are generated within the same, environmentally situated process from 4
which also emerge the forms they are said to specify. But they may not exist at all. Thus 5
where apparently identical objects are made, generation after generation, this is not because 6
each is a replica run off from a template that has been somehow transmitted from ances- 7
tors to descendants, independently and in advance of the construction process. It is rather, 8
as we saw in the case of the making of string bags described in Chapter Nineteen, that 9
form-making involves a precise co-ordination of perception and action that is learned 30
through copying the movements of experienced practitioners in socially scaffolded contexts. 1
Making, in other words, is copying; it is not the realisation of a design that has already 2
been copied. The same point could be alternatively expressed in terms of a contrast between 3
reproduction and replication: every artefact, formed as it is within the process of produc- 4
tion, is an original, not a replica. And whatever variations may be introduced in the process 5
lie in the dynamics of making, not in errors of transmission.
Now I believe that precisely the same argument may be applied to the growth of organ- 7
isms. The transgenerational stability of organic form is due to the dynamics of 8
reproduction, not to the mechanics of replication. In each generation the form emerges 9
anew, in the course of ontogenetic development; it is not run off from a pre-existing 40
design speciﬁcation. Indeed for organisms, there is no such speciﬁcation. The genotype, 1
conceived as a programme or blueprint for the growth of the organism, does not exist. 2
To recall my conclusion from the ﬁrst part of this chapter, the forms and capacities of 3
organisms are attributable not to genes but to the properties of developmental systems (of 4
which the genes are, of course, an integral part). An exploration of the radical implica- 5
tions of this conclusion for evolutionary theory is my subject for the next chapter.

Tools, minds and machines • 373 •

Chapter Twenty-one

‘People like us’
The concept of the anatomically modern human

INTRODUCTION: THE ORTHODOX VIEW
Let me begin with a rather facetious question. Why did Cro-Magnon Man not ride a
bicycle? I shall ﬁrst elaborate on the answer that will surely seem obvious: it is not that he
lacked the basic anatomical prerequisites to perform such a feat, but simply that he lived in
an era long before anything as ingenious and complex as a bicycle had been developed.
And even if it had, given the nature of the terrain and the prevailing mode of subsistence,
a bicycle would probably have been of little use to him. In other words, although
biologically prepared to take to the saddle, the cultural conditions that would make cycling
a practicable option were not yet in place. I intend to show, however, that this answer is
seriously ﬂawed, and that the search for a more satisfactory alternative forces a fundamental revision of our most basic notions of evolution, of history and indeed of humanity
itself. In particular, I shall argue that the idea of the ‘anatomically modern human’, the
pivot around which all these other notions revolve, is an analytic ﬁction whose principal
function is to cover up a contradiction at the heart of modern evolutionary biology.
Cro-Magnon Man, unearthed by Louis Lartet in the village of Les Eyzies, France, in
1868, has of course acquired the mantle of the prototypical ‘modern’, albeit by no means
the earliest representative of its type in the fossil record. Compared with its predecessors
– the ‘archaic’ Neanderthals and, before that, Homo erectus – this type was recognisably
different: a kind of man, as William Howells wrote, ‘who was entirely like ourselves’
(1967: 240). In contemporary palaeoanthropology, the Cro-Magnons are included, along
with all subsequent and present-day human populations, within the single sub-speciﬁc
taxon Homo sapiens sapiens. And the implication of such categorisation is that, at least so
far as their biological endowment was concerned, these Upper Palaeolithic people fell well
within the existing range of variation of the sub-species. Had they been born in our own
time, and grown up in a society like our own, they would undoubtedly have been able
to do all the things we can: read and write, play the piano, drive cars, ride bicycles, and
so on. That is, they had the potential to do all these things, a potential that nonetheless
remained unrealised in their own lifetimes.
Now I should like to return to Howells’s characterisation of the Cro-Magnons, as people
‘entirely like ourselves’, bearing in mind that at this stage of the argument my purpose is
to spell out what I believe to be the orthodox position in current anthropology. Somebody
might object that they were not like us at all. They did not, after all, live in cities, read
books, write scientiﬁc monographs, play the piano or drive cars. To this kind of objection, two responses are immediately forthcoming. One is to point out that the objection
rests on a narrow and ethnocentric view of who ‘we’ are, a view that would exclude a

Skill
large proportion even of contemporary humanity. In comparing Upper Palaeolithic people 1
to ourselves, the reference is to humankind in its global distribution, irrespective of cultural 2
variation. The other response is to qualify the sense in which the people are said to have 3
been ‘modern’. This should not be confused with conventional usage in social and cultural 4
anthropology, in which modernity has generally been linked to some notion of Western 5
urban-industrial society. The Cro-Magnons were modern in an anatomical, not in a socio- 6
cultural sense. They were ‘like us’ biologically, but not culturally.
What separates the anatomically modern humans of thirty thousand years ago (and 8
earlier) from their contemporary descendants, according to orthodox theory, is a process 9
not of evolution but of history – or as some would have it, of cultural rather than biolog- 10
ical evolution. This is not to suggest that with the advent of the ‘moderns’, the evolution 1
of our species literally stopped. There have been continuing changes, but these have been 2
relatively minor, and pale into insigniﬁcance beside the truly colossal transformations in 3
ways of life that have occurred – apparently at an escalating rate – throughout the course 4
of human history. Whether, or in what sense, these transformations can be considered 5
progressive has been hotly debated: nevertheless it seems to be generally agreed that the 6
history of culture has been marked by a cumulative increase in the scale and complexity 7
of its technological component. Not only, however, was the historical process of complex- 8
iﬁcation in the technological sphere of culture made possible by a biological endowment 9
that was already established by the Upper Palaeolithic; it also left that endowment unaf- 20
fected. The motor car is a modern invention, but the man behind the wheel remains a 1
creature biologically equipped for life in the Stone Age!
Thus so far as their basic biology is concerned, cyclists are no different from walkers, 3
and the walkers of today are no different from their predecessors of the Upper Palaeolithic. 4
It is generally accepted that bipedal locomotion is a universal human characteristic, whose 5
evolution entailed a distinctive suite of anatomical adjustments (Lovejoy 1988). Cycling, 6
by contrast, is an acquired skill which has appeared relatively lately in some, but not all 7
human populations. Though its advent was conditional upon a long chain of prior circum- 8
stances of invention and diffusion (from the discovery of the wheel to the manufacture 9
of steel tubing), as well as of environmental modiﬁcation (the construction of roads and 30
tracks), it entailed no reconﬁguration of human anatomy. In its structure and propor- 1
tions, after all, the bicycle was designed to ‘ﬁt’ a human body that had already evolved 2
for walking, and its essential mechanical function is to convert bipedal into rotary motion. 3
This brings us back to the conventional answer to the question with which I began. 4
The reason why Cro-Magnon Man did not ride a bicycle has nothing whatever to do 5
with biology. That is, the reason is historical rather than evolutionary. The same distinc- 6
tion, as we saw in the last chapter, is generally invoked to explain why the toolmakers of 7
the Upper Palaeolithic worked with ﬂaked stone rather than complex mechanical or elec- 8
tronic equipment. And if it is absurd to posit a direct line of continuity from the very 9
earliest stone tools to modern machinery, then it is equally absurd to posit a similar 40
progression from quadrupedal to bicyclic locomotion. For whereas the transition from 1
walking on four feet to walking on two belongs to evolution, the transition – if you will 2
– from two feet to two wheels belongs to history.
WALKING AND CYCLING
I trust it will be agreed that this is a fair representation of the orthodox view. I shall now 7
go on to show why I think it is wrong. Let me begin by taking a fresh look at the contrast 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 375 •

between walking and cycling. It is commonly supposed that walking is something we are
‘born with’ whereas cycling is a product of enculturation; in other words the former is
presumed to be innate, the latter acquired. Yet the fact is that new-born infants cannot
walk. They have to learn to walk, and the help of older persons, already competent in
the art, is invariably enlisted in the enterprise. In brief, walking is a skill that emerges for
every individual in the course of a process of development, through the active involvement of an agent – the child – within an environment that includes skilled caregivers,
along with a variety of supporting objects and a certain terrain (Ingold 1991: 370). How,
then, can we continue to maintain that it comes, as it were, ‘pre-packaged’ in the human
biogram? True, the vast majority of human infants do learn to walk, moreover they do
so within a fairly narrowly deﬁned period. Thus while the baby does not exactly land in
the world on two feet, it comes with a built-in developmental schedule which ensures
that it will eventually walk upright provided, however, that certain conditions are present
in its environment.
This last proviso is absolutely critical. Infants deprived of contact with older caregivers
will not learn to walk – indeed they would not even survive, which is why all surviving
children do walk, unless crippled by accident or disease. One could imagine a future
scenario in which human locomotive needs were met entirely by wheeled vehicles, or of
life under conditions of weightlessness in outer space, where walking would disappear.
Such scenarios are admittedly fantastic, but to imagine them serves to reinforce my point,
which is that the capacity for bipedal locomotion can only be said to be innate by presupposing the presence of the necessary environmental conditions for its development. Strictly
speaking, therefore, bipedalism cannot be attributed to the human organism unless the
environmental context enters into the speciﬁcation of what that organism is.
With this point in mind, let me turn from walking to cycling. Children can only
become proﬁcient in cycling, as in walking, through a process of learning in which adult
assistance is generally required. Compared with walking, however, the conditions for the
development of cycling are a good deal more stringent. Obviously, no-one can learn to
cycle who does not have a bike to ride, and the environment must also include roads or
tracks that are negotiable on two wheels. In contemporary industrial societies these conditions are so ubiquitously present that we tend to think it as natural that children beyond
a certain age should be able to cycle as it is that they can walk. In other societies, by
contrast, bicycles may be rare or absent altogether, or the terrain may be quite unsuited
to their use. And so the skills of cycling are of far more limited distribution than those
of walking.
This is a difference, however, of extent rather than principle. If walking is innate in
the sense – and only in the sense – that given certain conditions, it is bound to emerge in
the course of development, then the same applies to cycling. And if cycling is acquired
in the sense that its emergence depends on a process of learning that is embedded in
contexts of social interaction, then the same applies to walking. In other words, it is as
wrong to suppose that cycling is ‘given’ exogenously (independently of the human
organism) as it is to suppose that walking is ‘given’ endogenously (independently of the
environment). Both walking and cycling are skills that emerge in the relational contexts
of the child’s involvement in its surroundings, and are therefore properties of the developmental system constituted by these relations.
Moreover these skills are literally embodied, in the sense that their development entails
speciﬁc modiﬁcations in neurology, musculature, and even in basic features of anatomy.
Though children generally learn to walk before they learn to ride, the modiﬁcations entailed

Skill
in cycling are not simply inscribed upon an anatomy that comes, as it were, ‘ready-made’ 1
for walking. For the human body is not ready-made for anything, but undergoes 2
continuous change throughout the life-cycle as it is pressed into the performance of 3
diverse tasks. Indeed the recurrent stresses and strains of everyday life do not just affect 4
the relative development of different muscles; they also leave their mark on the skeleton 5
itself. Thus carrying loads on the head affects the bones of the upper spine; squatting 6
puts a strain on the knee, resulting in a notched kneecap, and no doubt cycling, too, 7
leaves tell-tale signs.1 It is of course true that the bicycle is designed for a creature already 8
accustomed to bipedal locomotion, so that cycling calls for no major overhaul of human 9
anatomy. Cyclists can still walk, and it is doubtful whether even the most percipient 10
observer could distinguish a cyclist from a non-cyclist, save by putting them to the test. 1
However the facts that no novice has succeeded in sustaining balance and co-ordination 2
on a ﬁrst attempt, and that the knack of riding a bicycle, once learned, is never lost, 3
indicate that the exercise of the requisite sensory and motor skills leaves an indelible 4
anatomical impression, if only in the normally invisible architecture of the brain. Indeed, 5
this conclusion is supported by recent neurological research which shows, as Kandel and 6
Hawkins report, that ‘our brains are constantly changing anatomically’, even as we learn 7
(1992: 60).
In the light of these considerations, it is perhaps not so absurd, after all, to situate the 9
emergence, respectively, of walking and cycling within the same overall process of evolu- 20
tion – an evolution, that is, of the developmental systems which underwrite these capacities. 1
For once we introduce the environmental context of development into our speciﬁcation 2
of what an organism is, it must follow that a human-being-in-environment-A cannot be 3
the same kind of organism as a human-being-in-environment-B. Thus Cro-Magnon Man 4
was indeed a rather different kind of creature from the cycling or car-driving urban dweller 5
of today. He was not ‘like us’ – not even biologically. He may have resembled us genet- 6
ically, but that is another matter. How it was that biology came to be identiﬁed with 7
genetics is a problem in the history of ideas to which I return below; sufﬁce it to say at 8
this juncture that such identiﬁcation is already implicit in the notion that every individual 9
receives his or her biological constitution, at the moment of conception, in the form of 30
an endowment. Before examining this notion more closely, I should ﬁrst like to review an 1
area in which very similar issues arise to those raised in my comparison of walking and 2
cycling, but which has been the site of far more serious controversy: namely, the evolu- 3
tion of language.
SPEECH AND WRITING
It is generally recognised that Cro-Magnon Man, as a paragon of anatomical modernity, 8
had a fully-ﬂedged capacity for language. He could speak just as well as you or I. But he 9
could neither read nor write. I begin with the comparison between speech and literacy, 40
since it bears the most obvious parallel with that between walking and cycling. Thus 1
according to the orthodox view, the capacity for language is a human universal, some- 2
thing that we all receive as part of a common biological endowment that was in place by 3
the Upper Palaeolithic, if not earlier (I am not here concerned with the arguments over 4
dating). Literacy, by contrast, is a technology of language that arose independently in 5
various parts of the world as a result of speciﬁc events of invention and diffusion, and 6
which – even today – is by no means universally shared. The capacity for language, then, 7
is a product of evolution; the capacity to read and write a product of history. The former 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 377 •

is said to be innate, the latter acquired. Cro-Magnon’s failure to read and write, like his
failure to ride a bicycle, had nothing to do with his biology. It was rather that, in the
epoch during which he was living, the cultural developments that culminated in the invention of writing systems had yet to run their course.
I believe this view is wrong, for reasons that I have already spelled out. Human babies
are not born talking, any more than they are born walking. Their capacity for language
develops, through a series of fairly well-deﬁned stages. The support of speaking caregivers,
and the presence in the environment of a rich and highly structured array of signiﬁcant
features, are essential for normal language development. Since these conditions are almost
invariably fulﬁlled, the overwhelming majority of children learn to speak without difﬁculty, and the exceptions are those whose development is impeded by some other handicap.
The conditions that have to be fulﬁlled if a child is to learn successfully to read and write
are, of course, far more restricted. Indeed, just what these conditions are is a matter of
vigorous debate, especially in educational circles. Since literacy skills and practices are
in fact exceedingly diverse, having no more in common than the representation of words
in a graphic medium, the conditions necessary for their acquisition are, in all probability,
equally variable (Street 1984). But this does not affect my main point, namely that literacy
is not ‘added on’, through enculturation, to a human constitution that is biologically
ready-made for speech. Rather, the abilities both to speak and to read and write emerge
within a continuous process of bodily modiﬁcation, involving a ‘ﬁne-tuning’ of vocalauditory and manual-visual skills together with corresponding anatomical changes in the
brain, and taking place within the contexts of the learner’s engagement with other persons
and diverse objects in his or her environment. Both capacities, in short, are the properties
of developmental systems.
Without prejudging the vexed issue of whether the so-called ‘archaic’ humans, typiﬁed
by Neanderthal Man, could speak, there is considerable agreement among contemporary
palaeoanthropologists that this capacity – at least in its fully-ﬂedged form – was not shared
by earlier, pre-human hominids such as Homo erectus and Homo habilis. The question we
need to ask, however, is this: in what way, if at all, did the failure of these early hominids
to speak differ from the failure of Upper Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers to read and write?
To recall a distinction I introduced in the last chapter (pp. 364–5), in the context of a
comparison of the technical capabilities of chimpanzees and human hunter-gatherers, how
can we justify the attribution of the former to innate incapacity, when the latter is attributed to unfulﬁlled historical conditions? If Cro-Magnon Man, had he been brought up
in the twentieth century, could have mastered the skills of literacy, why should not Homo
erectus, had he been brought up in the Upper Palaeolithic, have mastered language?
A somewhat comparable question arises in the context of research into the linguistic
capacities of great apes, especially chimpanzees. Reared under ‘natural’ conditions – that
is, without signiﬁcant contact with humans – chimpanzees do not learn to speak. Yet
recent research shows fairly convincingly that chimpanzees reared in a human environment with speaking caregivers are capable of the spontaneous acquisition of linguistic
syntax and semantics of a complexity equivalent to that used by small children (SavageRumbaugh and Rumbaugh 1993). Does this prove that contrary to expectations,
chimpanzees – and by analogy, early hominids – do or did have a capacity for language,
albeit of a limited sort? Are we to believe that thanks to the legacy of their common
ancestry with humans, such a capacity is pre-installed, as an hereditary endowment, in
the mind of every individual chimpanzee, merely awaiting propitious environmental
circumstances for it to be ‘brought out’?

Skill
I think not, for the question itself rests on a false premise, namely that the capacity 1
for language is something whose presence or absence may be attributed to individuals of 2
a species, irrespective of the environmental contexts of their development. Indeed it makes 3
no sense to ask whether chimpanzees or hominids ‘have’ or ‘had’ language, as though it 4
were programmed into them from the start. The biological deﬁnition of species depends 5
upon the possibility of a context-independent speciﬁcation: thus a chimpanzee is a chim- 6
panzee, Pan troglodytes, whether reared among other chimpanzees or among humans, 7
whether in the forest or in the laboratory. Yet the chimpanzee-in-an-environment-of-other- 8
chimpanzees is not at all the same kind of animal as the chimpanzee-in-an- 9
environment-of-humans: the latter may be credited with a rudimentary capacity for 10
language which the former lacks. This capacity, as Dominique Lestel has pointed out, is 1
the outcome of a process of development situated in the peculiar context of the hybrid 2
human–animal community set up for the purposes of ape-language research (Lestel 1998: 3
13). And while this context may seem rather exceptional, it is nevertheless true of any 4
process of development that it must involve an organism in relationships that cross-cut 5
the boundaries of conventional taxonomic groupings. It follows that if a capacity – like 6
language – can be shown to arise as an emergent property of the developmental system 7
comprised by these relationships, then it cannot be attributed to a species. (Conversely, 8
to attribute language to species is automatically to have resort to an innatist view that 9
involves some kind of neural ‘hard-wiring’ that comes miraculously ready-made.)
The notion of the ‘capacity for language’ is itself deeply problematic. The orthodox 1
account, which attributes this capacity to ‘anatomically modern humans’, requires that it 2
be clearly distinguished, as a human universal, from the capacity to speak this language 3
rather than that. Competence in one’s particular mother-tongue is supposed to be a product 4
of enculturation rather than given as part of one’s biological endowment as a member of 5
the human species. But human children are not ‘born with’ an innate programme 6
(a language acquisition device) for assimilating an acquired one (in the form of the rules 7
of syntax for a particular language). For whatever devices may be deployed in the process 8
of language acquisition have themselves to undergo formation within a developmental 9
context which is the very same as that within which the child learns the language of his 30
or her community. There are not, in other words, two distinct and successive processes 1
– the ﬁrst ‘wiring up’ the brain for language, the second providing speciﬁc syntactic and 2
semantic content – for it is in learning to speak in the manner of the people in his or 3
her surroundings, and with their active assistance and support, that the neurological 4
connections underwriting the child’s linguistic competence are forged. Consequently, 5
speakers of different languages, exposed at critical stages of development to different 6
patterns of acoustic stimulation in different environments, will also differ in those aspects 7
of their neural organisation that are involved in the production and interpretation of vocal 8
utterances.2
In short, it is only by artiﬁcially separating out the more general from the more partic- 40
ular aspects of the total developmental system within which the skills of speaking emerge 1
that ‘language’ can be identiﬁed as a universal capacity as against the speaking of one 2
language rather than another. And in this respect, speaking is much like walking. There 3
are, indeed, as many different ways of walking as there are ways of speaking. But as Esther 4
Thelen and her colleagues have shown, in a series of studies of infant motor development, 5
there is no ‘essence’ of walking that can be isolated from the real-time performance of 6
the action itself (Thelen 1995: 83). Thus to refer to ‘bipedal locomotion’ or to ‘language’ 7
as a universal attribute, distinct from the manifold skills of walking or speaking as these 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 379 •

are actually deployed in the everyday life of human communities, is to reify what is, at
best, a convenient analytic abstraction. Moreover speaking, like walking, is an achievement of the whole human organism, it is not merely the behavioural output of a cognitive
mechanism installed within the organism, and for which it serves as a vehicle. Thus both
walking and speaking are, in Mauss’s phrase, ‘techniques of the body’ (1979 [1934]:
97–123). We carry these techniques with us in the ways that our bodies have been formed
in and through the developmental process.
The corollary of this conclusion, however, is quite radical. It is to overturn, once and
for all, the deep-seated presumption that those differences in language, body posture and
so on that we are inclined to call cultural are superimposed upon a pre-constituted substrate
of human biological universals. We can no longer remain content with the facile notion
that all human beings start out (biologically) much the same and end up (culturally) very
different. Consider, for example, this formulation from Geertz: ‘One of the most significant facts about us may ﬁnally be that we all begin with the natural equipment to live
a thousand kinds of life but end in the end having lived only one’ (1973: 45). My point,
contra Geertz, is that human beings are not naturally pre-equipped for any kind of life;
rather, such equipment as they have comes into existence as they live their lives, through
a process of development. And this process is none other than that by which they acquire
the skills appropriate to the particular kind of life they lead. What each of us begins with,
then, is a developmental system. It follows that cultural differences – since they emerge
within the process of development of the human organism in its environment – are themselves biological. Before examining the implications of this result, I must take a step back,
to show how it was that biology and culture came to be separated in the ﬁrst place. With
this, I return to a reconsideration of the notion of ‘biological endowment’.

THE GENOME AND THE GENOTYPE
As I have already indicated, anatomically modern humans are supposed to be biologically
endowed not only with bipedalism but also with a host of other attributes from language
to advanced cognitive and manipulative abilities, all of which are often lumped together
under the general rubric of the capacity for culture. Let me remind you of Lieberman’s
comment, which I cited in the last chapter, that despite all the monuments to human
technological advance which litter the landscape, present-day people have ‘essentially the
same biological endowment’ as their predecessors of 30,000 years ago. That endowment,
then, must be bequeathed to individuals in every successive generation, independently of
the diverse environmental contexts in which they grow up as walkers or cyclists, as stone
toolmakers or machine tool operators, as hunter-gatherers or city dwellers, and so on. In
other words, it amounts to a context-independent speciﬁcation of the human organism,
given to each and every member of the species at the point of conception.
In modern biology, the technical term for such a context-independent speciﬁcation is
genotype. By contrast, to characterise the organism in the form in which it actually appears
– in terms of its outward morphology and behaviour as revealed within any particular
environmental context – is to specify its phenotype. A fundamental premise of evolutionary
theory, in its current neo-Darwinian guise, is that only the characteristics of the genotype, and not those of the phenotype, are carried across generations. On this principle
rests the conventional division between ontogeny and phylogeny, or between development
and evolution. Whereas development refers to the process whereby, in the life-history of
the individual, the initial genotype is ‘realised’ in the concrete form of an environmentally

Skill

speciﬁc phenotype, evolution refers to the gradual 1
change, over a large number of successive genera- 2
tions, in the genotype itself (Figure 21.1). More 3
exactly, it is the frequency of the constituent 4
G1
P1
E1
elements of the genotype, in populations of indi- 5
viduals, that is supposed to undergo evolutionary 6
change, through a process of variation under natural 7
selection.
G2
P2
E2
To make this theory work, some vehicle is required 9
that would serve to carry elements of the formal spec- 10
iﬁcation of the organism – namely genetic traits – 1
G3
P3
E3
from one site of development to another, heralding 2
the initiation of a new life-cycle. With the discovery 3
of DNA, it was thought that such a vehicle, long 4
predicted, had at last been found. The DNA mole- 5
G4
P4
E4
cule comprises a very long string of nucleotide bases 6
(some three billion in humans, contained within the 7
twenty-three chromosomes of every cell in the body), 8
each of which is one of only four possible kinds. 9
This molecule has two critical properties. First, it 20
Figure 21.1 Schematic representation of the binds with a complementary string which, rather like 1
orthodox distinction between evolution and devel- a photographic negative, provides a template in a 2
opment. G1 – G4 are successive genotypes linked in chemical copying process that results in the synthesis 3
an ancestor-descendant sequence. P1 – P4 are the of further strands of DNA with precisely the same 4
respective phenotypes generated under environsequence of bases as in the original. Secondly, 5
mental conditions E1 – E4. The vertical arrows depict
an intergenerational phylogenetic pathway, the hori- segments of the molecule, of the order of ten thou- 6
zontal arrows depict ontogenetic processes conﬁned sand bases in length, guide the synthesis of speciﬁc 7
within each generation.
proteins – the composition of each protein being 8
determined by the linear sequence of bases in the 9
corresponding segment. These proteins, in turn, are 30
the fundamental constituents of the living organism. Thus the total complement of DNA 1
in the cell, otherwise known as the genome, is supposed to encode in its base sequence 2
a complete speciﬁcation of the organism to which the cell belongs.
To explain this encoding, geneticists often resort to the language of information theory 4
(Medawar 1967: 56–7). The genome, they say, carries a message which, roughly trans- 5
lated, means ‘build an organism of such-and-such a kind’ – that is, according to the formal 6
speciﬁcations of the genotype. Now in fact, the theory of information, as it was devel- 7
oped in the 1940s by Norbert Wiener, John von Neumann and Claude Shannon, took 8
up the notion of information in a specialised sense which had little to do with how the 9
term was generally understood – namely to refer to the semantic content of messages 40
passing between senders and recipients. Information for these theorists had no semantic 1
value whatever; it did not mean anything. In their terms, a random string of letters could 2
have the same informational content as a Shakespeare sonnet (Kay 1998: 507). This point, 3
however, was entirely lost on the molecular biologists who, having realised that the DNA 4
molecule could be regarded as a form of digital information in the technical, information- 5
theoretic sense, immediately jumped to the conclusion that it therefore qualiﬁed as a code 6
with a speciﬁc semantic content. The point was not lost on the information theorists 7
themselves, however, who repeatedly warned against the conﬂation of the technical sense 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 381 •

of information with its generic counterpart, and looked on in dismay as the
Genotype
Trait
scriptural metaphors of message, language, text and so forth became
‘Gene’
entrenched in a biology that had become
DNA segment
seemingly intoxicated with the idea of
Genome
DNA as a ‘book of life’.
The upshot of this conﬂation was that
the information theoretic model, as it
came to be reincarnated in the context of
Mental
Concept
biological science, was all about messages
representations
and their transmission. It is a require‘Word’
ment of the model, thus conceived,
Sound-pattern
that the message to be transmitted be
Physical world
ﬁrst broken down into its minimal constituents of meaning, each of which is
then represented, in coded form, in an
21.2 A schematic representation of the analogy between
appropriate physical medium. In verbal Figure
genes and words as signs.
communication, for example, concepts
are said to be represented by distinctive
combinations of sounds (in the case of
speech) or graphic traces (in the case of writing). In this physical guise they are picked
up by a receiver who, through a reverse process of decoding, recovers the original meanings
and puts them together to reconstitute the message. In the case of genetic transmission,
the minimal constituents of meaning were supposed to correspond to characters or traits,
each represented by a DNA segment with a distinctive base sequence. Just as the linguistic
sign is understood to unite a particular concept with a particular sound pattern, so the gene
came to be conceived as the union of a particular trait with its corresponding segment of
the DNA molecule (Figure 21.2).
I shall defer until later the question of whether this model of information transmission
provides an adequate account of what goes on even in ordinary verbal discourse. Sufﬁce
it to say at this point that the model is premised upon an ontological separation of
mind and world. Indeed this separation is intrinsic to the very notion of information in
its original sense – to the idea that form is brought in to real-world contexts of interaction. The message or instruction to be conveyed is thus supposed to pre-exist in the
mind of the sender, and to be translated into a physical medium by means of a set
of encoding rules that are themselves entirely independent of the contexts in which it is
sent and received. How a message, once received, will be interpreted may of course depend
upon the situation, but the message itself must be unambiguously speciﬁed. Likewise, if
we are to suppose that the genome is a carrier of coded information from one context
of development to another, then the ‘message’ – that is, the genotypic speciﬁcation – must
pre-exist its representation in the DNA, and be linked to it by context-independent
encoding rules. In other words, it must be possible to ‘read off’ each element of the
genotype – each trait – from its corresponding DNA segment, regardless of local conditions of development. However, just as a received message may be interpreted differently
in different circumstances, so also the genotype will be ‘realised’ in different ways depending upon the environmental context, leading to observed variations in phenotypic form
(Figure 21.3).

Skill

The problem inherent in this 1
kind of account may be posed 2
Context-independent
in terms of a simple question: 3
encoding
where is the genotype? Where, 4
MIND
in other words, is the formal 5
WORLD
speciﬁcation that – according 6
Context
to the model – is said to be 7
VEHICLE
imported with the genome into 8
INTERPRETATION
the inaugural context of a new 9
(context-specific)
life-cycle, as a ‘biological en- 10
dowment’? We may grant that 1
GENOTYPE
the newly conceived organism 2
comes into being with its com- 3
plement of DNA; taken on its 4
MIND
own, however, the DNA ‘speci- 5
ﬁes’ nothing. It is, after all, just 6
WORLD
Context
a molecule, and a remarkably 7
GENOME
inert one at that. But in reality, 8
DNA never exists on its own, 9
PHENOTYPE
except when artiﬁcially isolated 20
in the laboratory. It exists within 1
Figure 21.3 The relation between message, vehicle and interpretation cells, which are the parts of 2
organisms, themselves situated 3
(above), and its analogue in the biological domain (below).
within wider environments. And 4
it is only by virtue of their in- 5
corporation into the living machinery of the cell that molecules of DNA have the effects 6
they do. They do not, unaided, make copies of themselves or construct proteins, let alone 7
build entire organisms (see Lewontin 1992: 33, for an exceptionally lucid exposition of this 8
point). Thus the DNA is not an agent but a reactant, and the particular reactions it sets in 9
train depend upon the total organismic context in which it is situated. Only by presuming 30
such a context can we ever say what any particular gene is ‘for’ (Ingold 1991: 368). To put 1
it another way, it is the cellular machinery that ‘reads’ the DNA, and that reading is part 2
and parcel of the very development of the organism in its environment. Hence there is no 3
‘decoding’ of the genome that is not itself a process of development; no attributes of form 4
that do not themselves originate within that process; no speciﬁcation of the organism that 5
is independent of the developmental context.
So to return to my earlier question, ‘where is the genotype?’, there can be only one 7
possible answer: ‘in the mind of the biologist’. The genotype, I would argue, is the outcome 8
of biologists’ attempts to write a programme or algorithm for the development of the 9
organism, in the form of a coherent system of epigenetic rules. These rules are derived 40
by abstraction from the organism’s observed characteristics, in a manner analogous to the 1
way in which a linguist would derive the rules of syntax by abstraction from a sample of 2
recorded utterances – an analogy that receives explicit acknowledgement in the notion 3
of the ‘biogram’. Moreover the same trick is then applied: as Bourdieu (1977: 96) puts 4
it, by transferring onto the object of study the exteriority of the observer’s relation to it, 5
that object appears as the mere vehicle for an interiorised system of rational principles, a 6
kind of ‘intelligence’ installed at the heart of the organism and directing its activity from 7
within. Just as the linguist regards speaking as the application of syntactic structures located 118
MESSAGE

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 383 •

inside speakers’ heads, so the biologist regards the development and behaviour of the
organism as having its generative source in an innate biogram. In both cases aspects of
form, abstracted from the contexts in which they arise, are converted into the elements
of a programme that is said to precede and govern the processes of their production. As
an explanation for the genesis of form, the circularity of this argument needs no further
elaboration.
Nothing better illustrates the transferral, onto the organism, of the principles of the
observer’s external relation to it, than the fate of the concept of biology itself. Referring
initially to the procedures involved in the scientiﬁc study of organic forms, ‘biology’ has
come to be seen as a framework of rational principles – literally a bio-logos – supposedly
residing in the organisms themselves, and orchestrating their construction. For any particular organism, this bio-logos is, of course, its genotype. Herein, then, lies the explanation
for the identiﬁcation, noted above, of ‘biology’ with genetics. In the ﬁnal analysis, this
identiﬁcation betrays a logocentrism that biology shares with the entire enterprise of
Western natural science: the assumption that the manifest phenomena of the physical
world are underwritten by the work of reason. But the reason that science sees at work
there is its own, reﬂected in the mirror of nature.

FORM AND DEVELOPMENT
If organisms do not receive their form, with the genome, as a ‘biological endowment’,
then how are we to explain the stability of form across generations? The answer lies in
the observation that the life of any organism is inaugurated with far more than its complement of DNA. For one thing, as Lewontin points out, the DNA is contained within an
egg which, even before fertilisation, is equipped through its own development with the
essential prerequisites for launching future growth. ‘We inherit not only genes made of
DNA but an intricate structure of cellular machinery made up of proteins’ (Lewontin
1992: 33). For another thing, that egg exists not in a vacuum but in an already structured environment. Life begins, then, with DNA, in an egg, in an environment. Or as
Oyama succinctly puts it, ‘what is quite literally passed on or made available in reproduction is a genome and a segment of the world ’ (1985: 43, my emphasis). Together, these
constitute a developmental system, and it is in the dynamic functioning of this system –
in the complex interactions among components both internal to the organism (including
the genome) and beyond its boundaries – that form is generated and maintained
(Ho 1991: 346–7).
It follows that no one component – such as the DNA – can be privileged as ‘holding’
the form, which the others ‘bring out’, since the form itself is an emergent property of
the total system consisting in the relations between them. Change in any component of
the system, whether in the genome or in some aspect of the intra- or extra-organismic
environment, insofar as it alters the parameters of development, may bring about significant change in form; however the possibilities for change are not unlimited but are
constrained within the range of forms that can be generated by the system’s properties of
dynamic organisation. Thus the explanation for the intergenerational stability of form is
to be found not in the ﬁdelity of DNA copying, but in the self-organising potentials of
the entire ﬁeld of relations within which development occurs (Goodwin 1988, see also
Chapter Eighteen, pp. 345–6).
It is important to be precise about how this conclusion differs from what is generally
accepted in evolutionary biology. The issue of whether organisms are determined by their

Skill
nature or their nurture, by innate endowment or environmental conditioning, has long 1
been declared obsolete, having given way to an interactionist perspective according to 2
which every organism, at any moment of its life-cycle, is the product of a complex and 3
ongoing interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Naturally, it is argued, organ- 4
isms take on different appearances in different environments. It is nevertheless assumed 5
that these environmentally induced differences merely reveal the potential for variation of 6
what is essentially the same organism, and that only those differences attributable to genetic 7
modiﬁcation attest to evolutionary change in the organism itself. And it is on precisely 8
this assumption, with its implicit privileging of the genome as the true bearer of organic 9
form, that the conventional distinctions between genotype and phenotype, and between 10
evolution and development, have been allowed to rest.
For orthodox theory, these distinctions are quite critical. Evolution, as we have seen, 2
is taken to refer to intergenerational changes in the genotype; development to the trans- 3
lation, within each generation, from genotype to phenotype (see Figure 21.1). This is not 4
to say that these processes are thought to be unrelated. Thus it is recognised, on the one 5
hand, that the circumstances of development – insofar as they have a bearing on genetic 6
replication – may exert an inﬂuence on evolution, and on the other hand that it is the 7
evolved genotype that establishes the schedule for development (Hinde 1991: 585). But 8
the theory rules out any possibility that the life-history of the organism may itself form 9
an intrinsic part of the evolutionary process. From an evolutionary perspective, it is not 20
what organisms do but the reproductive consequences of their activity that are signiﬁcant. 1
Considerations of agency and intentionality have no place in evolutionary explanation: 2
these are assigned to the proximate mechanisms involved in the realisation of strategies 3
whose ultimate rationale is already established by natural selection. For this reason, it is 4
customary to speak of organisms as the sites where evolution occurs, but not as agents of 5
evolutionary change. Thus changes are said to take place in, but not to be brought about 6
by, populations of organisms.
But if form, as I have argued here, is a property not of genes but of developmental systems, 8
then to account for the evolution of form we need to understand how these systems are 9
constituted and reconstituted over time. We have seen that what an organism initially 30
receives from its predecessors includes, besides its complement of genetic material, the 1
environment wherein this material is placed. This placement sets up speciﬁc relations that 2
are enfolded in the developing form. Yet as it develops, the organism also contributes by 3
way of its actions to the environmental conditions not just for its own further development 4
but for the development of other organisms – of its own and of different kinds – to which 5
it relates. It may do so either directly, insofar as it has an immediate presence in the 6
other’s environment, or indirectly, insofar as its actions sustain, modify or transform 7
the environment of another’s experience. For example, the human child may grow up 8
surrounded by parents and siblings, in a house constructed long ago by predecessors whom 9
she will never meet. Yet all these people, and doubtless many more besides, play or have 40
played their part in establishing the conditions for that child’s development. Conversely, 1
as she grows older and her powers of agency expand, she in turn will contribute to the 2
conditions of development for her own contemporaries and successors.
Speaking of human beings, it is usual to refer to this process, wherein the people of 4
each generation furnish through their life-activities the contexts within which their succes- 5
sors grow to maturity, as history. My point, however, is that human history is but one 6
part of a process that is going on throughout the organic world (see Ingold 1990: 224). 7
In this process, organisms ﬁgure not as the passive products of a mechanism – variation 118

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 385 •

under natural selection – that stands outside of time and change, but as active and creative
agents, producers as well as products of their own evolution (Ho 1991: 338). For every
organism not only undergoes development within a wider ﬁeld of relationships, but
also contributes through its activity to the perpetuation and transformation of that ﬁeld.
Thus what it does, in its life, is not expended in the reproduction of its genes but is
incorporated into the developmental potentials of its successors. There can, then, be no
separation between ontogeny and phylogeny, development and evolution. Ontogenesis,
far from being accessory to evolutionary change, is the very fount from which the evolutionary process unfolds.
To forestall any possible misunderstanding, let me be quite clear about what I am
claiming. I do not deny the existence of the genome or its importance as a regulator of
developmental processes. Nor do I deny that changes can and do occur in the composition of the genome, as a result of the mutation, recombination and differential replication
of its constituent segments across generations. I do deny, however, that the genome contains
a speciﬁcation of the essential form of the organism, or of its capacities for action, and
therefore that a record of genetic change is in any sense tantamount to an account of its
evolution. Much genetic change occurs without any corollary on the level of form or
behaviour; conversely, signiﬁcant morphological or behavioural transformation may occur
without any corresponding changes in the genome. We have seen that since organisms,
in their activities, can modify the conditions of development for successor generations,
developmental systems – and the capacities speciﬁed therein – can go on evolving without
requiring any genetic change at all. Nowhere is this more evident than in the evolution
of our own kind. In order to explain how change can occur in the absence of signiﬁcant
genetic modiﬁcation, orthodox evolutionary theory has had to conceive of a ‘second track’,
of culture history, superimposed upon the baseline of an evolved genotypic heritage. Once
it is realised, however, that capacities are constituted within developmental systems, rather
than carried with the genes as a biological endowment, we can begin to see how the
dichotomies between biology and culture, and between evolution and history, can be
dispensed with. This is a matter to which I now turn.

BIOLOGY AND CULTURE
Let me begin by returning to the comparison between walking and cycling. Bipedal
locomotion, according to orthodox theory, is part of the human biological endowment –
that is, it is included as a property of the ‘anatomically modern’ genotype. Now we have
seen that the genotype is the product of biologists’ attempts to attribute the capacities of
the organism to an interior programme, consisting of a set of rules or algorithms capable
of generating appropriate responses under any given environmental circumstances. Thus if
the capacity to walk belongs with the genotype, then it must be possible to comprehend
walking as the output of a programme of this kind, designed by natural selection and
imported with the genome into diverse contexts of development. What, then, are we to
make of the capacity to ride a bicycle? It is doubtful whether much could be learned
about the origins and development of this capacity through an examination of changing
gene frequencies in the cycling public! By common consent, it forms no part of the human
genotype, and for that reason is not generally considered to have evolved in the biological
sense. Yet clearly, cycling is a skill that, in some sense, is passed on from one generation to
the next. It cannot therefore be ascribed to the phenotype, since phenotypic characters are
not supposed to be transmitted across generations.

Skill

To accommodate the kind of non-genetic transmis- 1
sion that is apparently at work here, it has often been 2
proposed that in human populations, a second mode 3
of inheritance operates in parallel with the genetic 4
C1
B1
E1
one. ‘Human beings’, as Durham puts it, ‘are pos- 5
sessed of two major information systems, one genetic, 6
one cultural’ (1991: 9). The capacity to ride a bicy- 7
C2
B2
E2
cle, then, is included in a cultural analogue of the 8
genotype – a ‘culture-type’ (Richerson and Boyd 9
1978: 128) – whose constituent elements or traits are 10
likewise encoded in a symbolic medium. This model 1
C3
B3
E3
of enculturation rests on precisely the same assump- 2
tions that I have already spelled out in connection 3
with genetic transmission. It presupposes that the 4
cultural ‘message’ that the individual receives from its 5
C4
B4
E4
conspeciﬁcs pre-exists its symbolic representation, 6
that the message can be ‘read off’ from the represen- 7
tation by means of context-independent decoding 8
rules, and that this reading precedes the application 9
of the received cultural knowledge in the set- 20
Figure 21.4 Individual and social learning. The tings of practice. Thus a clear distinction has to be 1
vertical arrows depict the intergenerational trans- drawn between the intergenerational transmission 2
mission of cultural information through social of cultural information and its expression in the 3
learning in the ancestor-descendant sequence C1 –
career of each individual, exactly parallel to the dis- 4
C4. The horizontal arrows depict the processes of
individual learning through which, in each genera- tinction that orthodox theory in evolutionary biology 5
tion, the received cultural schemata are translated draws between the transmission of the elements mak- 6
into overt behaviour (B1 – B4) under given environ- ing up the genotype and the latter’s realisation, 7
mental conditions (E1 – E4). Compare Figure 21.1. within the life of every organism, in the guise of the 8
phenotype. The former distinction has convention- 9
ally been made by means of a contrast between ‘indi- 30
vidual’ and ‘social’ learning (Figure 21.4).
Individual learning, here, refers to the way in which behaviour, just as much as mor- 2
phology, is ‘acquired’ through the environmental steering of development culminating in 3
the mature phenotype. In this each organism learns for itself, through experience, and the 4
process of learning is coterminous with its own lifespan. Social learning, on the other hand, 5
refers to the transmission, across generations, of a body of cultural knowledge in the form 6
of a tradition. This tradition consists not in behaviour itself, but in a system of schemata 7
– ‘plans, recipes, rules, instructions’ (Geertz 1973: 44) – for generating it. In the case of 8
bicycle riding, for example, what an individual acquires from his or her seniors are the 9
elements of a programme, analogous to the genetically encoded programme that supposedly 40
underwites the skills of walking, which is then ‘realised’ through practice and experience in 1
an environment. Notice how this division between the social and the individual compo- 2
nents of learning effectively divorces the sphere of the learner’s involvement with others 3
from the contexts of his or her practical engagement in the world. It assumes that what is 4
passed on, in learning, is a context-independent speciﬁcation for behaviour, and that such 5
a speciﬁcation is available for transmission, in coded form, outside the situations of its appli- 6
cation. Accordingly, the inter-generational stability of cultural form is seen to lie in the 7
ﬁdelity with which this information is copied from mind to mind.

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 387 •

As an account of what goes on in learning to ride a bicycle, or for that matter in
the acquisition of any other practical skill, this is highly artiﬁcial. For one thing, the art
of cycling – as indeed that of walking – deﬁes codiﬁcation in terms of any formal system
of rules and representations. Even if it were possible to devise a programme for bicycle
riding, it is doubtful whether a creature endowed with such a programme, and equipped
with a machine to ride, would ever be able to achieve the ﬂuency of the skilled practitioner. For another thing, where adult assistance is required it is above all to provide
demonstration and support – that is, to set up situations in which the novice is afforded
the possibility of getting the feel of things for him- or herself. The same is true in language
learning, aptly described as a process of ‘guided reinvention’ (Lock 1980), in which the
contribution of adults in the infant’s environment is to provide contextually speciﬁc interpretations of the infant’s vocal utterances that lead it to the discovery of how words can
be used to convey meaning. What each generation contributes to the next, then, are not
rules and schemata for the production of appropriate behaviour, but rather the speciﬁc
conditions of development under which successors, growing up in a social world, acquire
their own embodied skills and dispositions.
Words and deeds, of course, are full of meaning, and in any situation of learning the
novice will listen to what people say and watch what they do. Yet there is no ‘reading’
of words or deeds that is not part of the novice’s own practical orientation to his or her
environment. Spoken words, for example, taken in themselves, are no more for anything
than are genes. They do not carry meaning into contexts of interaction, as the orthodox
model of information transmission requires. Rather, again like genes, they gather their
meanings from the contexts of activities and relationships in which they are in play
(I return to this point in Chapter Twenty-three, p. 409). Thus culture, as a body of
context-independent, traditionally transmitted knowledge, encoded in words or other
symbolic media, can exist nowhere except in the mind of the anthropological observer.
It is derived by abstraction from observed behaviour, in just the same way that the biologist derives the genotype by abstraction from the observed characteristics of the organism,
and the linguist derives a grammar from the record of utterances. And by the same
trick that we have already noted in the ﬁelds of linguistics and biology, this abstraction
is imagined to be implanted within the minds of the actors themselves, as the generative
source of their behaviour.
I have argued, to the contrary, that whether our concern be with walking or cycling,
talking or writing, making tools or operating machines, what people do cannot be understood as the behavioural output of an inner programme but only as the intentional activity
of the whole human organism in its environment. Thus to reiterate my earlier conclusion, we have no grounds for distinguishing between those capacities for action due to
‘biology’ and those due to ‘culture’. True, there are things that human beings can do
which are apparently impossible for any other creature, even if raised in a human environment. And it is reasonable to suppose that these potentials would not have emerged were
it not for certain changes in the genome that could, in principle, be traced in ancestral
populations. But the genome, on its own, does not specify a capacity of any kind. Thus
we will search in vain for a capacity for culture, whose evolutionary emergence might have
marked what is sometimes called the ‘human revolution’. For there is no such thing, apart
from the diverse capacities of human beings growing up in different surroundings. These
differences of developmental experience, as I have shown, are incorporated anatomically
so as to make of each of us an organism of a different kind.

Skill
Where does all this leave the Cro-Magnons? Did their arrival on the scene really mark 3
the appearance of people ‘entirely like ourselves’? We are not, of course, by any means 4
perfect; nevertheless – Howells remarks – ‘it is not unfair to say that Homo sapiens seems 5
to have ﬁnished up all the unﬁnished business of human progress in the Pleistocene’ 6
(1967: 242). Yet in another sense, human progress had scarcely begun. These two 7
senses of progress correspond, as we have seen, to what are customarily distinguished as 8
evolution and history. Now this is not a distinction that would generally be made for any 9
other species. It is assumed, in other words, that there can be no cumulative or progres- 10
sive changes in the behavioural capacities of non-human kinds that are not tied to 1
evolutionary changes in their essential, species-speciﬁc forms. For this reason, no-one ﬁnds 2
it necessary to speak, for example, of ‘anatomically modern chimpanzees’ or ‘anatomically 3
modern elephants’. What the concept of anatomical modernity does, in effect, is to recog- 4
nise an alternative sense in which people can be ‘modern’, only to place it out of bounds, 5
as of no concern to the student of human biological evolution. Yet this second sense of 6
modernity, founded as it is upon a commitment to the supremacy of reason, is built into 7
the very project of contemporary science and underwrites its claim to be able to deliver 8
an authoritative account of the workings of nature. Here, then, lies the contradiction to 9
which I referred at the outset. For the historical process, which purports to raise humanity 20
onto a level of existence above the purely biophysical, is presupposed by science as providing 1
the platform from which its practitioners – who are of course humans too – can launch 2
their declarations to the effect that the human is just another species of nature (Foley 3
1987).
The roots of the contradiction considerably antedate the rise of evolutionary theory in 5
its modern Darwinian form, and may be traced back to a basic dualism in eighteenth- 6
century thinking between nature and reason. In his Systema Naturae of 1735, Linnaeus 7
recognised the status of man as a species within the animal kingdom, under the designa- 8
tion Homo. Yet unlike all other animal species, it was not by his physical characteristics 9
that he was to be known. Indeed, Linnaeus declared himself hard-pressed to ﬁnd any 30
deﬁnitive criterion whereby human beings could be distinguished anatomically from the 1
apes. Rather, he chose to identify the human distinction by means of a word of advice: 2
Nosce te ipsum (‘know for yourself ’). It is in his wisdom, Linnaeus thought, not in his 3
bodily form, that man differs essentially from the apes. Through our unique possession 4
of the intellectual faculty of reason, we are the only beings who can seek to know, through 5
our own powers of observation and analysis, what kinds of beings we are. There are no 6
scientists among the animals.
The great nineteenth-century theorists of social and cultural evolution – men like 8
Edward Tylor and Lewis Henry Morgan – placed their scenarios of human progress within 9
a similarly dualistic framework. While all animal species were ranked, according to their 40
physical form, in a chain of being culminating in humankind, the latter was supposed to 1
have been uniquely endowed by the Creator with an incorporeal consciousness which, 2
through history, has undergone progressive advance under laws of development of its own, 3
within the bounds of an unchanging body (Ingold 1986b: 58–60). Thus all human beings 4
were deemed to be alike in their essential nature and developmental potentials, but popu- 5
lations were supposed to differ in the degree to which these potentials were realised in 6
the passage from savagery to civilisation. With the publication, in 1871, of Darwin’s The 7
descent of man, the doctrine of common human potential – or, as it was then known, of 118

EVOLUTION AND HISTORY

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 389 •

the ‘psychic unity of mankind’ – was brought into contention, challenged by the view
that inter-population differences on the scale of civilisation could be attributed to anatomical variation, above all in the size and complexity of the brain. Thomas Huxley went so
far as to declare that the superiority of the European over the allegedly small-brained
savage was no different, in principle, from that of the savage over the even smaller-brained
ape. There ensued a period of quite rampant racism from which anthropology did not
begin to recover until the second decade of the twentieth century. It did so by reasserting
the universality of human nature, and by insisting that whatever differences of biological
endowment may exist between populations are of no consequence for history and cultural
development.
Indeed so long as it is assumed that the biological constitution of human organisms is
given as a genetic endowment, there can be no escape from racism save by disconnecting
cultural from biological variation. Clearly there is no foundation in fact for the raciological belief that cultural differences have a genetic basis. My point, however, is that in
turning its back on racist dogma, subsequent theorising about human evolution has reconstituted the eighteenth-century view in all its essentials. Once again human beings ﬁgure
in a dual capacity, on the one hand as a species of nature, on the other as creatures who
– uniquely among animals – have achieved such emancipation from the world of nature
as to make it the object of their consciousness. It is true that unlike Linnaeus, contemporary students of human evolution are able to point with some precision to a whole
cluster of anatomical features by which human beings may be distinguished not only from
extant, non-human primates but also from their pre-human, hominid forbears. These are
the diagnostic features for the recognition of anatomical modernity. But humans of this
recognisably ‘modern’ type did not evolve as scientists, let alone with a ready-made theory
of evolution. Science and its theories are widely understood to be the products of a cultural
or civilisational process quite separate from the process of biological evolution: a cumulative growth of knowledge that has left our basic natures unaffected.
We thus have two distinct continua, one evolutionary, leading from ancestral pongid and
hominid forms to ‘anatomically modern’ Homo sapiens sapiens, the other historical, leading
from our presumed hunter-gatherer past to modern science and civilisation (Ingold
1998: 89–93). And it is the intersection of these continua that sets up a point of origin,
without parallel in the history of life, at which our ancestors stood on the threshold of
culture and, for the ﬁrst time, came face to face with meaning (Figure 21.5). This point
is believed to mark the emergence of what is sometimes called ‘true humanity’ (see, for
example, Botscharow 1990: 64), or the arrival, in Howells’s words, of ‘the new kind – our
kind – of man’ (1967: 242). This kind of man, equipped anatomically for life as a huntergatherer, was possessed of a mind that would eventually enable him to reason like a scientist.
Cro-Magnon Man, it seems, had all the biological potential necessary to make him into a
scientist: his brain was as big, and as complex, as Einstein’s. But the time was not ripe, in
his era, for this potential to be brought out. Stretched between the poles of nature and
reason, epitomised respectively by the contrasting ﬁgures of the hunter-gatherer and the
scientist, lies the entire history of human culture, a history that has unfolded within
the parameters of an essentially stable bodily form. And that form, which all human beings
are supposed to receive as a common biological endowment, irrespective of cultural or
historical circumstance, is of course none other than the ‘modern human’ genotype.
Just as in the eighteenth-century doctrine of psychic unity, the human genotype – albeit
installed by natural selection rather than divine intervention – is said to establish a universal
baseline for cultural development. As an ideal representation of the essential form of

Skill

humanity, the ‘modern human’ is 1
itself a creature of modern Western 2
Western scientists
thought. He (or she) is conceived 3
as the epitome of everything a 4
human being possibly could be, 5
a compendium of universal capaci- 6
ties abstracted from the manifold 7
forms of life that have actually 8
appeared in history, and retrojected 9
onto the Palaeolithic past as a set of 10
genetically inscribed, developmen- 1
Cro-Magnons
BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION
tal potentials underwriting their 2
realisation.4 Thus the course of his- 3
Origin of
tory reappears as the progressive 4
modern
unfolding of the latent capacities 5
humans
of our ancestors, biologically ﬁxed 6
in evolution even before history 7
began. There is a certain irony here. 8
Biologists, who long ago co-opted 9
the notion of evolution to describe 20
Figure 21.5 The origin of ‘true humanity’, conceived as lying at the
the process that Darwin had origi- 1
intersection between the continuum of biological evolution leading from
ancestral pongid and hominid forms to anatomically modern humans, nally called ‘descent with modiﬁca- 2
and the continuum of culture history leading from Palaeolithic hunting tion’, have been scathing in their 3
and gathering to modern science and civilisation.
criticism of social scientists who 4
have continued to use the notion, 5
with reference to human history, in 6
its original sense of progressive development. Yet just such a view of human history, as the 7
developmental realisation of innate potentials, is implied by their own theory!
I have argued that the distinction between evolution and history, as set out in the 9
orthodox view, cannot be sustained. Regarded as a process whereby people, in their 30
activities, shape the contexts of development for their successors, history reappears as the 1
continuation, by another name, of a process of evolution that is going on throughout the 2
organic world. In the Eighteenth Brumaire, Marx wrote that ‘men make their own history, 3
but they do not make it just as they please, they do not make it under circumstances 4
chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted 5
from the past’ (Marx 1963 [1869]: 15). In just the same way do organisms in general 6
make their own evolution. There is, then, no point of origin when history began; no 7
moment of emergence of ‘true humanity’. Thus we do not need one theory to explain 8
how apes became human, and another to explain how (some) humans became scientists. 9
For the business of human evolution was not ﬁnished with the arrival of the Cro-Magnons, 40
but has carried on into the present – though we call it history now. I have attempted to 1
show that the various forms and capacities that have emerged within this process are 2
neither given in advance as a genetic endowment, nor transmitted as components of a 3
separate body of cultural information, but are rather generated in and through the dynamic 4
functioning of the developmental systems constituted by virtue of the involvement of 5
human beings in their diverse environments.
For human as for any other organisms, such involvement is an inescapable condition 7
of existence. I believe we need to recast the whole way we think about evolution, taking 118
CULTURE
HISTORY

Neanderthals

H. Erectus

H. Habilis

Australopithecines

The concept of the anatomically modern human • 391 •

this condition of involvement as our point of departure. Orthodox theory, which attributes evolutionary change to underlying modiﬁcations in the genotype, requires that human
beings be completely speciﬁable, independently of the relational contexts of their development. But such a speciﬁcation, as I have shown, exists only in the mind of the observer,
and therefore introjects a division between mind and world, or between reason and nature,
as an ontological a priori. There is, in truth, no species-speciﬁc, essential form of humanity,
no way of saying what an ‘anatomically modern human’ is apart from the manifold ways
in which humans actually become (Ingold 1991: 359). These variations of developmental
circumstance, not of genetic inheritance, make us organisms of different kinds. Thus my
conclusion, that the differences we call cultural are indeed biological, carries no racist
connotations whatever. By refocusing on the human-being-in-its-environment, we can
dispense with the need for a species-speciﬁc characterisation of humankind, and so also
with the opposition between species and culture. People inhabit one world, not because
their differences are underwritten by universals of human nature, but because they are
caught up – along with other creatures – in a continuous ﬁeld of relations, in the unfolding
of which all difference is generated.

Skill
As Horne Tooke, one of the founders of the noble science of philology, observes, 3
language is an art, like brewing or baking; but writing would have been a better simile. 4
It certainly is not a true instinct, for every language has to be learnt. It differs, however, 5
widely from all ordinary arts, for man has an instinctive tendency to speak, as we see 6
in the babble of our young children; whilst no child has an instinctive tendency to 7
brew, bake or write.
Charles Darwin, The descent of man (1871: 131) 9
THE LANGUAGE CAPACITY: ORIGINS OF AN ILLUSION
All theorising about the origins and evolution of language rests on a distinction that, by 3
and large, is regarded as so obvious that it virtually goes without saying. It is that by 4
‘language’, in this context, is meant not any particular language, as spoken presently or 5
in the past by members of some human community, but a capacity that is manifestly 6
common to all human beings, and that is surely one of the hallmarks of our species. One 7
could of course examine the changes over time that have given rise to the immense prolif- 8
eration of languages spoken around the world, but that is a problem for philologists or 9
historians of language. Does not the very possibility of this history, however, rest on the 30
fact that all of us, including our ancestors up to a certain critical point, share (or shared) 1
the capacity to speak? If so, then explaining how, when and why this capacity arose is a 2
problem not of history but of evolution. The twin distinctions, between particular 3
languages spoken and the capacity for language, and between history and evolution, do 4
indeed seem intuitively reasonable. For my part, however, I am convinced that they are 5
unsustainable, and in this chapter I shall try to show why.
I contend that there is no essence of language, no way of saying what language is, apart 7
from the manifold ways in which people actually speak. But if there is no such thing as 8
language as such, what is the point of seeking its origins? I do in fact take the view that 9
it is futile to inquire into the origins of language, not for the reason that is usually offered 40
– namely, that such inquiry calls for empirical evidence about the behaviour of our earliest 1
ancestors that is simply not available – but because the very idea of an origin is a ﬁction 2
that serves more to confer legitimacy on the present than to illuminate the past. I shall 3
argue that Charles Darwin, and Horne Tooke before him, were right to compare language 4
to an art like brewing or baking, though it might have been more appropriate to select 5
different examples, such as singing, dancing or playing a musical instrument, which 6
do not involve the procurement and processing of raw materials. But no more than 7
these other arts did language evolve at some point, as a built-in property of the human 118

Chapter Twenty-two

Speech, writing and the modern
origins of ‘language origins’

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 393 •

make-up. Rather, it inheres in the very practice of the art, in the activities of speaking
themselves. These activities, in their unfolding, constitute a process of evolution. Thus
there is, in reality, no point of origin, since the evolutionary process continues even as
we speak.
Although my thesis as regards the question of origin is a negative one, I would not
want what I have to say to be construed in an entirely negative light. It may make no
sense to seek the point where language began, but it makes a good deal of sense to inquire
into the evolution of speech. To do this, however, it will be necessary to drop two assumptions that lie at the heart of most contemporary theorising on the subject. First, we must
cease to regard speech as the derivative output of something else – that is, ‘language’ –
which is supposed to pre-exist as a generative potential or capacity independently of human
activity in the world. And secondly, we must not assume that what evolves is some kind
of context-independent speciﬁcation of the essential form of humanity.
Closely bound up with the argument I have just introduced is another one, about the
relation between speech and writing. Reﬂecting on the parallel between language and other
practical arts, Darwin came to the conclusion that the latter could be better compared to
writing than to speech, and that spoken language was – after all – a rather special case.
I propose to argue, somewhat to the contrary, that language looks special to us only
because we view it from a perspective that has been conditioned through our familiarity
with certain practices of writing. I contend that these practices have had a decisive impact
in shaping our modern view of language as an objective system of rules and meanings –
as something that people have, and can use. According to my argument, it is only thanks
to the reiﬁcation of speech which writing makes possible, that the idea of language as a
thing, and hence of language origins, becomes even conceivable. If language, in a certain
formal sense, is a consequence of writing, then to seek the evolutionary origins of language
in this same sense, as a precondition for writing, is manifestly circular.1
I shall conclude, however, by suggesting that besides considering the effects of writing
on our view of what language is, we need to attend to the possible bias in our view
of what writing is, a bias that stems from the frequently asserted notion that writing is
a technology of the word. It is not, then, writing per se, but rather a technologised conception of writing, associated with the rise of modern print literacy, that leads to the
objectiﬁcation of speech as language, and thence to the problematic of language origins.

THE STANDARD MODEL: GENETIC BASES OF CULTURAL
TRANSMISSION
That, stripped to its bare essentials, is what I have to say. In what follows I shall elaborate
on, and seek to demonstrate, the various claims I have made. I begin, however, by returning to what I shall henceforth call the ‘standard model’ of the relation between language as
a universal human capacity, and the manifold languages of particular communities. This
holds that the former is a product of evolution under natural selection, and is transmitted
genetically, thereby establishing the cognitive foundations, in successive generations, for the
acquisition of the latter through a parallel process of cultural transmission.
I have summarised the standard model in Figure 22.1, and shall devote a few moments
to spelling out three of its key features. The ﬁrst is that every particular language may be
fully described as a system of acquired rules and representations – comprising its syntax
and lexicon – inscribed in the minds of its speakers and transmissible as a body of information, from one generation to the next, independently of its instantiation in those acts

Skill

of speaking and listening for 1
which it is prerequisite. The 2
second is that this transmission 3
is possible only thanks to the 4
presence, in the mind of each 5
and every human being, of a 6
c1
c2
c3
c4
ready-made acquisition device 7
that allows the novice to derive 8
g1
g2
g3
g4
the speciﬁcations of his or her 9
language from the input of 10
biogenetic transmission
otherwise unintelligible speech 1
sounds. And the third is that 2
Figure 22.1 The orthodox view of the relation between biogenetic and the relation between the acqui- 3
cultural transmission. The letters g1–4 refer to the genetic speciﬁcations, in sition device and the acquired 4
successive generations, of an innate acquisition device; the letters c1–4 refer to information is one of container 5
the content, again in successive generations, of acquired culture.
to content. The novice starts 6
life with a certain capacity 7
already in place, which is then 8
gradually ﬁlled up with the informational content upon which his or her linguistic compe- 9
tence is based.
Now I believe that in each of these respects the standard model is wrong. Let me begin 1
with the second. It is perfectly true that if the essence of linguistic competence lies in 2
acquired rules and representations, then the mind must be pre-equipped with cognitive 3
devices of some kind that allow the relevant information to be reconstructed through a 4
processing of the raw input of sensory data. Consider, for example, the following deﬁni- 5
tion of learning, from one of the leading exponents of cognitive science, Philip 6
Johnson-Laird. Learning, he writes, amounts to ‘the construction of new programs out of 7
elements of experience’. But if you need programmes to process the data of experience, 8
how can they be constructed from such data? There is only one possible answer, and that 9
is by means of programmes that are already in place. Thus, if you are to learn anything, 30
you must be pre-equipped with a programme governing the construction process. Perhaps 1
this latter programme was constructed in the same way, through the processing of expe- 2
riential input according to yet another programme. ‘You can learn to learn’, Johnson-Laird 3
continues, ‘but then that learning would depend on another program, and so on. 4
Ultimately, learning must depend on innate programs that make programs’ (Johnson-Laird 5
1988: 133, my emphasis).
Following this line of reasoning, what applies to learning in general must also apply to 7
language acquisition in particular. Maybe there are rules or algorithms governing the acqui- 8
sition of language that are themselves acquired. But then there must be processing devices 9
in place that make possible their construction in the mind of the learner. So where do 40
these come from? Whence comes the information that speciﬁes the construction of the 1
innate devices, without which no learning would be possible at all?
By and large, in the literature of cognitive science, the postulation of innate structures 3
is taken to require no more justiﬁcation than vague references to genetics and natural 4
selection. It is assumed that the problem of where they come from has already been solved, 5
at least in general terms, by evolutionary biology. Unfortunately this is not the case. For 6
one thing, most biologists claim that they have long since discarded the distinction between 7
innate and acquired structures. According to what is often called the ‘ﬁrst law of biology’, 118
cultural transmission

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 395 •

the actual characteristics of organisms are neither innate nor acquired, but are products
of the interaction, throughout the life cycle, between endogenous, genetic causes and
exogenous, environmental ones. Thus interactionism has long since replaced innatism as
the dominant creed within biological science. In fact, however, a doctrine of genetic preformation still lurks beneath the surface of orthodox interactionism, since it is built into
biology’s own master theory – the theory of evolution under natural selection. To see
how this is so, we need to focus on the account that is offered, within the framework of
Darwinian evolutionary biology, of the process of ontogenetic development. This calls for
a brief detour into the realms of biological theory.

THE EVOLUTION OF FORM: GENOTYPES AND DEVELOPMENTAL
SYSTEMS
Interactionism describes development as an unfolding relation between genes and environment. In this relation, however, it is the genes that are supposed to hold the essence of
form, whereas the environment is conceived merely to furnish the material conditions for
its realisation. Each gene is taken to represent a unit of pure, digital information, encoded
in the molecular structure of DNA. Put together, these units make up a formal speciﬁcation of the organism-to-be (the genotype) which, by deﬁnition, is given independently
and in advance of any real-world context of development. At the commencement of every
new life-cycle, this genotypic speciﬁcation is introduced, by way of the DNA of the germ
cells, into a particular environmental context. In development, the information carried in
the genes is then said to be outwardly expressed in the phenotypic form of the resultant
organism. But whereas the elements of the genotype are transmitted across generations,
the characteristics of the phenotype are not. Over many generations within a population,
through accidents of mutation and recombination coupled with the effects of differential
reproduction, the informational content of the genotype changes. These changes, it is
claimed, add up to a process of evolution.
This is all very neat, save for one problem. To be sure, every organism starts life with
its complement of DNA. But if genes are to be understood, as the theory requires, as the
carriers of a formal design speciﬁcation, shaped up through natural selection, from one
locus of development to another, then there must be some systematic correspondence
between the elements of this speciﬁcation and the actual DNA of the genome that is independent of any developmental process. Such a correspondence has been generally assumed,
but has never been demonstrated (see Cohen and Stewart 1994: 293–4). What happens
in practice, as I showed in the last chapter (pp. 382–3), is that biologists seek to redescribe
the observed phenotypic characteristics of organisms as the outputs of a formal system of
epigenetic rules. These are then ‘read in’ to the genome, so that development can be seen
as the ‘reading off’ of a programme or speciﬁcation that is already there, and that is
imported with the genome into the site of inauguration of a new life-cycle. In short, as
an account of the evolution of form, Darwinian theory rests on a simple circularity. That
is one reason, of course, why it has proved so hard to refute.
At root, the issue comes down to one about copying. The orthodox account has it that
the formal design features of the incipient organism are copied along with the DNA, in
advance of its interaction with the environment, so that they can then ‘interact’ with the
environment to produce the organism. I would argue to the contrary, and as illustrated
schematically in Figure 22.2, that copying is itself a process that goes on within the context
of organism-environment interaction. In other words, the ‘missing link’ between the

Skill

genome and the formal characteristics of 1
the organism is none other than the devel- 2
opmental process itself. There is, then, no 3
Copying
DNA
of formal
design for the organism, no genotype 4
replication
characters
– except, of course, as this might be 5
Environment
Genome ⬅ Genotype
constructed by the observing biologist. 6
Organic form, in short, is generated, not 7
Interaction
expressed, in development, and arises as an 8
emergent property of the total system of 9
Development
relations set up by virtue of the presence 10
of the organism in its environment. Hence 1
the evolution of form, as Susan Oyama 2
Phenotype
has put it, is tantamount to ‘the deriva- 3
tional history of developmental systems’ 4
DNA
(Oyama 1989: 5).
replication
Environment
Genome
THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE
MIND: ITS CONSTRUCTION
Developmental
system
AND FURNISHING
Let me now return to the question I left 1
hanging a moment ago. From where are 2
Copying
we to conjure up the innate devices that 3
are supposed to make possible the acqui- 4
sition of language? It is generally assumed 5
Organic form
that having been fashioned by natural 6
selection, these devices must have a genetic 7
Figure 22.2 Two theories of copying: (1) in the orthodox, basis. Thus the information that speciﬁes 8
Darwinian account, a design for the organism is copied with the their construction must form one com- 9
DNA of the genome, which is then ‘brought out’ in the course ponent of the human genotype. Yet here, 30
of development within an environmental context; (2) in the
psycholinguistics runs into the very 1
‘developmental systems approach’ proposed here, the process of
copying is equivalent to that of the organism’s development in same dilemma that, as we have seen, 2
derails Darwinian theory – in an even 3
its environment.
more acute form. It is more acute because 4
the cognitive devices in question must 5
already exist, not merely in the virtual guise of a design, but in the concrete hardwiring 6
of human brains. Somehow or other, in order to kick-start the process of ontogenetic 7
development, strands of DNA have miraculously to transform themselves into informa- 8
tion processing mechanisms. This is rather like supposing that merely by replicating the 9
design of an aircraft, whether on the drawing board or on the computer screen, one is 40
all prepared for take-off.
Attempts in the literature to resolve this problem, insofar as it is even recognised, are 2
confused and contradictory. To cut a rather long and tangled story short, they boil down 3
to two distinct claims. One is that the concrete mechanisms making up what has 4
been called the ‘evolved architecture’ of the human mind are reliably constructed under 5
all normal environmental circumstances. The other is that these universal mechanisms 6
proceed to work on ‘variable environmental inputs’ to produce the diversity of manifest 7
competencies and behaviours that we actually observe (Tooby and Cosmides 1992: 45). 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 397 •

Let me unpack these claims, illustrated
schematically in Figure 22.3, with speciﬁc
reference to language acquisition. Here
the alleged universal mechanism is the
‘language acquisition device’ (LAD).
During a well-deﬁned stage of infancy,
this device is said to be activated, operating upon the input of speech sounds from
the environment so as to establish, in the
infant’s mind, the grammar and lexicon
of the particular language (or languages)
spoken in his or her community. An
infant reared in social isolation, and thus
deprived of relevant environmental input,
would not learn a language, but would
still possess a fully formed LAD. It would
thus appear that language acquisition is a
two-stage process: in the ﬁrst, the LAD is
constructed; in the second it is furnished
with speciﬁc syntactic and semantic content. That, at least, is the theory, but is it
borne out in practice? Is there any basis
in reality for separating out the construction of innate psychological mechanisms
from the transmission of acquired cultural information, as shown in Figure
22.4, or is the division into these two
stages merely an artefact of our own analytic procedures? In what follows, I shall
argue that the latter is the case.

THE MYTH OF THE LANGUAGE
ACQUISITION DEVICE

Building
design
(genotype)

Environment

‘reliably constructs’

Evolved
architecture
Evolved
architecture

Environment
‘variable inputs’

Specific
cultural
competencies

Figure 22.3 Two claims for the construction of mind, following
the model presented by Tooby and Cosmides (1992). (1) A universal building design (one component of the genotype) interacts
with the environment to ‘reliably construct’ the ‘evolved architecture’ consisting of a number of cognitive mechanisms including, for
example, the ‘language acquisition device’. (2) The architecture
(presumed universal) interacts selectively with the environment,
accepting information specifying diverse cultural competencies such
as, for example, the ability to speak English, Japanese or Swahili.

The ﬁrst point to note is that the mechanisms (if we can call them that)
underwriting the child’s ability to speak
are not constructed in a vacuum, but rather emerge in the context of his or her sensory
involvement in a richly structured environment. Recent research has shown that from well
before birth, infants are sensitive to the surrounding ambience of sound, and above all to
the mother’s voice (De Casper and Spence 1986). Thus the human baby comes into the
world already attuned to certain environmentally speciﬁc sound patterns. From birth
onwards, it is surrounded by an entourage of speakers who provide support in the form
both of contextually grounded interpretations of the infant’s vocal utterances and of
demonstrations, or ‘attention-directing gestures’ (Zukow-Goldring 1997: 221–3), to
accompany their own. This environment, then, is not a source of variable input for preconstructed mechanisms, but rather furnishes the variable conditions for the self-assembly,
in the course of early development, of the mechanisms themselves. And as the conditions

Skill

E

Building
design
Constant
component
(Stage 1)
Language acquisition
device
Variable
component
(Stage 2)
Competence
in particular
language(s)
Figure 22.4 Putting the two claims of Figure 22.3 together yields a two-stage model of cognitive devel1
opment. Note, however, that this model depends on factoring out those features of the environment
that are constant, or ‘reliably present’ in every conceivable developmental context, from those that repre- 2
sent a source of ‘variable input’ from one context to another. Only the former are relevant in the ﬁrst 3
stage (the construction of innate mechanisms such as the ‘language acquisition device’); only the latter 4
are relevant in the second (the acquisition of speciﬁc cultural competencies such as the ability to speak 5
a particular language or languages).
vary, so the resulting mechanisms will take manifold forms, each differentially tuned both 9
to speciﬁc sound patterns and to other features of local contexts of utterance. These vari- 30
ably attuned mechanisms, and the competencies they establish, are of course the 1
neurophysiological correlates of what appear to us observers as the diverse languages of 2
the world.
In short, language – in the sense of the child’s capacity to speak in the manner of his 4
or her community – is not acquired. Rather, it is an ability that is continually being gener- 5
ated and regenerated in the developmental contexts of children’s involvement in worlds 6
of speech (Lock 1980).2 And if language is not acquired, then there can be no such thing 7
as an innate language acquisition device (Dent 1990).
This conclusion puts paid to the last of the three features of the standard model that 9
I outlined earlier: that learning a language is like ﬁlling a universal, genetically speciﬁed 40
container with particular cultural content. Of course, people raised in different environ- 1
ments learn to speak in different ways. But these differences, far from being received into 2
the prefabricated compartments of a universal psychology, are immanent in those 3
very ﬁelds of relations wherein human beings undergo the organic processes of growth 4
and maturation, and in which their powers of speech are developed and sustained. 5
Bearing this in mind, we can now return to the ﬁrst feature of the standard model, that 6
each particular language is transmissible as a corpus of context-independent rules and 7
representations from one generation to the next. This cannot be true, for the simple reason 118
n

i r

o

n

e

n

t

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 399 •

that it rests, as we have seen, on the impossible precondition of a ready-made cognitive
architecture. For the theory of language learning as information transmission to work,
lengths of DNA would have magically to transform themselves into concrete brain mechanisms, ready and prepared to process relevant environmental input. In reality, as Dent
has pointed out (1990: 694), there can be no mechanisms in advance of experience, since
no matter at what point in development the mechanisms are identiﬁed, the individual at
that point already has a history of interaction with the environment.
Lest this argument be misunderstood, let me emphasise that my purpose in questioning
the real existence of innate mechanisms is not to argue for the priority of nurture
over nature, or to substitute for innatism a doctrine of the environmental determination
of human capacities. These are not the only theoretical alternatives, and indeed both
are fallacious for the same reason, most succinctly expressed by Oyama, namely that the
information specifying the capacities in question – whether its source be supposed to lie
inside the organism or outside in the environment – must be presumed to ‘pre-exist the
processes that give rise to it’ (Oyama 1985: 13). My point is that these capacities are
neither internally prespeciﬁed nor externally imposed, but arise within processes of development, as properties of dynamic self-organisation of the total ﬁeld of relationships in
which a person’s life unfolds.

WRITING, PRINT LITERACY AND THE MODERN CONCEPTION
OF LANGUAGE
What is the source of the peculiar conception of language enshrined in the standard model?
Consider the following three implications of the notion that language is fully describable
as an objective system of rules and representations for generating well-formed and meaningful utterances. First, every verbal composition must exist initially as an entity in its
own right – a mental construction – independently of the contexts of its enunciation and
interpretation in the real world of other persons and relationships. Secondly, performance
is a matter of placing this composition ‘on line’ for mechanical execution by the physical
apparatus of the body. Thirdly, the particular qualities of performance – such as tone of
voice, facial expression, and so on – may be considered superﬂuous to linguistic competence and therefore disregarded.
Now in ordinary speech, these conditions never obtain, although linguists often write
as though they do. That is to say, in real life verbal composition is inseparable from performance, and performance is an intentional and ﬁnely nuanced activity that draws its
meaning from the situational contexts of its enactment. In modern literate societies,
however, there is one domain of activity where the conditions outlined above approximately obtain – and this is the activity of writing. There is a sense in which the written
verbal composition does exist as an entity in its own right, moreover with modern print
technology the writing itself does seem like the mechanical replication of a preconstructed
design, while words printed on paper are, in themselves, expressionless, and are silent to
the work and feeling that went into their production.
Thus we are brought at length to writing, or more precisely to the rise of modern print
literacy, as the source of the conception of language that underpins what I have called
the standard model. It would be no exaggeration to claim, with Roy Harris (1980: 6),
that no other historical development has had such a profound impact on the concept of
what a language is. It is from systems of writing, as David Olson has convincingly shown,
that the concepts and categories have been drawn for thinking about the structure of

Skill
spoken language, rather than the other way around. Moreover it is our experience of 1
reading written texts that leads us to regard the spoken utterance as ‘composed of words 2
related by means of a syntax’ (Olson 1994: 68–78). As units of linguistic analysis, the 3
phoneme, the word and the sentence are all artefacts of writing that, far from being 4
intrinsic to speech, have latterly been imposed upon it (Coulmas 1989: 39).3 In most 5
modern, literate societies, grammarians and lexicographers have worked hard to rationalise 6
and standardise the forms of speech so as to bring them into line with these artiﬁcial, 7
scribal conventions, setting up canons of correctness against which actual utterances may 8
be judged more or less well-formed, and which citizens are encouraged (or sometimes 9
forced) to emulate. In these societies, language has become an institution.
It is hardly surprising, then, that linguists working from within this institutional context 1
imagine that in learning, language is copied into the minds of practitioners in much the 2
same way that, in their own analyses, it is reproduced on the printed page. It is this scrip- 3
tist bias that leads many linguists naïvely to assume that the ‘languages’ of non-literate 4
communities exist, each complete with grammar and lexicon, implanted in the uncon- 5
scious minds of their speakers, simply waiting to be discovered and written down. The 6
idea, however, that writing is simply the transcription of speech – or that, in the 7
words of Jonathan Rée, ‘everything that is linguistic must in principle be writable as well’ 8
(1999: 320) – is an illusion. For what is not writable, and therefore lost in the tran- 9
scription, is everything that gives the spoken utterance its ‘illocutionary force’ (Austin 20
1962: 100), that is its power to launch intentions and produce effects, including intona- 1
tion, voice quality, accompanying manual or facial gesture, and so on. Much of the history 2
of literacy may be understood as a struggle to compensate for this limitation, largely 3
through an elaboration of the lexicon to convey subtleties of intention and interpretation 4
that are normally expressed non-lexically in speech (Olson 1994: 109–10). Thus in its 5
rendering as the output of a language that is fully writable, speech is not so much tran- 6
scribed as transformed.
Such is the power of writing on the way we both conceive and practice speech that it 8
takes quite an effort of imagination to think ourselves back into the condition of what 9
Walter Ong (1982) calls ‘primary orality’, in which speech had the power to move people, 30
as song does still, by virtue of its immediate impact on the senses. To get a perspective 1
on this, we could do worse than adopt the advice of Giambattista Vico, offered in 2
his New Science of 1725. For a genuine understanding of the origins of civilisation, 3
Vico wrote, ‘we must reckon as if there were no books in the world’ (1948 §330). That, 4
presumably, was the state of affairs in prehistory. How, says Vico, can we have a theory 5
of the origins of civilisation in prehistory if our very concept of civilisation presupposes 6
the existence of the book? How likewise, we could ask, can we have a theory of language 7
origins whose very notion of what language is presupposes print literacy? As John Shotter 8
puts it, commenting on Vico’s counsel, ‘if we are to grasp the nature of the beginnings 9
of language, and reckon as if there were no books in the world, . . . we must grasp the 40
nature of a form of communication which does not consist in a sequential occurrence of 1
events or things, nor in a series of products or of component meanings, but which rather 2
“subsists” in the continuous ﬂow of sensuous, “moving” activity between people’ (Shotter 3
1991: 385).

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 401 •

IF SPEAKING IS A SKILL, IS WRITING A TECHNOLOGY?
This is the point at which to return to my initial claim that speaking is akin to the practice of an art like singing or dancing. I do not mean art in its modern sense, a sense that
has come to be opposed to technology as the spontaneous creation of novelty to the
mechanical replication of pre-existing design (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 349–50). I have
in mind, rather, the traditional meaning of art as skill, of the kind we associate with craftsmanship – a sense preserved in such words as ‘artisan’ and ‘artefact’.
Before proceeding further, it is necessary to reiterate three general points about skill. I
have already introduced and discussed these points at length in Chapter Nineteen
(pp. 352–4), and will summarise them only brieﬂy here. First, skills are not techniques
of the body considered, objectively and in isolation, as an instrument in the service of
culture. They are rather properties of the whole system of relations constituted by the
presence of the practitioner in his or her environment. Secondly, skilled practice is not
just the mechanical application of external force but is continually responsive both to
changing environmental conditions and to the nuances of the practitioner’s relation to
the material as the task unfolds. Thirdly, skills are refractory to codiﬁcation in the programmatic form of rules and representations. Thus it is not through the transmission of any
such programmes that skills are learned, but rather through a mixture of improvisation
and imitation in the settings of practice. Now all these points, which apply to skills in
general, also apply to speaking in particular. Speaking is not a discharge of representations in the mind but an achievement of the whole organism-person in an environment;
it is closely attuned and continually responsive to the gestures of others, and speakers are
forever improvising on the basis of past practice in their efforts to make themselves understood in a world which is never quite the same from one moment to the next.
What, then, of the difference between speaking and writing? Earlier, I drew attention
to certain properties of writing, speciﬁcally of the kind associated with modern print
literacy, that may be responsible for the conception of language enshrined in the standard
model. These properties – that writing divorces the author from the immediate context
of sensuous engagement with his or her surroundings, that it involves the more or less
mechanical execution of a preconceived verbal composition, and that it is fully analysable
in terms of an objective system of rules and representations – are the precise opposites of
the three general properties of skill outlined above. Viewed in these terms, it would seem
that the key difference between speaking and writing is that the latter is not a skilled
practice at all, not an art in that sense, but the operation of a technology.
The idea of writing as a technology of language enjoys widespread currency in the literature (Sampson 1985: 17, Coulmas 1989: 9–11). A leading proponent of the idea has
been Walter Ong. One of the things that makes writing technological, according to Ong,
is that it involves the use of tools and other equipment (Ong 1982: 81). For us the tool
that immediately comes to mind is, of course the pen or pencil, or perhaps the typewriter.
But it is worth remembering, in passing, that the writer’s equipment may involve far more
than that. For example the tools of the medieval English scribe, according to Michael
Clanchy, included: a knife or razor for scraping parchment, a pumice for smoothing it,
a boar’s tooth for polishing the surface, a ruler, plumbline and awl for ruling the lines,
and, for the writing itself, quill pens and a penknife, inkhorn and inks of various colours.
This is not to mention the furniture, lamp-lighting and other paraphernalia of the study
(Clanchy 1979: 116). Where writing is pressed on wet clay, as in Sumerian cuneiform,
or engraved in stone, stamped on metal or embroidered in tapestry, the tools would have

Skill
been quite different, and often of a kind that we would not immediately associate with 1
writing at all. My concern, however, is not with what kinds of tools are used, or even 2
with whether tools are necessarily used at all (think of writing in the air, or with a ﬁnger 3
in the sand), but whether the use of tools in writing is tantamount to operating a 4
technology.
Ong thinks it is, and to demonstrate his point he invites us to compare writing with 6
playing the violin. The violinist, in Ong’s characterisation, is an operative whose task is 7
to induce vibrations in the strings of her instrument, according to its principles of acoustic 8
functioning, in order to render a pre-prepared musical composition in the concrete medium 9
of sound. Let me cite the relevant passage in full:
A violin is an instrument, which is to say a tool. An organ is a huge machine, with 2
sources of power . . . totally outside its operator . . . What do you think the sounds of 3
an organ come out of? Or the sounds of a violin or even a whistle? The fact is that 4
by using a mechanical contrivance, a violinist or an organist can express something 5
poignantly human that cannot be expressed without the mechanical contrivance. To 6
achieve such expression of course the violinist or organist has to have interiorized the 7
technology, made the tool or machine a second nature, a psychological part of himself 8
or herself.
(Ong 1982: 83) 20
Just as the violinist has to interiorise a technology, Ong goes on to argue, so also must 2
the writer, in order to be able to use his tools to inscribe linguistic forms upon a material 3
surface.
Now whatever one may think of the organ, to describe the violin as a ‘mechanical 5
contrivance’ seems a little odd, and certainly contrary to the experience of any practising 6
musician. It is evident that in this passage, Ong has fallen prey to the fallacy, already 7
discussed in Chapter Sixteen, that where tools or instruments are being used there must 8
exist a technology (p. 316). For what the concept of technology does, as we have seen, 9
is to recast the skilled activity of artisans as the behavioural or mechanical output of a 30
formal system of rules and principles, a logos of tekhnē, that is embodied in the construc- 1
tion of the tools of the trade, and that practitioners are bound to put into effect, regardless 2
of their personal experience and sensibilities. There is far more to playing the violin, 3
however, than the mechanical execution of a pre-prepared series of instructions. And if 4
there is a certain analogy between violin-playing and writing, it must point to a conclu- 5
sion that is the very converse of the one that Ong draws from it: namely, that the activity 6
of the writer, like that of the violinist, is an art in itself.
THE ART OF WRITING
To learn to play the violin, the novice has to practise with her instrument, over and over 1
again, and often from a young age while her body is still rapidly growing, until her move- 2
ments and the sounds that ﬂow from them gain the ﬂuency and responsiveness of the 3
accomplished performer. Precisely the same is true, as we saw in Chapter Nineteen (pp. 4
356–7), of learning to make string bags in Central New Guinea. And in just the same 5
way, too, the young apprentice scribe learns the craft of writing. This is not a matter, as 6
Ong would have it, of interiorising a technology, but rather one of developing a skill. As 7
with any skill, the art of handwriting emerges through a continuous process of bodily 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 403 •

modiﬁcation within the contexts of novices’ engagement with other persons and diverse
objects in their environments. That writing is not merely added on, as a cultural supplement, to a body that is naturally ready-made for speech is apparent as soon as we pause
to consider the demands, both postural and gestural, that it places on the developing
human organism.
The postures routinely adopted in writing are in fact very variable, depending in part
on tools, raw materials and furniture, and in part on status etiquette. For example the
postural change adopted by Sumerian scribes when they started writing on large rectangular clay tablets rather than small square ones was probably responsible for the 90°
rotation of all the originally pictographic signs of the cuneiform script (Powell 1981,
Coulmas 1989: 74–5). Ancient Egyptian scribes adopted a variety of positions from crosslegged or kneeling to standing upright. Japanese and Chinese calligraphers knelt on the
ﬂoor with the paper spread before them, while the Medieval European scribe settled into
a solid wooden chair with a table or desk to support his work. Despite his relative immobility, however, he considered his writing to be an act of endurance ‘in which’, as one
scribe mournfully wrote, ‘the whole body labours’ (Clanchy 1979: 116). And at least one
contemporary professor of linguistics would agree. It is no more true, observes Roy Harris,
to say that writing consists simply in the movements of the hand in holding a pen (or
other instrument) than it is to say that speech consists only in the movements of the vocal
tract. For ‘we speak and write with our whole body’, including the head, eyes, facial
musculature, hands, arms, and general posture (Harris 1980: 99).
Jack Goody has characterised writing as a ‘technology of the intellect’ (1977: 151), but
from the examples cited above it would seem equally appropriate to follow the lead of
Marcel Mauss (1979 [1934]), and regard it as a technique of the body. For the regular
practice of writing, like that of any other skill, leaves an indelible anatomical impression,
whether in the visible form of the scholar’s rounded shoulders or in the normally invisible architecture of the brain. Writing, as Paul Connerton has observed, is an incorporating
as well as an inscribing practice: that is, it has an ‘irreducible bodily component’, not just
in the controlled movement of the hand but in the way in which the hand together with
the tool it holds is brought into a certain angular relation with the surface of the material to be inscribed, which in turn affects the writer’s entire comportment (Connerton
1989: 76–7). Without diminishing the importance of the inscriptional aspect of writing,
we should not forget that there can be no inscription without incorporation – without,
in other words, the building of habitual patterns of posture and gesture into the bodily
modus operandi of the skilled practitioner. Just like speech, in short, writing is an achievement of the whole human organism-person in his or her environment.
To view writing as an art is to think of it, in the ﬁrst place, as a kind of dextrous
movement, and to think of the text (recalling a distinction introduced in Chapter Eighteen
(pp. 346–8)) as something woven rather than made. That is to say, the patterning or
weave of the text emerges as the crystallisation of this movement, and is not preﬁgured
as a mental construction which the writing hand merely serves to transcribe onto a surface.
This is what André Leroi-Gourhan had in mind when he referred to prehistoric inscriptions as instances of ‘graphism’, whose meaning was drawn from contexts of oral narrative
now irretrievably lost. Graphism, as Leroi-Gourhan insisted, is not representational but
the congelation, as an enduring trace, of those rhythmic bodily movements that are intrinsic
to preliterate speech (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 190). Regarded as an instance of graphism,
writing, just like mapping (see Chapter Thirteen, pp. 231–5), is inscriptive, not transcriptive. Indeed the idea that its forms and patterns are woven into the surface rather than

Skill
impressed upon it is supported by the derivation of the word ‘text’ from the Latin texere, 1
meaning ‘to weave’ (Carruthers 1990: 12). Comparably, the word for writing among the 2
Quiché Maya of Guatemala (tz’ib) comes from the stem -tz’iba, which refers to actions 3
involving ‘the creation of designs by means of weaving’ (Tedlock and Tedlock 1985: 4
124–6).
In sum, far from being conceived as the operation of a technology, writing would be 6
better understood as a graphic counterpart to speech. Since we speak, to recall Harris’s 7
point, with the whole body, and not just with the voice, the relation between speech and 8
writing is not so much between a sonic reality and its visual representation as it is between 9
the communicative bodily gesture and its graphic inscription.
HISTORY AS AN EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS: THE ILLUSION OF ORIGINS
With this point I return, at length, to Darwin, and to his idea that writing is comparable 4
to brewing or baking, conceived as a skilled practical activity rather than a technology to 5
be applied. Now for Darwin, it will be recalled, writing differed from speaking only insofar 6
as it is not grounded, as is speaking, in an ‘instinctive tendency’. In the last chapter, 7
however, I set out to demonstrate that speaking is no more or less ‘instinctive’ than writing. 8
As varieties of skilled practice, both speaking and writing emerge quite naturally in the 9
course of development, so long as the necessary support structure or ‘scaffolding’ is present 20
in the environment. Now if, as I have suggested, writing is an inscriptive counterpart to 1
speech, it must follow that any account of the evolution of speech, in the sense I have 2
proposed here, must at one and the same time be an account of the evolution of writing. 3
Hence, contrary to conventional wisdom (Sampson 1985: 13, Coulmas 1989: 3), speech 4
and writing are not separated on opposite sides of a dichotomy between human biolog- 5
ical evolution and the history of technology, but are mutually implicated in a single 6
evolutionary process.
It is this dichotomy between evolution and history, as I showed in the last chapter, 8
that sets up a point of origin at their intersection. This is where scholars have conven- 9
tionally placed the genesis of language, art, technology, religion, and all the other capacities 30
that are supposed to mark our distinctive humanity. Yet not only has the conception of 1
language enshrined in this origin story been profoundly inﬂuenced by writing, but also 2
our conception of writing has been equally profoundly shaped by the idea of technology. 3
It is, I suggest, the inherent ‘logocentrism’ of modern Western thought, its understanding 4
of practice as rule-governed execution, that renders writing as a technological system. 5
Hence it is this, too, and not writing per se, that is ultimately responsible for the reiﬁca- 6
tion of speech as language, and thus for the establishment of the whole problematic of 7
language origins. To that extent, the problematic itself has its origins in modernity. I have 8
argued here, to the contrary, that there is no point at which language could be said to 9
have originated. For language exists only in the activities of speaking and writing them- 40
selves. These activities, and the skills in which they are based, emerge through what Harvey 1
Whitehouse (1996: 113) has aptly called ‘the labours of maturation’, within ﬁelds of prac- 2
tice constituted by the activities of predecessors. And as each generation, through its 3
activities, contributes to the conditions of maturation of the next, they continue to evolve. 4
It is, to conclude, fundamentally wrong to populate the past with people like ourselves, 5
equipped with the capacities or potentials to do everything we do today, such that history 6
becomes nothing more than the teleological process of their progressive realisation. The 7
notion of an origin, deﬁned as the point at which these capacities became established, 118

Speech, writing and ‘language origins’ • 405 •

awaiting their historical fulﬁlment, is part of an elaborate ideological justiﬁcation for the
present order of things and, as such, an aspect of the pervasive presentism of modern
thought. I have shown that the capacity to speak (or write) is inseparable from the capacity
to speak (or write) in this way or that. We would not say, I think, that all human beings
have evolved with the innate capacity to play musical instruments, and that this is distinct
from the capacity to play the violin, the trumpet or the oboe. Likewise, it makes no sense
to distinguish a universal capacity for language or speech from the ability to speak English,
Japanese or Swahili. Speech is a dynamic phenomenon, and its forms change through
history. As it does so, capacities evolve. They are still evolving. Language has not originated yet, and it never will.

Skill
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, neo-Darwinian biology, cognitive science and psycholinguists have 5
conspired to produce an extremely powerful approach to understanding the relations, in 6
human evolution, between technology, language and intelligence. It is argued that linguistic 7
and intellectual capacities, common to all human beings, are built-in properties of a mind 8
whose basic architecture has evolved through a process of variation under natural selec- 9
tion. Remaining issues for debate concern whether the selective pressures guiding the 20
evolution of these capacities lay in the social domain of the relations among conspeciﬁcs 1
or in the technical domain of adaptation to the non-human environment, and whether – 2
or at what point in either ontogeny or phylogeny – technical capacities are dissociated 3
from linguistic ones. What is the difference, it is asked, between the kinds of mental 4
constructional tasks involved in toolmaking and tool-using, on the one hand, and speaking, 5
on the other? To what extent does the performance of these tasks call upon similar or 6
even identical neurophysiological mechanisms?
As a social anthropologist, perched precariously on a narrow ledge while buffeted 8
by contrary winds from the humanities and the natural sciences, I view these debates 9
with increasing unease. I am disturbed by their apparent disregard of the intellectual 30
ferment that has accompanied the contemporary critique of modernism, by the commit- 1
ment of those involved to a version of ‘normal science’ that brooks no challenge to 2
fundamental paradigmatic assumptions, and by their readiness to frame their various, 3
competing accounts – of the entire career of humanity from earliest origins to the present 4
day – in terms of concepts that, like the disciplines to which they belong, are recent 5
products of a very speciﬁc history in the Western world. These concepts, as we have 6
already seen (Chapter Sixteen, p. 312), are grounded in a general claim to the supremacy 7
of human reason – a claim that is perhaps the deﬁning feature of the discourse of moder- 8
nity. Thus intelligence is the faculty of reason, language its vehicle, and technology the 9
means by which a rational understanding of the external world is turned to account for 40
human beneﬁt.
I would like to propose a radically alternative claim: namely, that there is no such thing 2
as technology, or language, or intelligence, at least in pre-modern or non-Western societies. 3
By that I do not for one moment mean to suggest that people in such societies do not make 4
common use of tools in their everyday activities, that they do not engage with one another 5
in the verbal idioms of speech, or that these and other activities do not represent creative 6
ways of coping in the world. My concern is rather to focus attention on what it means 7
to say that everyday tool-using is a behavioural instantiation of technology, or that spoken 118

Chapter Twenty-three

The poetics of tool use

From technology, language and intelligence
to craft, song and imagination

The poetics of tool use • 407 •

dialogue is the instantiation of language, or that creative activity is the instantiation of intelligence. Even in our own society, in which these propositions form a part of received wisdom, they are not immediately or obviously borne out in experience.1
For example, I am presently writing with a pen, I am wearing spectacles which help
me to see, I carry on my wrist a watch which tells me the time, a chair and table provide
supports respectively for my body and my work, and I am surrounded by innumerable
other bits and pieces that come in handy for one thing and another. I incorporate these
diverse objects into the current of my activity without attending to them as such: I concentrate on my writing, not the pen; I see the time, not my watch. Indeed it could be said
that these and other instruments become truly available to me, as things I can use without
difﬁculty or interruption, at the point at which they effectively vanish as objects of my
attention. And if anything links them together, it is only that they are brought into the
same current, that of my work. Drawing an explicit parallel with tool-use, Wittgenstein
made much the same point about the use of words in speech (1953, §11): different words
have different uses, just as do the pen, watch and spectacles; one normally attends not to
the words themselves but to what the speaker is telling us with them, and they are bound
together solely by virtue of the fact that the various situations of use are all embedded
within a total pattern of verbal and non-verbal activity, a form of life.
There are, then, words, and activities that people do with words (i.e. speaking). And
there are tools, and activities that people do with tools (i.e. tool-using). But is there
language? Or technology? What is entailed in the assumption that for people to speak
they must ﬁrst ‘have’ language, or for people to use tools they must ﬁrst ‘have’ technology
– or indeed for people to engage in intelligent activities of any kind they must ﬁrst ‘have’
intelligence? If, on the other hand, we drop the assumption, what further need do we
have of these concepts? Suppose, to pursue my alternative claim, that we set ourselves the
task of examining the relation, in human evolution, not between technology, language
and intelligence, but between craftsmanship, song and imagination. The resulting account,
I suspect, would be very different. Without prejudging the issue of which is the better
conceptual frame, I shall attempt in what follows to indicate where some of the differences might lie. I begin with language and song.

LANGUAGE, MUSIC AND SONG
In the voice, human beings are equipped with a wonderfully expressive and versatile instrument. We use it to speak, and we use it to sing. But how, if at all, can we distinguish
speaking from singing? In the modern conception the answer is simple: speaking is essentially linguistic, singing is essentially musical. Of course, speech may be present in the
song, in the words that accompany the music – thus the song may be conceived as it is
written on paper, in two registers proceeding in parallel: the musical sequence written as
a series of notes, and the linguistic sequence as a concurrent series of words. So what is
the difference between these two sequences, between the melodic line and the syntagmatic
chain? One possible answer, to which I have already alluded in Chapter Fourteen
(pp. 247–8), is that the former is immanent in the stream of sound, whereas the latter
lies in some sense behind the sound. To listen to music is to dwell in a world of sound,
which permeates our entire awareness. When we listen to speech, however, it is as though
our awareness reaches through the sound to a world of words beyond – a world that is
as silent as the book, where there are no sounds as such but only images of sound. What
happens, then, when we listen to song?

Skill
‘When words and music come together in song’, writes Susanne Langer, ‘music swal- 1
lows words’ (1953: 152). Her point is that the sounds of speech, to the extent that they 2
are incorporated into a total musical phenomenon, cease to draw the listener’s attention 3
to meanings beyond themselves – meanings that, in speech, the sounds had served 4
only to convey or deliver up to the listener rather than actually to embody. For Langer, 5
sound that does not convey meaning in this sense is no longer verbal sound. Thus what 6
essentially distinguishes verbal sound is that its signiﬁcance can be extracted from the 7
sound itself. Musical sound, by contrast, delineates its own meaning: it is meaningful not 8
because of what it represents, but simply because of its affective presence in the listener’s 9
environment. If this were so, then speech is what you would be left with if you took the 10
music out of song, and music is what you would be left with if the verbal component of 1
song were swallowed up in its entirety, while poetry lies ambiguously, somewhere in 2
between: more verbal than song, and yet more musical than speech. Thus in poetry we 3
stretch words beyond the limits of normal utterance so that, in their sounding, they become 4
expressive in themselves.
The very idea of a ‘coming together’ of words and music, however, presupposes their 6
original separation. To produce a song, it seems, we have to combine two things that are 7
initially distinct, music and language. But on what grounds do we assume this distinction? 8
Could we not, equally well, put the argument in reverse, and suggest that music and 9
language, as separate symbolic registers, are the products of a movement of analytic decom- 20
position of what was once an indivisible expressive totality, namely song? To support such 1
a reverse argument, we would need to be able to demonstrate that the difference between 2
speech and melodic gesture is one of degree rather than kind, that to speak is indeed – in 3
a sense – to sing, and hence that no absolute line can be drawn between them.2
The issue here largely hinges on the question of how words acquire meaning. The 5
orthodox view has it that words refer to concepts. And concepts are the building blocks 6
of comprehensive mental representations. At once there is presupposed a division between 7
a subject, in whose mind these representations are to be found, and an objective world 8
‘out there’. Meaning is in the mind, not in the world – it is assigned to the world by the 9
subject. As I move around physically in the world, and advance through time, I carry my 30
concepts with me – rather as I might carry a map in navigating the landscape (see Chapter 1
Thirteen pp. 223–4). In different times and places I experience different sensations, but 2
like the map, the system of concepts which organizes these sensations into meaningful 3
patterns remains the same, regardless of where I stand. But if the world exists for me only 4
as I have thus constructed it from the data of perception, how can it be shared? How can 5
subjects inhabit a common world of meaning?
Again, the orthodox account argues that meanings are shared through verbal commu- 7
nication. Thus, my pre-prepared thought or belief has to be ‘encoded’ in words, which 8
are then ‘sent’ in the medium of sound, writing or gesture to a recipient who, having 9
performed a reverse operation of decoding, ﬁnishes up with the original thought success- 40
fully transplanted into his mind. Of course every act of communication takes place in a 1
context, involving a particular speaker and a particular listener (or listeners) in a given 2
environmental setting. But since words refer to abstract concepts rather than real-world 3
objects, the relation of signiﬁcation (between word and concept) is itself context- 4
independent. The logic of this account therefore entails that signs can achieve the status 5
of words, that is they become properly ‘linguistic’, only at the end point of a process of 6
decontextualisation. At this point, the sign severs all connection with the external world, 7
such that the relation between sign and meaning is wholly interior to the subject.

The poetics of tool use • 409 •

Not only must this relation of signiﬁcation be context-free, it must also be conventional. Agreement on the conventional meanings of words is clearly a condition for the
faithful transcription of ideas from one mind to another, according to the model of
communication presented above. Such conventions, moreover, are presumed to be arbitrary
– again on the grounds of the severing of iconic links between verbal signs and the
properties of the exterior world. Linguists are fond of reminding us, naïve speakers all,
that one word is as good as another for signifying the same concept, so long as the pattern
of phonemic contrast that serves to set each word off from each and every other in the
language is retained. To me it may seem that a quality of hardness is presented in
the very utterance of the word ‘hard’, just as it is presented in a passage of music played
staccato. And likewise, the word ‘smooth’ sounds smooth, as does the same passage
played legato. But that, says the linguist, is an illusion born of the frequent association,
in experience, of words and their ‘real-world’ denotata. To clinch the argument, he points
to the sheer diversity of natural languages, to the fact that the different words – say – for
‘dog’, in these different languages, may bear not the slightest resemblance to one another,
nor indeed to the real-world animal of that name.
Perhaps it is time for naïve speakers to put linguists in their place. For what the former
can provide, which the latter cannot, is the perspective of a being who, quite unlike the
dislocated, closed-in subject confronting an external reality, is wholly immersed, from the
start, in the relational context of dwelling in a world. For such a being, this world is already
laden with signiﬁcance: meaning inheres in the relations between the dweller and the
constituents of the dwelt-in world. And to the extent that people dwell in the same world,
and are caught up together in the same currents of activity, they can share in the same
meanings. Such communion of experience, the awareness of living in a common world of
meaningful relations, establishes a foundational level of sociality which exists – in Pierre
Bourdieu’s (1977: 2) phrase – ‘on the hither side of words and concepts’, and that constitutes the baseline on which all attempts at verbal communication must subsequently
build. For although it is indisputable that verbal conventions are deployed in speech, such
conventions do not come ready made. They are forever being built up over time, through a
cumulative history of past usage: each is a hard-won product of the hazardous efforts
of generations of predecessors to make themselves understood. When we speak of the
conventional meaning of a word, that history is simply presupposed or, as it were, ‘put in
brackets’, taken as read. And so we are inclined to think of use as founded on convention
when, in reality, convention can only be established and held in place through use. Thus
to understand how words acquire meaning we have to place them back into that original
current of sociality, into the speciﬁc contexts of activities and relations in which they are
used and to which they contribute. We then realize that, far from deriving their meanings
from their attachment to mental concepts which are imposed upon a meaningless world
of entities and events ‘out there’, words gather their meanings from the relational properties of
the world itself. Every word is a compressed and compacted history.3
Armed with this ‘dwelling perspective’, how should we view the difference between the
spoken word and the musical gesture? It is no longer possible to argue that the former
carries a conventional meaning that can be detached from the sound whereas the latter
embodies its meaning in itself. We should rather argue that in words, the process of sedimentation and compression of past usage which contributes to the determination of their
current sense has advanced to an exceedingly high degree, whereas in melody it is still
incipient. But this is a difference of degree rather than kind, one that has perhaps been
stretched to its maximal extent in the West by virtue of a cultural emphasis on the novelty

Skill
of music as against the conventionality of language. One cannot expect the difference to 1
be everywhere, and at all times, to be so clearcut. For all music, viewed in this light, is 2
on its way to becoming speech, and there is no Rubicon beyond which we can say that 3
it is unequivocally one thing rather than the other. Conversely, all speech has its origins 4
in vocal music, that is in song. As Merleau-Ponty put it, once we put speech back into 5
the current of intercourse from which it necessarily springs, ‘it would then be found that 6
the words, vowels and phonemes are so many ways of “singing” the world’ (1962: 187) 7
– not, it should be stressed, in the naïve sense of producing an onomatopoeic resemblance 8
between particular sounds and particular aspects of the world, but in the sense of entering 9
intentionally and expressively into it, of ‘living’ it.
EMOTION AND REASON
The decomposition of song into the two ‘compartments’ of language and music has come 4
about, I believe, through the assimilation of vocal gesture to a particular view of the human 5
constitution, one that has long held a central place in Western thought, and that reached 6
its apotheosis in the rationalism of Descartes. According to this view, every human being 7
is a composite creature made up of body and mind, susceptible, on the one hand, to 8
emotions and feelings (bodily sensations), but capable, on the other, of rational delibera- 9
tion (mental operations). Thus the musical phrase is envisaged as a feeling shaped in 20
sound, the verbal utterance as the representation of a thought. One is visceral, the other 1
cerebral; one is experienced directly, the other presupposes a mental processing of received 2
sound to extract the ‘message’. In music (and more obviously still in dance) the body 3
resonates with the world, in language one mind communicates with another. Music, assumed 4
to be devoid of propositional content, is placed on the ‘purely expressive’ side of human 5
existence; language is placed on the ‘purely rational’ side – all expressive aspects of speech 6
being removed from language itself and assigned to contingent aspects of performance. 7
Moreover, the rational is normally ranked above the expressive, as an index of ‘higher’ 8
cognitive faculties that enable their possessors to step outside the world and – from this 9
decentred vantage point – to take a cool, dispassionate view of it.
Such, of course, is the professed aim of natural science. Since the ascendancy of reason 1
over emotion is implicated in science’s claim to deliver an objective account of the natural 2
world, it comes as no surprise to ﬁnd the same principle of ranking at the basis of scien- 3
tiﬁc accounts of the evolution of language – for it is surely language that enables humans 4
to be scientists. Early formulations of the gestural theory of language origins, for example, 5
rested on claims that the vocalisations of non-human primates (and by imputation, those 6
of early hominids) were purely emotional or affective, and were therefore unlikely candi- 7
dates as precursors for linguistic communication, whose key property was taken 8
to be the conveyance of propositional information. Neurophysiologists, for their part, 9
claimed to ﬁnd empirical proof of the existence of a dichotomy between volitional and emo- 40
tional behaviours and body movements, and proceeded to map these onto different regions 1
of the brain (Myers 1976). Language was unequivocally ascribed to the former category of 2
behaviour: thus Ronald Myers could assert that ‘the use of words in verbal communications 3
is clearly volitional’. What, then, are we to make of those words that are uttered without 4
deliberate, prior intent? Myers is at least dimly aware of the problem. He continues:
The existence of a second type of use of the voice, i.e. in emotional expression, remains 7
uncertain, and its neurology poorly deﬁned. Indeed the neurologist, when confronted 118

The poetics of tool use • 411 •

with the proposition of an emotional use of the voice, inevitably thinks of curse words
or interjections.
(1976: 746)
The implication is that what are rather primly called ‘curse words’ do not really merit inclusion within the domain of language at all! Language proper comes to be marked
out, through the exclusion of all vocal expression of emotion, as a realm of propositional
statements delivered completely free from emotional or affective overtones. Gordon Hewes
suggests an example: ‘The message “the house is on ﬁre” can, if need be, be conveyed with
no more excitement than the information that Paris is a city in France’ (Hewes 1976: 490).
This may be so. Yet in practice, anyone who says ‘the house is on ﬁre’ does so in a
context, and in a tone of voice that may vary from a level monotone to a high-pitched
shout. In the context of utterance the former tone is as expressive of indifference as is the
latter of urgency or anguish, and each is liable to evoke a quite different response on the
part of the audience, from a detached contemplation of the conﬂagration to a rush to
evacuate the building. How, then, can these possibly be regarded as alternative renderings
of the same proposition? Only by abstracting the verbal phrase from its context, by treating
it as though – like words printed, as they appear here, on paper – it had a separate existence of its own. In reality, regardless of whether I utter the words with excitement or
indifference, or of whether or not I have already rehearsed my speech beforehand in
thought, my speaking is an intentional act which can only artiﬁcially be broken down
into propositional and expressive components. And the same, of course, goes for the utterance of a swearword, which may indeed be no more premeditated than my cry, ‘the house
is on ﬁre’, but which nevertheless launches my intention into the world and carries it
forward towards its goal.
In short, whether I speak, swear, shout, cry or sing, I do so with feeling, but feeling –
as the tactile metaphor implies – is a mode of active and responsive engagement in the
world, it is not a passive, interior reaction of the organism to external disturbance (see
Chapter One, pp. 23–4). We ‘feel’ each other’s presence in verbal discourse as the craftsman feels, with his tools, the material on which he works; and as with the craftsman’s
handling of tools, so is our handling of words sensitive to the nuances of our relationships with the felt environment. Thus, far from characterising mutually exclusive categories
of behaviour – namely ‘volitional’ and ‘emotional’ – intentionality and feeling are two
sides of the same coin, that of our practical involvement in the dwelt-in world. Only by
imagining the human organism to be an isolated, preconstituted entity, given in advance
of its external relations, do we come to regard feeling as an inner, affective state that is
‘triggered’ by incoming sensations. And by the same token, we are led to recover the
intentional (or ‘volitional’) character of speech by supposing that what makes it so is that
it does not arise in reaction to external stimulus but is rather caused by an internal mental
representation – by a thought, belief or proposition pressing to make itself heard (Chomsky
1968: 10–11).
What, then, is language? Or more precisely, how do we come to have the idea that
such a thing as language exists, and that it therefore has an evolution that we can attempt
to describe and explain? One answer might be that the idea is a by-product of the process
of ‘interiorisation’ of personhood that has marked the emergence of the modern Western
concept of the individual (Mauss 1985, Dumont 1986). It is this concept that leads us
to look within the human being, rather than to the sphere of its involvement in a wider
ﬁeld of relations, to discover the ultimate, generative source of purposive action. Thus

Skill
every individual, as we saw in the last chapter, is supposed to come independently equipped 1
with a ‘built-in’ language capacity (or at least a device for its acquisition), located some- 2
where inside the brain, which is the generative source of speech. Another possible answer, 3
related to the ﬁrst, is that the idea of language is necessarily entailed by a rationalism that 4
is unable to conceive of action except as the mechanical replication, in a physical medium, 5
of assemblies already constructed in thought. To language, then, is accorded the respon- 6
sibility for constructing those assemblies, namely sentences, which are merely executed in 7
speech. Yet a third answer might be that the idea of language is a ‘fetish of linguists’ 8
(Goodman 1971: 34) who have sought to model the activities of speaking as the 9
application of a coherent system of syntactic and semantic rules, derived by abstraction 10
from observed behaviour. To be able to do this, they have to stand back from the current 1
of discourse, focusing on speech as speech whilst the rest of us concentrate on what other 2
people are telling us in their speech. But they have gone on to transfer, onto the speakers 3
themselves, their own external relationship to the object of study, imagining the abstrac- 4
tions derived from this ‘view from the outside’ to be implanted within the speakers’ minds 5
and to constitute the essence of their competence. Hence, speaking is seen to consist in 6
the implementation of linguistic rules. Inside the head of every speaker there appears a 7
miniature linguist.4
Irrespective of which of the three answers presented above we might favour, the idea 9
of language is a relatively recent one in the annals of human history. Yet it has had a 20
profound impact, not only on the way we interpret our own activities of speaking, but 1
also on those activities themselves. I have already shown, in the previous chapter, how 2
the explicit codiﬁcation of lexical conventions and grammatical rules sets standards of 3
correctness which may – to varying degrees – be emulated or enforced. This institution- 4
alisation of language is reﬂected in systems of education. Children not only learn to speak, 5
as they have always and everywhere done, through immersion in an environment of vocally 6
accomplished caregivers, they also receive formal schooling in the principles of language, 7
as formulated by those appointed by society to act as its guardians – the grammarians 8
and dictionary-makers. Above all, they are taught to write. The inﬂuence of writing on 9
modern ideas and practices of language cannot be overestimated (Harris 1980: 6). For 30
writing is not simply the equivalent of speech in an alternative medium. It is rather a 1
kind of reconstructed, as if speech: as if the verbal utterance were fully amenable to system- 2
atic analysis in terms of syntactical rules; as if the tone of voice and pronunciation 3
were entirely dispensable to meaning; as if the utterance had an autonomous existence, 4
independently of the context of its production.
None of these things are actually true of speech, except perhaps for some kinds of 6
‘reading aloud’. Yet modern linguistics has operated largely on the assumption that they 7
are. Thus it turns out that the prototypical instance of the linguistic utterance, a rule- 8
governed, context-independent proposition delivered without expression or affect, is that 9
artefact so familiar to us but unknown to non-literate societies: the sentence of writing. 40
Every theory of language evolution that holds up this prototype as its point of culmina- 1
tion, as the exemplar of a fully evolved language capacity, has an inbuilt ‘scriptist’ bias, 2
treating speech that emulates or imitates writing as more perfect than speech that does 3
not, and regarding the latter’s deviations from the ideal as imperfections or errors. It is 4
no wonder that in modern society, where the practices of speech have come to be modelled 5
on writing and where speakers are taught to observe a rationalised system of rules and 6
conventions (that is, to apply language), it has fallen to a specialised branch of verbal 7
craft, namely poetry, to attempt to make up for the resulting expressive and aesthetic 118

The poetics of tool use • 413 •

impoverishment by producing forms which – whilst approaching the rhythmic and tonal
patterns of music – are lexically and syntactically aberrant. But as Alfred Gell has argued,
in a brilliant analysis of the vocal artistry of the Umeda, a society of Papua New Guinea,
for a non-literate people whose speech has retained its expressive, song-like quality, unexpurgated by the rationalizations of the language-makers, all speaking is inherently poetic.
‘What need of poets then?’ (Gell 1979: 61).5

TECHNOLOGY, ART AND CRAFTSMANSHIP
I have argued that song, far from being put together from separate linguistic and musical
components, is rather an expressive unity that is decomposed into these components
through the imposition of a concept of language of recent, Western origin. Exactly the
same argument can be made for the kind of skilled, technical artistry that I denote
by the term ‘craftsmanship’. For the concept of technology recasts the technical skills of
the craftsman in terms of an objective system of rational principles, a logos, in just the
same way that the idea of language recasts the verbal art of speaking in terms of the rules
of grammar (see Chapter Fifteen, pp. 294–5). And as practice comes to be seen as the
mechanical application of technological rules, so its expressive, aesthetic aspects are
consigned to a separate domain of ‘art’ – a concept once synonymous with technical skill
but whose meaning is now constituted by its opposition to technology on precisely the
same grounds that music, in the modern conception, is constituted by its opposition to
language (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 349–51).
In a technologically literate society, tool-using is assimilated to the operation of artiﬁcial systems, much as speaking is assimilated to writing. Hence the prototypical tool appears
as the mechanical gadget which embodies in its own construction the principles of its
operation. As an antidote to the scriptist bias of formal linguistics, I have suggested
(following Merleau-Ponty) that we regard speech as a species of song. To follow up this
suggestion into the analogous ﬁeld of tool-use, I propose that we consider, as a prototypical instance, the kind of tool-using that comes closest of all to song – that is, playing
a musical instrument. For if to speak is to sing, then surely to use a tool is to play. Since,
as every anthropologist knows, it is helpful to be able to draw on ﬁrst-hand experience,
I shall consider the example of playing the ’cello. As a reasonably proﬁcient ’cellist, my
experience is that when I sit down to play everything falls naturally into place – the bow
in my hand, the body of the instrument between my knees – so that I can launch myself
directly, and with the whole of my being, into the music. I dive in, like a swimmer into
water, and lose myself in the surrounding ambience of sound.
This is not to say that I cease to be aware, or that my playing becomes simply mechanical or automatic: quite the contrary, I experience a heightened sense of awareness, but
that awareness is not of my playing, it is my playing. Just as with speech or song, the
performance embodies both intentionality and feeling. But the intention is carried forward
in the activity itself, it does not consist in an internal mental representation formed
in advance and lined up for instrumentally assisted, bodily execution. And the feeling,
likewise, is not an index of some inner, emotional state, for it inheres in my very
gestures, in the pressure of my bow against the strings, in the vibrato of my left hand.
In short, to play is itself to feel, so that in playing, I put feeling into the music. It makes
no more sense, then, to split off a rational-technical component from the (residually)
expressive component of playing a musical instrument than it does to split off a
propositional component from the expressive component of speech or song.

Skill
I do not claim, of course, that all of what I have described above happens spontan- 1
eously, without preparation or rehearsal. A great deal of practice is required, and there 2
are puzzles to be solved. To get around awkward passages, complex conﬁgurations of 3
ﬁngering and hand position have to be worked out in advance, and bowing movements 4
have to be planned so that at the end of one phrase the bow is in the right place on the 5
strings for the beginning of the next. At such times, as also when something goes wrong 6
in the performance, one becomes painfully aware both of oneself and of the instrument, 7
and of the distance that separates them. The instrument is felt to be obdurate or resis- 8
tant; it sticks. My point, however, is that this opposition between player and instrument 9
is collapsed in the instant when the former begins actually to play. In that instant, the 10
boundaries between the player, the instrument and the acoustic environment appear to 1
dissolve.
Lest my choice of example may seem to force the issue – for in playing a musical 3
instrument one does not achieve any direct, practical effect beyond the rapidly fading 4
tapestry of sound – let me suggest another instance of tool-use, again drawn from my 5
own experience, this time of anthropological ﬁeldwork among reindeer herdsmen 6
in northern Finland. The tool I have in mind is the lasso, and the herdsman uses it to 7
capture selected deer from the throng of animals circulating in the round-up enclosure 8
(Ingold 1993b). In construction, the lasso is extremely simple: no more than a length of 9
rope with a sliding toggle. When not in use it hangs limply in a coil from the hand, or 20
trails loose on the ground. Yet in the moment of being cast, it assumes the lively form 1
of a ﬂying noose, a form which never stands still even for a single instant. Like the musical 2
phrase shaped in sound, the form hangs suspended in the current of action. Thus, working 3
a lasso, like playing a musical instrument, is pure movement or ﬂow, and everything that 4
I have said applies to the latter applies to the former as well. It involves an embodied 5
skill, acquired through much practice. It carries forward an intention, but at the same 6
time is continually responsive to an ever-changing situation. Just as, with the orchestral 7
’cellist, the processes of his visual attention to the conductor and his manual handling of 8
the instrument are indissociable aspects of one ongoing process of action, so also the 9
herdsman’s handling of the lasso is inseparable from his attention to the movements of 30
the herd in the enclosure. The attentive quality of the action is equivalent to what, in 1
relation to musical performance, I have called ‘feeling’: to play is to feel; to act is to 2
attend. The agent’s attention, in other words, is fully absorbed in the action. Yet things 3
can go wrong in the roundup, as they can in performance: the lasso can miss its mark, 4
ropes can become entangled, the efforts of other herdsmen working in the enclosure may 5
be disrupted, animals can even be injured. The frustrated herdsman then becomes an 6
object of embarrassed self-regard, not to mention abuse from his fellows (I speak from 7
experience). The ﬂow is broken, and one has to begin all over again.
COGNITION AND PRACTICE
So much for the view of the naïve, yet reasonably skilled practitioner. Enter now the 2
cognitive scientist, who claims that where tools are used, there must be a technology – a 3
theory of how the tools are to be operated – lodged, albeit unbeknown to its possessors, 4
inside their heads. The claim is, of course, parallel to that of the linguist who assumes 5
that the ‘languages’ of non-literate peoples exist fully-formed in the minds of speakers, 6
merely awaiting explicit formulation. One wonders, then, what such a logos of ’cello- 7
playing or lasso-throwing would look like. It would consist, presumably, in a set of formal 118

The poetics of tool use • 415 •

rules or algorithms capable of combining elementary motor schemata into complex,
patterned sequences which, precisely executed, should produce instrumental gestures appropriate to any given context. The task of representing the technique of ’cello-playing or
lasso-throwing in such formal terms would likely be an inﬁnite one, but even supposing
it were possible, would an imaginary creature, programmed with this knowledge, and
provided with the requisite material equipment, be able to function remotely like a skilled
practitioner?
The answer, I believe, is that it would not. It would produce, rather, a sort of ‘as if ’
action, as if what in reality is a continuous ﬂow could be reconstructed in the form of
countless steps, each the mechanical execution of a pre-established plan or assembly –
analogous to the sentence of language (Bourdieu 1977: 73, Ingold 1986b: 209–10). It is
as though the quality of attention that, as we have seen, inheres in the skilled practitioner’s conduct were to be withdrawn from the conduct itself and concentrated in the
operation of a mental constructional device (an ‘intelligence’), which, on the basis of a
processing of sensory inputs, is supposed to generate plans and place them ‘on line’ for
execution. Thus thought becomes active, action passive. In essence, the ‘as if ’ actor and
the skilled practitioner employ different kinds of intentionality. The ﬁrst is the kind
entailed in orthodox Cartesian accounts of volitional behaviour, in which to have an intention is to preﬁx that behaviour with a thought, plan or mental representation which it
serves to deliver. The second is a kind of intentionality that is launched and carried forward
in the action itself, and corresponds to the attentive quality of that action. It is the intentionality not of an isolated mind, of the cogitating subject confronting an exterior world
of things, but rather that of a being wholly immersed in the relational nexus of its instrumental ‘coping’ in the world.
There is a certain (though as we shall see, inexact) parallel between the ‘as if ’ actor
and the inexperienced novice, and they fail for the same reason. Every act has to be
thought out in advance, and once embarked upon, it cannot be changed without further
deliberation which, in turn, interrupts the action. Attention precedes response, introducing
a time lag which would make anything like orchestral playing or capturing reindeer with
lassos completely impossible. The skilled practitioner, by contrast, is able continually to
attune his movements to perturbations in the perceived environment without ever interrupting the ﬂow of action, since that action is itself a process of attention. Skilled practice
