sitioned. Formerly placed with the organism on the side of biology, the body has now 5
reappeared as a ‘subject’ on the side of culture. Far from collapsing the Cartesian dualism 6
of subject and object, this move actually serves to reproduce it. Moreover it leaves the 7
organism bodiless, reduced to an inchoate mass of biological potential. The embodiment 8
of culture, in short, leads to nothing less than the disembodiment of the organism! Indeed 9
to posit some kind of biological residuum that exists prior to, and independently of, the 40
culturally constituted body is to resort to the very objectivism that a phenomenological 1
approach claims to repudiate (Morton 1995). It seems to me that to consolidate the theo- 2
retical gains brought by the paradigm of embodiment, one ﬁnal step has yet to be taken: 3
that is, to recognise that the body is the human organism, and that the process of embod- 4
iment is one and the same as the development of that organism in its environment.
This leads to the second obstacle, which is that the cause of dissolving the division 6
between body and mind is ill-served by emphasising one term to the exclusion of the 7
other. One could, in principle, speak just as well of enmindment as of embodiment, to 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 171 •

emphasise the way in which the body and its surroundings are incorporated into those
processing loops that underwrite human powers of agency and intentionality. Body and
mind, after all, are not two separate things but two ways of describing the same thing –
or better, the same process – namely the environmentally situated activity of the human
organism-person (see Chapter Nineteen, pp. 352–3). Mind, as Gregory Bateson always
insisted, is not ‘in the head’ rather than ‘out there in the world’, but immanent in the
active, perceptual engagement of organism and environment (Bateson 1973). Indeed the
distance between a Merleau-Pontyan phenomenology of the body and what Bateson christened the ‘ecology of mind’ is not as great as might ﬁrst appear.
Finally, even if it is agreed that a phenomenological approach offers a richer and more
‘experience-near’ (Geertz 1984: 124) account of human life in the world than do the more
formal, ‘experience-distant’ concepts of cognitive science, the problem remains of translating this approach into a programme of research that would give us a more accurate
idea than we presently have of how people routinely succeed, in their everyday, skilful
‘coping’, in performing with ease actions that are far beyond the capabilities of any machine
yet devised. It is easy to pour scorn on the efforts of researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence
to replicate the processes at work in the human brain, but as Dreyfus admits (1992: xliv),
no one knows how the brain does it, nor are philosophers in any way equipped to provide
the answers.
What we can say, however, is that the effect of taking the agent-in-an-environment
rather than the isolated, self-contained individual as our point of departure is to collapse
not only the venerable Durkheimian distinction between the individual and society, but
also the division – which has traditionally rested on this distinction – between the two
disciplines of anthropology and psychology. I can see no further intellectual justiﬁcation
for continuing to separate these disciplines. For we now recognise that such processes as
thinking, perceiving, remembering and learning have to be studied within the ecological
contexts of people’s interrelations with their environments. We recognise, too, that the
mind and its properties are not given in advance of the individual’s entry into the social
world, but are rather fashioned through a lifelong history of involvement in relationships
with others. And we know that it is through the activities of the embodied mind (or
enminded body) that social relationships are formed and reformed. Psychological and social
processes are thus one and the same. And the discipline that will be called into being to
study these processes, whatever we choose to call it, will be the study of how people
perceive, act, think, know, learn and remember within the settings of their mutual, practical involvement in the lived-in world.

Dwelling
This chapter is partly autobiographical, and describes my own attempts over the last few 3
years to ﬁnd a satisfactory way of understanding the relationships between people and 4
their environments. It is incomplete, in the sense that I cannot claim to have yet found, 5
or that I will ever ﬁnd, ﬁnal answers to the questions that are bothering me. Indeed, if 6
one of the main conclusions of what I have to say is that so-called ‘ends’ or ‘goals’ are 7
but landmarks on a journey, then this must apply as much to my own thinking and 8
writing as to everything else that people do in the world. The most fundamental thing 9
about life is that it does not begin here or end there, but is always going on. And for the 20
same reason, as we saw in Chapter One (p. 20), environments are never complete but are 1
continually under construction. My purpose here is to consider the implications of this 2
point with regard to our ideas about the similarities and contrasts between human beings 3
and other animals in the ways in which they go about creating environments for them- 4
selves. I am concerned, in particular, with the meaning of architecture, or of that part of 5
the environment which is conventionally described as ‘built’.
In recent years, my own ideas have undergone something of a sea change, which is 7
where the autobiographical element comes in. I began with a view that was – and indeed 8
still is – fairly conventional in anthropology, one that sets out from the premise that 9
human beings inhabit discursive worlds of culturally constructed signiﬁcance, laid out 30
upon the substrate of a continuous and undifferentiated physical terrain. If I differed from 1
my colleagues, at least in social anthropology, it was in my concern to spell out the impli- 2
cations of this premise for the distinction between human beings and non-human animals. 3
I felt sure that the models developed by ecologists and evolutionary biologists to account 4
for the relations between organisms and their environments must apply as well to the 5
human as to any other species, yet it was also clear to me that these models left no space 6
for what seemed to be the most outstanding characteristic of human activity – that it is 7
intentionally motivated. Human intentions, I argued, are constituted in the intersubjec- 8
tive domain, of relationships among persons, as distinct from the domain in which human 9
beings, as biological organisms, relate to other components of the natural environment. 40
Human life, I therefore proposed, is conducted simultaneously in two domains – a social 1
domain of interpersonal relations and an ecological domain of inter-organismic relations 2
– so that the problem is to understand the interplay between them (Ingold 1986a: 9). 3
Starting out from two quite reasonable propositions – that human beings are organ- 4
isms, and that human action is intentionally motivated – I thus ended up with what 5
appeared to be a thoroughly unreasonable result: that unlike all other animals, humans 6
live a split-level existence, half in nature, half out; half organism, half person; half body, 7
half mind. I had come out as an unreconstructed Cartesian dualist, which is perhaps not 118

Chapter Ten

Building, dwelling, living:

How animals and people make themselves
at home in the world

Building, dwelling, living • 173 •

so surprising when you remember that the intellectual division of labour between the
natural sciences and the humanities – and within anthropology between its biological and
sociocultural divisions – rests on a Cartesian foundation. Something, I felt, must be wrong
somewhere, if the only way to understand our own creative involvement in the world is
by taking ourselves out of it. Eventually, it dawned on me that although the problem was
an anthropological one, it would require more than an anthropological solution: what is
needed is a completely new way of thinking about organisms and about their relations
with their environments; in short, a new ecology. And it is towards this new ecology that
I have been groping.
In this task, I have gained inspiration from three principal sources. The ﬁrst comes
from biology, and consists in the work of the handful of courageous scholars – principally developmental biologists – who have been prepared to challenge the hegemony of
neo-Darwinian thinking in the discipline (e.g. Ho and Saunders 1984, see also Oyama
1985). The second lies in what is known as ‘ecological psychology’, an approach to understanding perception and action that is radically opposed to the cognitivist orientation of
the psychological mainstream (Gibson 1979, Michaels and Carello 1981). And the third
comes from philosophical writing of a broadly phenomenological bent, above all the works
of Martin Heidegger (1971) and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962).1 Although developed
independently, in the different disciplinary contexts of biology, psychology and philosophy, these three approaches have much in common. Though I cannot now explore the
commonalities in detail, I want to highlight just two of them that are rather central to
what I shall have to say. First, all three approaches reverse the normal order of priority
– normal, that is, in the history of Western thought – of form over process. Life, in this
perspective, is not the revelation of pre-existent form but the very process wherein form
is generated and held in place. Secondly, the three approaches adopt as their common
point of departure the agent-in-its-environment, or what phenomenology calls ‘being in
the world’, as opposed to the self-contained individual confronting a world ‘out there’.
In short, they maintain that it is through being inhabited, rather than through its assimilation to a formal design speciﬁcation, that the world becomes a meaningful environment
for people.
In what follows, I refer to this position as the ‘dwelling perspective’, by contrast to the
more conventional position from which I began, and which I shall call the ‘building
perspective’. Thus the movement in my own thinking has been from the building perspective to the dwelling perspective. To document this movement, I shall start by spelling out
the ﬁrst of these perspectives, and its implications for the way we understand the construction of the built environment, in greater depth. I shall then explain what is entailed in
adopting a dwelling perspective in its place. Finally, I shall consider how this shift from
a building perspective to a dwelling perspective bears upon the concept and meaning of
architecture.

CONSTRUCTING ENVIRONMENTS AND MAKING WORLDS
Our initial problem may be framed by juxtaposing two statements, the ﬁrst of which will
be familiar to anthropological readers, the second much less so. ‘Man’, Clifford Geertz
has declared, ‘is an animal suspended in webs of signiﬁcance he himself has spun’ (1973:
5). One is led to suppose that non-human animals are not so suspended. Spiders spin
webs, and do indeed suspend themselves in them, but their webs are tangible objects –
they catch ﬂies, not thoughts. But now consider this passage from the delightful but little

Dwelling

known text of Jakob von Uexküll, A Stroll 1
through the Worlds of Animals and Men: 2
‘As the spider spins its threads, every 3
subject spins his relations to certain char- 4
acters of the things around him, and 5
weaves them into a ﬁrm web which 6
carries his existence’ (1957: 14). Now the 7
subjects of which von Uexküll speaks are 8
not merely human, nor even close to 9
human. Indeed he begins his stroll with 10
a particular species of parasitic tick! If, as 1
it would seem, what Geertz says of 2
humankind applies equally to ticks, then 3
what – if anything – does distinguish 4
human from non-human environments? 5
Though it might be said, with Nelson 6
Goodman (1978), that human beings are 7
makers of worlds, this only begs the ques- 8
tion of how human acts of world-making 9
differ from the processes whereby non- 20
human animals fashion their environ- 1
ments. It was this question that initially 2
led me to focus on the meaning of the 3
built environment: not, that is, on what 4
a built environment means, but on 5
what it means to say that an environment 6
is built. How can we distinguish an 7
Figure 10.1 Human and animal architecture. (A) Ground plan environment that is built from one that 8
of beaver lodge (from Morgan 1868: 142); (B) Floor plan and is not? It is all very well to deﬁne the 9
cross-section of Eskimo house, Mackenzie region (from Mauss built environment, as do Denise Law- 30
and Beuchat 1979: 4).
rence and Setha Low in a recent review, 1
to include ‘any physical alteration of 2
the natural environment, from hearths 3
to cities, through construction by humans’ (1990: 454). But why should the 4
products of human building activity be any different, in principle, from the constructions 5
of other animals? Or to phrase the same question in another way, by what right do we 6
conventionally identify the artiﬁcial with the ‘man-made’? And where, in an environ- 7
ment that bears the imprint of human activity, can we draw the line between what is, 8
and is not, a house, or a building, or an instance of architecture (Pearson and Richards 9
1994: 2)?
My ﬁrst efforts to deal with these questions all hinged on a crucial distinction, which 1
I thought quite unproblematic at the time, between design and execution. The argument 2
ran roughly as follows: imagine a mollusc shell, a beaver’s lodge and a human house. All 3
have been regarded, at one time or another, as instances of architecture. Some authors 4
would restrict architecture to the house, others would include the lodge – as an example 5
of ‘animal architecture’ (von Frisch 1975) – but exclude the shell, others would include 6
all three forms. The usual argument for excluding the shell is that it is attached to the 7
body of the mollusc, whereas for something to count as an artefact it must be detached 118

Building, dwelling, living • 175 •

from the body. The shell, it is said, ‘just grows’ – there is nothing the mollusc can or
need do about it. The beaver, by contrast, works hard to put its lodge together: the lodge
is a product of the beaver’s ‘beavering’, of its activity. Likewise the house is a product of
the activities of its human builders. In their respective forms, and levels of complexity,
they need not be that different (Figure 10.1). Should we, then, conclude that the lodge
is beaver-made just as much as the house is man-made?
To this question I answered in the negative (Ingold 1986b: 345–6; 1988b: 90).
Wherever they are, beavers construct the same kinds of lodges and, so far as we know,
have always done so. Human beings, by contrast, build houses of very diverse kinds, and
although certain house forms have persisted for long periods, there is unequivocal evidence
that these forms have also undergone signiﬁcant historical change. The difference between
the lodge and the house lies, I argued, not in the construction of the thing itself, but in
the origination of the design that governs the construction process. The design of the lodge
is incorporated into the same programme that underwrites the development of the beaver’s
own body: thus the beaver is no more the designer of the lodge than is the mollusc the
designer of its shell. It is merely the executor of a design that has evolved, along with the
morphology and behaviour of the beaver, through a process of variation under natural
selection. In other words, both the beaver – in its outward, phenotypic form – and the
lodge are ‘expressions’ of the same underlying genotype. Richard Dawkins (1982) has
coined the term ‘extended phenotype’ to refer to genetic effects that are situated beyond
the body of the organism, and in this sense, the lodge is part of the extended phenotype
for the beaver.
Human beings, on the other hand, are the authors of their own designs, constructed
through a self-conscious decision process – an intentional selection of ideas. As Joseph
Rykwert has put it: ‘unlike even the most elaborate animal construction, human building
involves decision and choice, always and inevitably; it therefore involves a project’ (1991:
56). It is to this project, I maintained, that we refer when we say that the house is made,
rather than merely constructed. I even went so far as to extend the argument to the
domain of toolmaking, criticising students of animal behaviour for their assumption that
wherever objects are manifestly being modiﬁed or constructed for future use, tools are
being made. They are only being made, I claimed, when they are constructed in the imagination prior to their realisation in the material (Ingold 1986a: 40–78). But if the essence
of making lies in the self-conscious authorship of design, that is in the construction of a
project, it follows that things can be made without undergoing any actual physical alteration at all. Suppose that you need to knock in a nail but lack a hammer. Looking around
the objects in your environment, you deliberately select something best suited to your
purpose: it must be hard, have a ﬂat striking surface, ﬁt in the hand, and so on. So you
pick up an appropriate stone. In this very selection, the stone has ‘become’ a hammer in
that, in your mind’s eye, a ‘hammer-quality’ has been attached to it. Without altering the
stone in any way, you have made a hammer out of it.2 In just the same manner, a cave
may come to serve as a dwelling, a stretch of bare ﬂat land as an airstrip, or a sheltered
bay as a harbour.
To deal with situations of this kind, I chose the term co-option. Thus the stone was
co-opted, rather than constructed, to become a hammer. It follows that there are two
kinds of making: co-optive and constructive. In co-optive making an already existing object
is ﬁtted to a conceptual image of an intended future use, in the mind of a user. In
constructive making this procedure is reversed, in that the object is physically remodelled
to conform more closely to the pre-existing image. Indeed it seemed that the history of

Dwelling
things – of artefacts, architecture and landscapes – could be understood in terms of succes- 1
sive, alternating steps of co-option and construction. We press into service what we ﬁnd 2
around us to suit our current purposes, we proceed to modify those things to our own 3
design so that they better serve these purposes, but at the same time our objectives – or 4
adaptive requirements – also change so that the modiﬁed objects are subsequently 5
co-opted to quite other projects for which they are perceived to come in handy, and so 6
on and on. Exactly the same model has been applied to account for the evolution of 7
organisms – Darwin himself used it in his book on orchids (1862: 348).3 To adopt terms 8
suggested by Stephen J. Gould and Elisabeth Vrba (1982), structures adapted for one 9
purpose may be exapted for another, subsequently undergoing further adaptation, only to 10
be exapted for yet another purpose . . . The difference is just that in the case of organic 1
evolution, the selection involved is natural rather than intentional (Ingold 1986b: 200–2). 2
It was in searching around for ways to express these ideas that I came across the writ- 3
ings of Jakob von Uexküll, Estonian-born aristocrat and a founding ﬁgure in the ﬁelds 4
of both ethology and semiotics, to whose Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men, 5
ﬁrst published in 1934, I have already referred. Reacting against the mechanistic biology 6
of the day, von Uexküll argued that to treat the animal as a mere assemblage of sensory 7
and motor organs is to leave out the subject who uses these organs as tools, respectively, 8
of perception and action:
We who still hold that our sense organs serve our perceptions, and our motor organs 1
our actions, see in animals . . . not only the mechanical structure, but also the oper- 2
ator, who is built into their organs, as we are into our bodies. We can no longer regard 3
animals as mere machines, but as subjects whose essential activity consists in perceiving 4
and acting . . . All that a subject perceives becomes his perceptual world and all that he 5
does, his effector world. Perceptual and effector worlds together form a closed unit, the 6
Umwelt.
(1957: 6) 8
For von Uexküll, the Umwelt – that is, the world as constituted within the speciﬁc life 30
activity of an animal – was to be clearly distinguished from the environment, by which 1
he meant the surroundings of the animal as these appear to the indifferent human observer. 2
We human beings cannot enter directly into the Umwelten of other creatures, but through 3
close study we may be able to imagine what they are like. But the reverse does not hold: 4
the non-human animal, because it cannot detach its consciousness from its own life- 5
activity, because it is always submerged within its own Umwelt, cannot see objects as such, 6
for what they are in themselves. Thus for the animal, the environment – conceived as a 7
domain of ‘neutral objects’ – cannot exist (Ingold 1992a: 43).
Towards the end of his stroll, von Uexküll invites his readers to imagine the manifold 9
inhabitants of an oak tree. There is the fox, who has built its lair between the roots; the 40
owl, who perches in the crotch of its mighty limbs; the squirrel, for whom it provides a 1
veritable maze of ladders and springboards; the ant, who forages in the furrows and crags 2
of its bark; the wood-boring beetle who feeds and lays its eggs in passages beneath the 3
bark, and hundreds of others (Figures 10.2 and 10.3). Each creature, through the sheer 4
fact of its presence, confers on the tree – or on some portion of it – a particular quality 5
or ‘functional tone’: shelter and protection for the fox, support for the owl, a thorough- 6
fare for the squirrel, hunting grounds for the ant, egg-laying facilities for the beetle. The 7
same tree, thus, ﬁgures quite differently within the respective Umwelten of its diverse 118

Building, dwelling, living • 177 •

inhabitants. But for none of them does it
exist as a tree (von Uexküll 1957: 76–9).
Now consider the forester, who is measuring
up the tree to estimate the volume of timber
it will yield. For him, the tree ﬁgures as a
potential source of valuable raw material,
whereas for the little child – again to follow
von Uexküll’s example (pp. 73–5) – it seems
to be alive and to reveal a frightening aspect.
But these different perceptions are not tied,
as they are for non-human animals, to the
modus operandi of the organism. Human
beings do not construct the world in a
certain way by virtue of what they are, but
by virtue of their own conceptions of the
possibilities of being. And these possibilities
are limited only by the power of the imagination.
Herein, it seemed to me, lay the essential distinction I was seeking between the
respective ways in which the subjective
existence of human and non-human animals
is suspended in ‘webs of signiﬁcance’. For
the non-human, every thread in the web is
a relation between it and some object or
feature of the environment, a relation that
is set up through its own practical immersion in the world and the bodily Figure 10.2 Fox, owl and oak tree
orientations that this entails. For the From Jakob von Uexküll ‘A Stroll through the Worlds of
human, by contrast, the web – and the rela- Animals and Men,’ in Instinctive Behavior, 1957, pp. 76–7,
tions of which it consists – are inscribed in illustrations by G. Kriszat.
a separate plane of mental representations,
forming a tapestry of meaning that covers
over the world of environmental objects. Whereas the non-human animal perceives these
objects as immediately available for use, to human beings they appear initially as occurrent phenomena to which potential uses must be afﬁxed, prior to any attempt at
engagement. The fox discovers shelter in the roots of a tree, but the forester sees timber
only in his mind’s eye, and has ﬁrst to ﬁt that image in thought to his perception of the
occurrent object – the tree – before taking action. Or to take another example, suggested
recently by Maurice Bloch, the ‘swidden plot’ exists as an image in the mind of the horticulturalist, who has to match that image to an observed stand of uncut forest prior to
transforming it into a ﬁeld (Bloch 1991: 187). As mental representations, the timber and
the swidden plot belong to the ‘intentional worlds’ (cf. Shweder 1990: 2) of the forester
and the farmer; as occurrent phenomena, the oak tree and the stand of forest belong to
the physical environment of ‘neutral objects’. It has been conventional, in anthropological and other writings of Western academic provenance, to refer to these worlds, of
human values and purposes on the one hand, and of physical objects on the other, by
means of the shorthand terms, culture and nature, respectively. And in a paper written

Dwelling
Figure 10.3 Ant, bark-boring beetle and oak tree
From Jakob von Uexküll ‘A Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men,’ in Instinctive Behavior, 20
1957, pp. 78–9, illustrations by G. Kriszat.
in 1987, I concluded that ‘making is equivalent to the cultural ordering of nature – the 4
inscription of ideal design upon the material world of things’ (Ingold 1989: 506). This 5
statement, I confess, is now a source of considerable embarrassment.
THE BUILDING PERSPECTIVE
In my defence, I can only say that I was singing a tune that has been sung by most 30
anthropologists, in one form or another, for decades, in the context of an encounter with 1
students of animal behaviour whose theories had no place for agency or intentionality at 2
all, except as an epiphenomenal effect of innate predisposition.4 This tune is what I earlier 3
called the ‘building perspective’, and I should now like to elaborate on this perspective 4
with reference to anthropological work other than my own. For a founding statement, we 5
could turn once again to Geertz, and to his assertion that culture – or at least that kind 6
of culture taken to be the hallmark of humanity – consists in ‘the imposition of an arbi- 7
trary framework of symbolic meaning upon reality’ (1964: 39). Reality, that which is 8
imposed upon, is envisioned here as an external world of nature, a source of raw mate- 9
rials and sensations for diverse projects of cultural construction. Following from this, a 40
distinction is commonly made between the real environment that is given independently 1
of the senses, and the perceived environment as it is reconstructed in the mind through 2
the ordering of sense data in terms of acquired, cognitive schemata. Other conventional 3
oppositions that encode the same distinction, and that we have already encountered (see 4
Chapter Three, p. 41, and Chapter Nine, p. 168), are between ‘etic’ and ‘emic’, and 5
between ‘operational’ and ‘cognised’. The starting point in all such accounts is an imagined 6
separation between the perceiver and the world, such that the perceiver has to reconstruct 7
the world, in the mind, prior to any meaningful engagement with it.

Building, dwelling, living • 179 •

Figure 10.4 The Mbuti Pygmy camp of Apa Lelo
From C. M. Turnbull, Wayward servants, published by Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1965, p. 357.

Here, then, is the essence of the building perspective: that worlds are made before they
are lived in; or in other words, that acts of dwelling are preceded by acts of worldmaking.
A good example of this approach comes from the introduction to Maurice Godelier’s
book, The mental and the material (1986). Here, Godelier is concerned with the proper
translation of the Marxian concepts Grundlage and Überbau, usually rendered in English
as ‘infrastructure’ and ‘superstructure’. He likens the Überbau to a building: ‘The Überbau
is a construction, an ediﬁce which rises on foundations, Grundlage; and it [the Überbau]
is the house we live in, not the foundations’ (pp. 6–7). Human beings, then, inhabit the
various houses of culture, pre-erected upon the universal ground of nature – including
the universals of human nature. For another example, I would like to turn to Peter Wilson’s
The domestication of the human species (1988). In this book, Wilson argues that the most
signiﬁcant turning point in human social evolution came at the moment when people
began to live in houses. Roughly speaking, this marks a division between hunters and
gatherers, on the one hand, and agriculturalists and urban dwellers, on the other. ‘Huntergatherers’, Wilson writes, ‘create for themselves only the ﬂimsiest architectural context,
and only the faintest line divides their living space from nature’. All other societies, by
contrast, ‘live in an architecturally modiﬁed environment’, inhabiting houses and villages
of a relatively enduring kind, structures that – even when abandoned – leave an almost
indelible impression in the landscape. In essence, Wilson is distinguishing between societies with architecture and societies without it.
This is a bold generalisation, and like all such, it is an easy target for empirical refutation.
That is not my concern, however. I am rather concerned to expose the assumptions entailed
in making the distinction between an ‘architecturally modiﬁed environment’ and what is

Dwelling

simply called ‘nature’. For it is on this 1
distinction that Wilson’s entire argument 2
rests. One objection to it immediately 3
comes to mind. To be sure, the physical 4
arrangement and formal properties of a 5
hunter-gatherer encampment may be very 6
different from those of a permanent village 7
settlement. By way of example, compare the 8
plan, shown in Figure 10.4, of the Mbuti 9
Pygmy camp of Apa Lelo, in the Ituri forest 10
of Zaire, with the plans shown in Figure 1
10.5 of the ancient Mesopotamian village 2
site of Tell es-Sawwan. In the ﬁrst case the 3
spatial structure of settlement is loose, 4
informal, and sensitive to the changing state 5
of interpersonal relations between cliques, 6
hosts and visitors. In the second it is tightly 7
packed, geometrically regular, and appears 8
to impose fairly tight constraints on the dis- 9
position of people and activities. Moreover, 20
compared with the substantial buildings of 1
the village settlement, the constructions of 2
the hunter-gatherers are scarcely more that 3
shades and windbreaks. Most of life, for 4
hunter-gatherers, goes on around dwellings 5
rather than in them. Nevertheless, the fact 6
remains that hunter-gatherers do build shel- 7
ters of various kinds. So who are we to say 8
that they have no architecture? And if they 9
Figure 10.5 Building plans of three periods from the ancient do not, how are we to comprehend their 30
Mesopotamian site of Tell es-Sawwan.
building activity?
From J. Mellaart, The Neolithic of the Near East, published by
The answer that emerges from Wilson’s 2
Thames and Hudson, London 1975.
account is that among hunter-gatherers, 3
erecting shelters is one of a suite of activi- 4
ties, along with food-collecting, cooking, toolmaking and repair, childminding, and so on, 5
that constitute the daily round for these people. Thus building activity is part and parcel 6
of life in an environment that is already given in nature, and that has not itself been arti- 7
ﬁcially engineered. With village architecture, by contrast, nature has to a degree been 8
covered over or transformed, so that what immediately confronts people is not a natural 9
environment but – in Wilson’s words – ‘an environment of their own making, the cultural’ 40
(1988: 8). If hunter-gatherers build as part of their adaptation to the given conditions of 1
the natural environment, villagers adapt to the conditions of an environment that is already 2
built. Either way, the environment is given in advance, as a kind of container for life to 3
occupy. Where, as among hunter-gatherers, building is a part of everyday life, it is not 4
supposed to have any lasting impact on the environment; where, as among villagers, the 5
environment has been manifestly built, the buildings are apparently made before life begins 6
in them. This, of course, is the architect’s perspective: ﬁrst plan and build the houses, 7
then import the people to occupy them.

Building, dwelling, living • 181 •

What, then, of the dwellings of nomadic pastoralists? A recent study comparing pastoral
tent dwellings and village houses in Turkey and Iran by the archaeologist, Roger Cribb
(1991), found that despite differences in the building materials used and the ﬂexibility
they afford, the tent and the house were virtually identical in their underlying organisational templates. What really distinguished the house from the tent was the degree to
which the imposed, cultural design – shared by villagers and nomads alike – is actually
translated into enduring, material structures. For such structures do not get built overnight;
they grow cumulatively in the course of a settlement’s continuous occupation, such that
‘each new alteration or addition builds on a series of existing structures’. But in the case
of a pastoral nomadic camp, ‘each occupation is a fresh event’, so that the camp ‘has no
such history but remains permanently retarded in the initial stages of the normal developmental cycle [of the settlement]’ (1991: 156). Thus, although pastoralists carry a basic
organisational template with them, there is little opportunity for its enduring physical realisation before the camp picks up and moves off somewhere else, where the occupation
process starts all over again. In such cases, building never proceeds beyond the ﬁrst phase
of temporary habitation (Ingold 1992c: 795–6).
In a statement that epitomises the building perspective, Amos Rapoport writes that ‘the
organisation of space cognitively precedes its material expression; settings and built environments are thought before they are built’ (1994: 488). In the case of villagers, the
environment is ready-built. In the case of nomadic pastoralists, it would seem, the environment, though thought, is never more than partially built. As for the hunter-gatherers,
it appears that the building hardly gets started at all: indeed Rapoport refers to the
camp sites of Aboriginal people of the Australian Central Desert as exemplars of the situation where the environment is thought but never built. On these grounds, as we saw in
Chapter Three (pp. 56–7), they are supposed to inhabit a ‘natural’ rather than an ‘artiﬁcial’
environment.

THE SEARCH FOR ORIGINS
Having spelled out the essence of the building perspective, let me now return to my earlier
observation, comparing the forms of the beaver’s lodge and the human house, that the
ﬁrst is tied, as it were, to the nature of the beaver itself, whereas the second is both historically and regionally variable. Among non-human animals, it is widely supposed, there
can be no signiﬁcant change in built form that is not bound to evolutionary changes in
the essential form of the species. With human beings, by contrast, built form is free to
vary independently of biological constraint, and to follow developmental pathways of its
own, effectively decoupled from the process of evolution. In his famous paper of 1917,
on ‘The Superorganic’, Alfred Kroeber declared: ‘Who would be so rash as to afﬁrm that
ten thousand generations of example would convert the beaver from what he is into a
carpenter or a bricklayer – or, allowing for his physical deﬁciency in the lack of hands,
into a planning engineer!’ (1952: 31). Yet human beings, through practice, example and
a good measure of ingenuity, coupled with their ability to transmit their acquired knowhow across the generations and to preserve it in long-term memory, have learned all these
trades, and many more besides.
However, this argument implies some kind of threshold in the evolution of our own
kind, at which point our ancestors were sufﬁciently endowed with the qualities of intelligence and manual dexterity to become the authors of their own projects of building.
Taking off from this point, the history of architecture must be supposed to have proceeded

Dwelling
from the earliest dwellings to the modern construction industry, the species-speciﬁc nature 1
of the human organism remaining all the while unchanged. But what was the earliest 2
dwelling? According to Kenneth Bock, an event in the history of architecture – such as 3
the construction of a Gothic vault – differs from an event in the evolution of species ‘in 4
that the former involves formation of intent or purpose on the part of an actor while the 5
latter does not’ (1980: 182). The same idea is implied by Joseph Rykwert when he suggests 6
that the essence of architecture lies in ‘taking thought about building’ (1991: 54). But 7
how did it come about that, at some decisive moment, our ancestors began to think about 8
what they built?
As Rykwert shows, in his study of the notion of the ‘primitive hut’ in the history of 10
architecture, this is a question that has long exercised the minds of Western thinkers. And 1
the title of his book, On Adam’s House in Paradise (1972), nicely conveys the mythic 2
quality of the many speculative answers that have been proposed. Reproduced in Figure 3
10.6 is one of the more delightful images of ‘the ﬁrst hut’, taken from the work of the 4
great French architectural theorist, Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, Histoire de l’habitation humaine, 5
published in 1875 (Viollet-le-Duc 1990: 26). Architecture began, for Viollet-le-Duc, when 6
the problem of the need for shelter was met through the procedures of rational planning. 7
In his tale of the building of the ﬁrst hut the secret is revealed to a hapless primitive tribe, 8
the Nairitti, by a progressive time-traveller by the name of Epergos, bestowed upon them 9
as a gift of his superior intelligence. For Viollet-le-Duc, as for many others, Rykwert notes, 20
it was ‘the difference of conception, the attachment of meaning to his task, that distin- 1
guishes man’s ﬁrst attempts [at building] from those of the instinctually driven beasts’ 2
(1972: 22). These attempts may have been decidedly inferior to the constructions of 3
animals, nevertheless they marked the turning point at which humanity was set upon the 4
road to culture and civilisation.
The search for the ﬁrst building continues to this day, though it is informed by a much 6
better knowledge both of the archaeological traces left by early human or hominid popu- 7
lations, and of the behaviour of those species of animals – namely the great apes – most 8
closely related to humankind. One of the most peculiar and distinctive aspects of the 9
behaviour of chimpanzees, gorillas and orang-utans is their habit of building so-called 30
‘nests’. In functional terms, they are not really nests at all: every individual animal builds 1
its own nest afresh, each evening, and uses it for the sole purpose of sleeping. Nor does 2
the nest site mark any kind of ﬁxed point in the animal’s movements; it may be built 3
anywhere, and is abandoned the next morning (Groves and Sabater Pi 1985: 23). 4
Nevertheless, assuming that the common ancestor of apes and humans would have had 5
a similar habit, attempts have been made to trace an evolutionary continuum from this 6
nesting behaviour to the residential arrangements of prototypical human groups (of which 7
the camps of contemporary hunter-gatherers have frequently been taken as the closest 8
exemplars, on the grounds of the presumed similarity of ecological context).
Comparing the nesting patterns of apes with the camping patterns of human hunter- 40
gatherers, Colin Groves and J. Sabater Pi note some striking differences. The human ‘nest’, 1
if we may call it that, is a ﬁxed point for the movements of its several occupants, and a 2
place to which they regularly return. In other words, it has the attributes of what the 3
ethologist, Heini Hediger, would call ‘home’: it is a ‘goal of ﬂight’ and a ‘place of maximal 4
security’ (Hediger 1977: 181). There is a difference, too, in the respective ways in which 5
apes and humans go about building their accommodation. For one thing, apes use material 6
that comes immediately to hand, normally by a skilful interweaving of growing vegeta- 7
tion to form an oval-shaped, concave bed; whereas humans collect suitable materials from 118

Building, dwelling, living • 183 •

Figure 10.6 The ﬁrst hut, as depicted by Viollet-le-Duc.
From The architectural theory of Viollet-le-Duc: readings and commentary, edited by M. F. Hearn, published
by MIT Press, 1990, p. 26.

a distance, prior to their assembly into a convex, self-supporting structure. For another
thing, the ape makes its nest by bending the vegetation around its own body; whereas
the human builds a hut, and then enters it (Groves and Sabater Pi 1985: 45). There is
a sense, as Hediger remarks, in which apes build from the ‘bottom up’, seeking support
for rest and sleeping, whereas humans build from the ‘top down’ seeking shelter from
sun, rain or wind (1977: 184). Yet there are also remarkable similarities between ape and
human living arrangements, in the overall number and layout of nests or huts and in the
underlying social organisation, and on the grounds of these similarities, Groves and Sabater
Pi feel justiﬁed in arguing that human campsites are but elaborations of a generalised ape
pattern. All the critical differences – the functioning of the site as a home-base, the collection of material prior to construction, the technique of building from the outside – can
be put down, they think, to one factor, namely the human ability ‘to visualise objects in
new conﬁgurations, and to bring these conﬁgurations into being on the basis of that
mental picture’ (1985: 45).

Dwelling
Figure 10.7 The ‘stone circle’ from Bed I of Olduvai Gorge.
From M. D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge (volume three), published by Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Though in substance based on fact rather than fantasy, the form in which this argu- 1
ment is cast is virtually identical to that of Viollet-le-Duc’s tale of the building of the 2
ﬁrst hut. Equipped, albeit by natural selection rather than providential intervention, with 3
foresight and intelligence, the ﬁrst builders set to work to execute a plan that was already 4
formed as a picture in their imagination. They had solved the problem of shelter in their 5
minds, prior to putting the solution into practical effect. It is in this light that we can 6
understand the extraordinary signiﬁcance that has been attached to the so-called ‘stone 7
circle’ discovered at the famous site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, and dated to some 8
1.75 million years ago (Figure 10.7). In her interpretation of the circle, Mary Leakey 9
writes that in its general appearance, it ‘resembles temporary structures often made by 40
present-day nomadic peoples who build a low stone wall round their dwellings to serve 1
either as a windbreak or as a base to support upright branches which are bent over and 2
covered with either skins or grass’ (1971: 24). A photograph of such a dwelling, from the 3
Okombambi people of Southwest Africa, is provided to substantiate the comparison. As 4
always in these matters, the speciﬁc interpretation has been challenged. What has not been 5
challenged, however, is the frame of mind that leads us to suppose that if the interpre- 6
tation were correct, we would have at last discovered the real ‘ﬁrst hut’, and with it not 7
just the origins of architecture, but the point of transition to true humanity.

Building, dwelling, living • 185 •

For it is the structure of our thought, not the patterning of the archaeological record, that
sets up a point of origin at the intersection of two axes, one of evolutionary change – leading
from ancestral pongids and hominids to human beings, the other of historical change – leading from Palaeolithic hunting and gathering to modern industry. (Why this should be so is a
matter to which I return in Chapter Twenty-one, pp. 388–90.) To explode the myth of the
ﬁrst hut thus requires nothing less than the dissolution of the dichotomy, which in modern
scholarship separates the biological sciences from the humanities, between evolution and
history, or between the temporal processes of nature and culture. Before indicating how this
might be done, I need to introduce what I have called the ‘dwelling perspective’.

THE DWELLING PERSPECTIVE
For this purpose I turn to Martin Heidegger’s evocative essay, ‘Building Dwelling
Thinking’, on which I have drawn for my title (Heidegger 1971: 145–61). In this essay,
Heidegger asks what it means to build and to dwell, and what the relation is between
these two – between building and dwelling. He begins with what might be taken as the
hegemonic view, as enshrined in the discourse of Western modernity. This is that building
and dwelling are separable but complementary activities, related as means to ends. We
build houses so that we may dwell in them (or, as is usual in industrial society, some
people build houses for other people to live in). To dwell, in this sense, means merely
‘to occupy a house, a dwelling place’. The building is a container for life activities, or
more strictly for certain life activities, since there are other kinds of activity that go on
outside houses, or in the open air. Yet, Heidegger asks, ‘do the houses in themselves hold
any guarantee that dwelling occurs in them?’ (1971: 146). To clarify matters, let us call
the physical structure, the building in itself, the house; and the setting within which people
dwell the home (Lawrence 1987). Heidegger’s question can then be rephrased as follows:
what does it take for a house to be a home (Pearson and Richards 1994: 6)? Merely to
pose the question in this form suggests that there must be more to dwelling than the
mere fact of occupation. What, then, does it mean, ‘to dwell’?
Heidegger tackles the issue through an exercise in etymology. The current German word
for the verb ‘to build’, bauen, comes from the Old English and High German buan,
meaning ‘to dwell’. Though this original meaning has been lost, it is preserved in such
compounds as the English ‘neighbour’, meaning one who dwells nearby. Moreover, this
sense of dwelling was not limited to one sphere of activity among many – to domestic
life, say, as opposed to work or travel. Rather it encompassed the whole manner in which
one lives one’s life on the earth; thus ‘I dwell, you dwell’ is identical to ‘I am, you are’.
Yet bauen has another sense: to preserve, to care for, or more speciﬁcally to cultivate or
to till the soil. And then there is the third sense: to construct, to make something, to
raise up an ediﬁce. Both these modern senses of building – as cultivation and as construction – are thus shown to be encompassed within the more fundamental sense of dwelling.
In the course of time, however, this underlying sense has fallen into disuse, such that
bauen has come to be reserved exclusively for cultivation and construction. Having
forgotten how the latter activities are grounded in dwelling, modern thought then rediscovers dwelling as the occupation of a world already built.
In short, where before, building was circumscribed within dwelling, the position now
appears reversed, with dwelling circumscribed within building. Heidegger’s concern is to
regain that original perspective, so that we can once again understand how the activities of
building – of cultivation and construction – belong to our dwelling in the world, to the

Dwelling
way we are. ‘We do not dwell because we have built, but we build and have built because 1
we dwell, that is because we are dwellers . . . To build is in itself already to dwell . . . Only 2
if we are capable of dwelling, only then can we build ’ (Heidegger 1971: 148, 146, 160, orig- 3
inal emphases). I take this to be the founding statement of the dwelling perspective.5 What 4
it means is that the forms people build, whether in the imagination or on the ground, arise 5
within the current of their involved activity, in the speciﬁc relational contexts of their 6
practical engagement with their surroundings. Building, then, cannot be understood as a 7
simple process of transcription, of a pre-existing design of the ﬁnal product onto a raw 8
material substrate. It is true that human beings – perhaps uniquely among animals – have 9
the capacity to envision forms in advance of their implementation, but this envisioning is 10
itself an activity carried on by real people in a real-world environment, rather than by a 1
disembodied intellect moving in a subjective space in which are represented the problems 2
it seeks to solve (see Chapter Twenty-three, pp. 418–19). In short, people do not import 3
their ideas, plans or mental representations into the world, since that very world, to borrow 4
a phrase from Merleau-Ponty (1962: 24), is the homeland of their thoughts. Only because 5
they already dwell therein can they think the thoughts they do.
To argue that the forms of buildings arise as a kind of crystallisation of human activity 7
within an environment clearly puts paid to my initial dichotomy between design and 8
execution. No longer can we assume, with Christopher Alexander, that form is ‘the ultim- 9
ate object of design’ (1964: 15), as though the one issued quite automatically and 20
unproblematically from the other. To the contrary, a dwelling perspective ascribes the 1
generation of form to those very processes whose creativity is denied by that perspective 2
which sees in every form the concrete realisation of an intellectual solution to a design 3
problem. Where, then, does this leave the constructions of non-human animals? The argu- 4
ment is equally damaging to the conventional biological account, which holds that the 5
outward, phenotypic form – not just of the animal itself, but of the constructions making 6
up its ‘extended phenotype’ – is the expression of a solution to some speciﬁc problem of 7
adaptation, already reached by natural selection, and transferred to the animal at the point 8
of conception, encrypted in the materials of heredity – the genes. That design is thus 9
imported into the organism, as a kind of ‘evolved architecture’ (Tooby and Cosmides 30
1992), prior to the organism’s development within an environmental context, is indeed 1
one of the great delusions of modern biology. For as I shall show in Chapter Twenty- 2
one, the forms of organisms are in no way preﬁgured in their genes but are the emergent 3
outcomes of environmentally situated development processes.
For any animal, the environmental conditions of development are liable to be shaped 5
by the activities of predecessors. The beaver, for example, inhabits an environment that 6
has been decisively modiﬁed by the labours of its forbears, in building dams and lodges, 7
and will in turn contribute to the fashioning of an environment for its progeny. It is in 8
such a modiﬁed environment that the beaver’s own bodily orientations and patterns of 9
activity undergo development. The same goes for human beings. Human children, like 40
the young of many other species, grow up in environments furnished by the work of 1
previous generations, and as they do so they come literally to carry the forms of their 2
dwelling in their bodies – in speciﬁc skills, sensibilities and dispositions. But they do not 3
carry them in their genes, nor is it necessary to invoke some other kind of vehicle for the 4
inter-generational transmission of information – cultural rather than genetic – to account 5
for the diversity of human living arrangements.
We can now see how, by adopting a dwelling perspective – that is, by taking the 7
animal-in-its-environment rather than the self-contained individual as our point of 118

Building, dwelling, living • 187 •

departure – it is possible to dissolve the orthodox dichotomies between evolution and
history, and between biology and culture. For if, by evolution, we mean differentiation
over time in the forms and capacities of organisms, then we would have to admit
that changes in the bodily orientations and skills of human beings, insofar as they are
historically conditioned by the work of predecessors (along with the enduring products
of that work, such as buildings), must themselves be evolutionary. And if, by cultural
variation, we mean those differences of embodied knowledge that stem from the diversity
of local developmental contexts, then far from being superimposed upon a substrate
of evolved human universals, such variation must be part and parcel of the variation of
all living things, which has its source in their enmeshment within an all-encompassing
ﬁeld of relations. It is not necessary, then, to invoke one kind of theory, of biological
evolution, to account for the transition from nest to hut, and another kind, of cultural
history, to account for the transition from hut to skyscraper. For once history is itself
recognised as an evolutionary process, the point of origin constituted by the intersection
of evolutionary and historical continua disappears, and the search for the ﬁrst hut –
for the beginnings of architecture, history and true humanity – becomes a quest after an
illusion.6

THE HOUSE AS ORGANISM
Let me conclude by returning to von Uexküll’s oak tree. Suppose that it stands, not in
the forest, but in the precincts of a house. Now at ﬁrst glance we might have no hesitation in regarding the house, but not the tree, as a building, or an instance of architecture.
For surely the house, as Godelier puts it, belongs to ‘that part of nature which is transformed by human action and thought [and] owes its existence to conscious human action
on nature’ (1986: 5, see also Chapter Five p. 79). The tree, on the other hand, has no
such debt to humanity, for it has grown there, rooted to the spot, entirely of its own
accord. On closer inspection, however, this distinction between those parts of the environment that are, respectively, built and unbuilt seems far less clear. For the form of the tree
is no more given, as an immutable fact of nature, than is the form of the house an imposition of the human mind. Recall the many inhabitants of the tree: the fox, the owl, the
squirrel, the ant, the beetle, among countless others. All, through their various activities
of dwelling, have played their part in creating the conditions under which the tree, over
the centuries, has grown to assume its particular form and proportions. And so, too, have
human beings, in tending the tree’s surroundings.
But the house also has many and diverse animal inhabitants – more, perhaps, than we
are inclined to recognise. Sometimes special provision is made for them, such as the kennel,
stable or dovecote. Others ﬁnd shelter and sustenance in its nooks and crannies, or even
build there. And all, in their various ways, contribute to its evolving form, as do the
house’s human inhabitants in keeping it under repair, decorating it, or making structural
alterations in response to their changing domestic circumstances. Thus the distinction
between the house and the tree is not an absolute but a relative one – relative, that is,
to the scope of human involvement in the form-generating process.7 Houses, as Suzanne
Blier notes (1987: 2), are living organisms. Like trees, they have life-histories, which consist
in the unfolding of their relations with both human and non-human components of their
environments. To the extent that the inﬂuence of the human component prevails, any
feature of the environment will seem more like a building; to the extent that the nonhuman component prevails, it will seem less so.

Dwelling
Building, then, is a process that is continually going on, for as long as people dwell in 1
an environment. It does not begin here, with a pre-formed plan, and end there, with a 2
ﬁnished artefact. The ‘ﬁnal form’ is but a ﬂeeting moment in the life of any feature, when 3
it is matched to a human purpose, likewise cut out from the ﬂow of intentional activity. 4
As the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once remarked, ‘from the moment of birth 5
we are immersed in action, and can only ﬁtfully guide it by taking thought’ (1938: 217). 6
And this applies, with equal force, to ‘taking thought about building’, the deﬁnitive char- 7
acteristic of the architectural attitude. We may indeed describe the forms in our 8
environment as instances of architecture, but for the most part we are not architects. For 9
it is in the very process of dwelling that we build.

Culture, nature, environment • 189 •

Chapter Eleven

The temporality of the landscape

PROLOGUE
I adhere to the view that social or cultural anthropology, biological anthropology and
archaeology form a necessary unity – that they are all part of the same intellectual enterprise. I am not concerned here with the link with biological or ‘physical’ anthropology,
but what I have to say does bear centrally on the unifying themes of archaeology and
sociocultural anthropology. I want to stress two such themes, and they are closely related.
First, human life is a process that involves the passage of time. Secondly, this life-process
is also the process of formation of the landscapes in which people have lived. Time and
landscape, then, are to my mind the essential points of topical contact between archaeology and anthropology. My purpose, in this chapter, is to bring the perspectives of
archaeology and anthropology into unison through a focus on the temporality of the
landscape. In particular, I believe that such a focus might enable us to move beyond the
sterile opposition between the naturalistic view of the landscape as a neutral, external backdrop to human activities, and the culturalistic view that every landscape is a particular
cognitive or symbolic ordering of space. I argue that we should adopt, in place of both
these views, what I have called a ‘dwelling perspective’, according to which the landscape
is constituted as an enduring record of – and testimony to – the lives and works of
past generations who have dwelt within it, and in so doing, have left there something of
themselves.
For anthropologists, to adopt a perspective of this kind means bringing to bear the
knowledge born of immediate experience, by privileging the understandings that people
derive from their lived, everyday involvement in the world. Yet it will surely be objected
that this avenue is not open to archaeologists concerned with human activities in the
distant past. ‘The people’, it is said, ‘they’re dead’ (Sahlins 1972: 81); only the material
record remains for their successors of our own time to interpret as best they can. But this
objection misses the point, which is that the practice of archaeology is itself a form of dwelling.
The knowledge born of this practice is thus on a par with that which comes from the
practical activity of the native dweller and which the anthropologist, through participation, seeks to learn and understand. For both the archaeologist and the native dweller,
the landscape tells – or rather is – a story, ‘a chronicle of life and dwelling’ (Adam 1998:
54). It enfolds the lives and times of predecessors who, over the generations, have moved
around in it and played their part in its formation. To perceive the landscape is therefore to carry out an act of remembrance, and remembering is not so much a matter
of calling up an internal image, stored in the mind, as of engaging perceptually with an
environment that is itself pregnant with the past. To be sure, the rules and methods of

Dwelling
engagement employed respectively by the native dweller and the archaeologist differ, as 1
do the stories they tell. Nevertheless, insofar as both seek the past in the landscape, they 2
are engaged in projects of fundamentally the same kind.1
It is of course part of an archaeological training to learn to attend to those clues which 4
the rest of us might pass over (literally, when they are below the surface), and which make 5
it possible to tell a fuller or a richer story. Likewise native dwellers, along with their 6
anthropological companions, learn through an education of attention. The novice hunter, 7
for example, travels through the country with his mentors, and as he goes, speciﬁc features 8
are pointed out to him. Other things he discovers for himself, in the course of further 9
forays, by watching, listening and feeling. Thus the experienced hunter is the knowledge- 10
able hunter (see Chapter Three, pp. 55–6). He can tell things from subtle indications that 1
you or I, unskilled in the hunter’s art, might not even notice. Called upon to explicate 2
his knowledge, he may do so in a form that reappears in the work of the non-native 3
ethnographer as a corpus of myths or stories, whereas the archaeologist’s knowledge – 4
drawn from the practices of excavation rather than hunting – may appear in the seem- 5
ingly authoritative form of the site report. But we should resist the temptation to assume 6
that since stories are stories they are, in some sense, unreal or untrue, for this is to suppose 7
that the only real reality, or true truth, is one in which we, as living, experiencing beings, 8
can have no part at all. Telling a story, as I observed in Chapter Three (p. 56), is not 9
like unfurling a tapestry to cover up the world, it is rather a way of guiding the attention 20
of listeners or readers into it. A person who can ‘tell’ is one who is perceptually attuned 1
to picking up information in the environment that others, less skilled in the tasks of 2
perception, might miss, and the teller, in rendering his knowledge explicit, conducts the 3
attention of his audience along the same paths as his own.
Following that preamble, I shall now go on to lay out the burden of my argument. 5
This is presented in four principal sections. In the ﬁrst two, I attempt to specify more 6
precisely what I mean by my key terms – landscape and temporality. I argue that tempo- 7
rality inheres in the pattern of dwelling activities that I call the taskscape. In the third 8
section I consider how taskscape relates to landscape and, ultimately by dissolving the 9
distinction between them, I proceed to recover the temporality of the landscape itself. 30
Finally, I draw some concrete illustrations of my arguments from a well-known painting 1
by Bruegel, The harvesters.
LANDSCAPE
Let me be begin by explaining what the landscape is not. It is not ‘land’, it is not ‘nature’, 6
and it is not ‘space’. Consider, ﬁrst of all, the distinction between land and landscape. Land 7
is not something you can see, any more than you can see the weight of physical objects. 8
All objects of the most diverse kinds have weight, and it is possible to express how much 9
anything weighs relative to any other thing. Likewise, land is a kind of lowest common 40
denominator of the phenomenal world, inherent in every portion of the earth’s surface yet 1
directly visible in none, and in terms of which any portion may be rendered quantitatively 2
equivalent to any other (Ingold 1986a: 153–4).2 You can ask of land, as of weight, how 3
much there is, but not what it is like. But where land is thus quantitative and homogeneous, 4
the landscape is qualitative and heterogeneous. Supposing that you are standing outdoors, 5
it is what you see all around: a contoured and textured surface replete with diverse objects 6
– living and non-living, natural and artiﬁcial (these distinctions are both problematic, as we 7
shall see, but they will serve for the time being). Thus at any particular moment, you can 118

The temporality of the landscape • 191 •

ask of a landscape what it is like, but not how much of it there is. For the landscape is a
plenum, there are no holes in it that remain to be ﬁlled in, so that every inﬁll is in reality
a reworking. As Meinig observes, one should not overlook ‘the powerful fact that life must
be lived amidst that which was made before’ (1979a: 44).
The landscape is not ‘nature’. Of course, nature can mean many things, and this is not
the place for a discourse on the history of the concept. Sufﬁce it to say that I have in
mind the rather speciﬁc sense whose ontological foundation is an imagined separation
between the human perceiver and the world, such that the perceiver has to reconstruct
the world, in consciousness, prior to any meaningful engagement with it. The world of
nature, it is often said, is what lies ‘out there’. All kinds of entities are supposed to exist
out there, but not you and I. We live ‘in here’, in the intersubjective space marked out
by our mental representations. Application of this logic forces an insistent dualism, between
object and subject, the material and the ideal, operational and cognised, ‘etic’ and ‘emic’.
Some writers distinguish between nature and the landscape in just these terms – the former
is said to stand to the latter as physical reality to its cultural or symbolic construction.
For example, Daniels and Cosgrove introduce a collection of essays on The iconography
of landscape with the following deﬁnition: ‘A landscape is a cultural image, a pictorial way
of representing or symbolising surroundings’ (1988: 1).
I do not share this view. To the contrary, I reject the division between inner and outer
worlds – respectively of mind and matter, meaning and substance – upon which such
distinction rests. The landscape, I hold, is not a picture in the imagination, surveyed by
the mind’s eye; nor however is it an alien and formless substrate awaiting the imposition
of human order. ‘The idea of landscape’, as Meinig writes, ‘runs counter to recognition
of any simple binary relationship between man and nature’ (Meinig 1979b: 2). Thus,
neither is the landscape identical to nature, nor is it on the side of humanity against
nature. As the familiar domain of our dwelling, it is with us, not against us, but it is no
less real for that. And through living in it, the landscape becomes a part of us, just as we
are a part of it. Moreover, what goes for its human component goes for other components as well. In a world construed as nature, every object is a self-contained entity,
interacting with others through some kind of external contact. But in a landscape, each
component enfolds within its essence the totality of its relations with each and every other.
In short, whereas the order of nature is explicate, the order of the landscape is implicate
(Bohm 1980: 172).
The landscape is not ‘space’. To appreciate the contrast, we could compare the everyday
project of dwelling in the world with the rather peculiar and specialised project of the
surveyor or cartographer whose objective is to represent it. No doubt the surveyor, as he
goes about his practical tasks, experiences the landscape much as does everyone else whose
business of life lies there. Like other people, he is mobile, yet unable to be in more than
one place at a time. In the landscape, the distance between two places, A and B, is experienced as a journey made, a bodily movement from one place to the other, and the
gradually changing vistas along the route. The surveyor’s job, however, is to take instrumental measurements from a considerable number of locations, and to combine these data
to produce a single picture which is independent of any point of observation. This picture
is of the world as it could be directly apprehended only by a consciousness capable of
being everywhere at once and nowhere in particular (the nearest we can get to this in
practice is by taking an aerial or bird’s-eye view). To such a consciousness, at once immobile and omnipresent, the distance between A and B would be the length of a line plotted
between two points that are simultaneously in view, that line marking one of any number

Dwelling
of journeys that could potentially be made (cf. Bourdieu 1977: 2). It is as though, from 1
an imaginary position above the world, I could direct the movements of my body within 2
it, like a counter on a board, so that to say ‘I am here’ is not to point from somewhere 3
to my surroundings, but to point from nowhere to the position on the board where my 4
body happens to be. And whereas actual journeys are made through a landscape, the board 5
on which all potential journeys may be plotted is equivalent to space.3
There is a tradition of geographical research (see, for example, Gould and White 1974) 7
which sets out from the premise that we are all cartographers in our daily lives, and that 8
we use our bodies as the surveyor uses his instruments, to register a sensory input from 9
multiple points of observation, which is then processed by our intelligence into an image 10
that we carry around with us, like a map in our heads, wherever we go. The mind, rather 1
than reaching into its surroundings from its dwelling place within the world, might be 2
likened in this view to a ﬁlm spread out upon its exterior surface. The sense of space 3
implicated in this cartographic view of environmental perception may be illuminated by 4
means of an analogy drawn from the linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure. To grasp the 5
essence of language, Saussure invites us to picture thought and sound as two continuous 6
and undifferentiated planes, of mental and phonic substance respectively, like two sides 7
of a sheet of paper. By cutting the sheet into pieces (words) we create, on one side, a 8
system of discrete concepts, and on the other, a system of discrete sounds; and since 9
one side cannot be cut without at the same time cutting the other, the two systems of 20
division are necessarily homologous so that to each concept there corresponds a sound 1
(Saussure 1959: 112–13).
Now when geographers and anthropologists write about space, what is generally implied 3
is something closely akin to Saussure’s sheet of paper, only in this case the counter-side 4
to thought is the continuum not of phonic substance but of the surface of the earth. And 5
so it appears that the division of the world into a mosaic of externally bounded segments 6
is entailed in the very production of spatial meanings. Just as the word, for Saussure, is 7
the union of a concept with a delimited ‘chunk’ of sound, so the place is the union of a 8
symbolic meaning with a delimited block of the earth’s surface. Spatial differentiation 9
implies spatial segmentation. This is not so of the landscape, however. For a place in the 30
landscape is not ‘cut out’ from the whole, either on the plane of ideas or on that of 1
material substance. Rather, each place embodies the whole at a particular nexus within it, 2
and in this respect is different from every other.
A place owes its character to the experiences it affords to those who spend time there 4
– to the sights, sounds and indeed smells that constitute its speciﬁc ambience. And these, 5
in turn, depend on the kinds of activities in which its inhabitants engage. It is from 6
this relational context of people’s engagement with the world, in the business of dwelling, 7
that each place draws its unique signiﬁcance. Thus whereas with space, meanings are 8
attached to the world, with the landscape they are gathered from it. Moreover, while places 9
have centres – indeed it would be more appropriate to say that they are centres – they 40
have no boundaries. In journeying from place A to place B it makes no sense to ask, 1
along the way, whether one is ‘still’ in A or has ‘crossed over’ to B (Ingold 1986a: 155). 2
Of course, boundaries of various kinds may be drawn in the landscape, and identiﬁed 3
either with natural features such as the course of a river or an escarpment, or with built 4
structures such as walls and fences. But such boundaries are not a condition for the consti- 5
tution of the places on either side of them; nor do they segment the landscape, for the 6
features with which they are identiﬁed are themselves an integral part of it. Finally, it is 7
important to note that no feature of the landscape is, of itself, a boundary. It can only 118

The temporality of the landscape • 193 •

become a boundary, or the indicator of a boundary, in relation to the activities of the
people (or animals) for whom it is recognised or experienced as such.
In the course of explaining what the landscape is not, I have already moved some way
towards a positive characterisation. In short, the landscape is the world as it is known to
those who dwell therein, who inhabit its places and journey along the paths connecting
them. Is it not, then, identical to what we might otherwise call the environment? Certainly
the distinction between landscape and environment is not easy to draw, and for many
purposes they may be treated as practically synonymous. It will already be apparent that
I cannot accept the distinction offered by Yi-Fu Tuan, who argues that an environment
is ‘a given, a piece of reality that is simply there’, as opposed to the landscape, which is
a product of human cognition, ‘an achievement of the mature mind’ (Tuan 1979: 90,
100). For that is merely to reproduce the dichotomy between nature and humanity.
The environment is no more ‘nature’ than is the landscape a symbolic construct. Elsewhere,
I have contrasted nature and environment by way of a distinction between reality of –
‘the physical world of neutral objects apparent only to the detached, indifferent observer’,
and reality for – ‘the world constituted in relation to the organism or person whose environment it is’ (Ingold 1992a: 44). But to think of environment in this sense is to regard it
primarily in terms of function, of what it affords to creatures – whether human or nonhuman – with certain capabilities and projects of action. Reciprocally, to regard these
creatures as organisms is to view them in terms of their principles of dynamic functioning,
that is as organised systems (Pittendrigh 1958: 394). As Lewontin succinctly puts it (1982:
160), the environment is ‘nature organised by an organism’.
The concept of landscape, by contrast, puts the emphasis on form, in just the same
way that the concept of the body emphasises the form rather than the function of a living
creature. If the body is the form in which a creature is present as a being-in-the-world,
then the world of its being-in presents itself in the form of the landscape. Like organism
and environment, body and landscape are complementary terms: each implies the other,
alternately as ﬁgure and ground. The forms of the landscape are not, however, prepared
in advance for creatures to occupy, any more than are the bodily forms of those creatures
independently speciﬁed in their genetic make-up. Both sets of forms are generated and
sustained in and through the processual unfolding of a total ﬁeld of relations that cuts
across the emergent interface between organism and environment (Goodwin 1988). Having
regard to its formative properties, we may refer to this process as one of embodiment.
Though the notion of embodiment has recently come much into fashion, there has
been a tendency – following an ancient inclination in Western thought to prioritise form
over process (Oyama 1985: 13) – to conceive of it as a movement of inscription, whereby
some pre-existing pattern, template or programme, whether genetic or cultural, is ‘realised’
in a substantive medium. This is not what I have in mind, however. To the contrary,
and adopting a helpful distinction from Paul Connerton (1989: 72–3), I regard embodiment as a movement of incorporation rather than inscription, not a transcribing of form
onto material but a movement wherein forms themselves are generated (Ingold 1990:
215). Taking the organism as our focus of reference, this movement is what is commonly
known as the life-cycle. Thus organisms may be said to incorporate, in their bodily
forms, the life-cycle processes that give rise to them. Could not the same, then, be said
of the environment? Is it possible to identify a corresponding cycle, or rather a series
of interlocking cycles, which builds itself into the forms of the landscape, and of which
the landscape may accordingly be regarded as an embodiment? Before answering this
question, we need to turn to the second of my key terms, namely ‘temporality’.

Dwelling
Let me begin, once again, by stating what temporality is not. It is not chronology (as 3
opposed to history), and it is not history (as opposed to chronology). By chronology, 4
I mean any regular system of dated time intervals, in which events are said to have taken 5
place. By history, I mean any series of events which may be dated in time according to 6
their occurrence in one or another chronological interval. Thus the Battle of Hastings was 7
an historical event, 1066 was a date (marking the interval of a year), and records tell us 8
that the former occurred in the latter. In the mere succession of dates there are no events, 9
because everything repeats; in the mere succession of events there is no time, as nothing 10
does. The relation between chronology and history, in this conception, has been well 1
expressed by Kubler: ‘Without change there is no history; without regularity there is no 2
time. Time and history are related as rule and variation: time is the regular setting for 3
the vagaries of history’ (1962: 72).
Now in introducing the concept of temporality, I do not intend that it should stand 5
as a third term, alongside the concepts of chronology and history. For in the sense in 6
which I shall use the term here, temporality entails a perspective that contrasts radically 7
with the one, outlined above, that sets up history and chronology in a relation of comple- 8
mentary opposition. The contrast is essentially equivalent to that drawn by Alfred Gell 9
(1992: 149–55) between what he calls (following McTaggart) the A-series, in which time 20
is immanent in the passage of events, and the B-series, in which events are strung out in 1
time like beads on a thread. Whereas in the B-series, events are treated as isolated happen- 2
ings, succeeding one another frame by frame, each event in the A-series is seen to encompass 3
a pattern of retensions from the past and protentions for the future. Thus from the 4
A-series point of view, temporality and historicity are not opposed but rather merge in 5
the experience of those who, in their activities, carry forward the process social life. Taken 6
together, these activities make up what I shall call the ‘taskscape’, and it is with the intrinsic 7
temporality of the taskscape that I shall be principally concerned in this section.
We can make a start by returning for a moment to the distinction between land and 9
landscape. As a common denominator in terms of which constituents of the environment 30
of diverse kinds may be rendered quantitatively comparable, I compared land with weight. 1
But I could equally have drawn the comparison with value or with labour. Value is the 2
denominator of commodities that enables us to say how much any one thing is worth by 3
comparison with another, even though these two things may be quite unlike in terms of 4
their physical qualities and potential uses. In this sense, the concept of value (in general) 5
is classically distinguished from that of use-value, which refers to the speciﬁc properties or 6
‘affordances’ of any particular object, that commend it to the project of a user (Ingold 7
1992a: 48–9, cf. Gibson 1979:127, Marx 1930: 169). Clearly, this distinction, between 8
value and use-value, is precisely homologous to that between land and landscape. But if 9
we turn to consider the work that goes into the making of useful things, then again we 40
can recognise that whilst the operations of making are indeed as unlike as the objects 1
produced – involving different raw materials, different tools, different procedures and 2
different skills – they can nevertheless be compared in that they call for variable amounts 3
of what may simply be called ‘labour’: the common denominator of productive activities. 4
Like land and value, labour is quantitative and homogeneous, human work shorn of its 5
particularities. It is of course the founding premise of the labour theory of value that the 6
amount of value in a thing is determined by the amount of labour that went into producing 7
it (I return to this theme in Chapter Seventeen, pp. 326–8).

TEMPORALITY

The temporality of the landscape • 195 •

How, then, should we describe the practices of work in their concrete particulars? For
this purpose I shall adopt the term ‘task’, deﬁned as any practical operation, carried out
by a skilled agent in an environment, as part of his or her normal business of life. In
other words, tasks are the constitutive acts of dwelling. No more than features of the landscape, however, are tasks suspended in a vacuum. Every task takes its meaning from its
position within an ensemble of tasks, performed in series or in parallel, and usually by
many people working together. One of the great mistakes of recent anthropology – what
Reynolds (1993: 410) calls ‘the great tool-use fallacy’ – has been to insist upon a separation between the domains of technical and social activity, a separation that has blinded
us to the fact that one of the outstanding features of human technical practices lies in
their embeddedness in the current of sociality. It is to the entire ensemble of tasks, in
their mutual interlocking, that I refer by the concept of taskscape. Just as the landscape
is an array of related features, so – by analogy – the taskscape is an array of related activities. And as with the landscape, it is qualitative and heterogeneous: we can ask of a
taskscape, as of a landscape, what it is like, but not how much of it there is. In short,
the taskscape is to labour what the landscape is to land, and indeed what an ensemble of
use-values is to value in general.
Now if value is measured out in units of money, and land in units of space, what is
the currency of labour? The answer, of course, is time – but it is time of a very peculiar
sort, one that must be wholly indifferent to the modulations of human experience. To
most of us it appears in the familiar guise of clock-time: thus an hour is an hour, regardless of what one is doing in it, or of how one feels. But this kind of chronological time
does not depend upon the existence of artiﬁcial clocks. It may be based on any perfectly
repetitive, mechanical system, including that (putatively) constituted by the earth in its
axial rotations and in its revolutions around the sun. Sorokin and Merton (1937), in a
classic paper, call it ‘astronomical’ time: it is, they write, ‘uniform, homogeneous;
. . . purely quantitative, shorn of qualitative variations’. And they distinguish it from ‘social
time’, which they see as fundamentally qualitative, something to which we can afﬁx
moral judgements such as good or bad, grounded in the ‘rhythms, pulsations and beats
of the societies in which they are found’, and for that reason tied to the particular circumstances of place and people (1937: 621–3; see also Chapter Seventeen, pp. 325–6).
Adopting Sorokin and Merton’s distinction, we could perhaps conclude that whereas
labour is measured out in units of astronomical time, or in clock-time calibrated to an
astronomical standard, the temporality of the taskscape is essentially social. Before we can
accept this conclusion, however, the idea of social time must be examined a little more
closely.
In my earlier discussion of the signiﬁcance of space, I showed that in the cartographic
imagination, the mind is supposed to be laid out upon the surface of the earth. Likewise
in the chronological perspective, time appears as the interface between mind and ‘duration’
– by which is meant an undifferentiated stream of bodily activity and experience. Taking
time in this sense, Durkheim famously likened it to ‘an endless chart, where all duration
is spread out before the mind, and upon which all possible events can be located in relation to ﬁxed and determinate guidelines’ (1976 [1915]: 10). Rather like Saussure’s sheet
of paper, it could be compared to a strip of inﬁnite length, with thought on one side and
duration on the other. By cutting the strip into segments we establish a division, on the
one hand, into calendrical intervals or dates, and on the other hand, into discrete ‘chunks’
of lived experience, such that to every chunk there corresponds a date in a uniform
sequence of before and after. And as every chunk succeeds the next, like frames on a reel

Dwelling
of ﬁlm, we imagine ourselves to be looking on ‘as time goes by’, as though we could take 1
up a point of view detached from the temporal process of our life in the world and watch 2
ourselves engaged now in this task, now in that, in an unending series of present instants. 3
Whence, then, come the divisions which give chronological form to the substance of 4
experience? Durkheim’s answer, as is well known, was that these divisions – ‘indispens- 5
able guidelines’ for the temporal ordering of events – come from society, corresponding 6
to the ‘periodical recurrence of rites, feasts, and public ceremonies’ (p. 10). Thus for 7
Durkheim, time is at once chronological and social, for society itself is a kind of clock, 8
whose moving parts are individual human beings (Ingold 1986b: 341).
This is not, however, the way we perceive the temporality of the taskscape. For we do 10
so not as spectators but as participants, in the very performance of our tasks. As Merleau- 1
Ponty put it, in reckoning with an environment, I am ‘at my task rather than confronting 2
it’ (1962: 416). The notion that we can stand aside and observe the passage of time is 3
founded upon an illusion of disembodiment. This passage is, indeed, none other than 4
our own journey through the taskscape in the business of dwelling. Once again we can 5
take our cue from Merleau-Ponty: ‘the passage of one present to the next is not a thing 6
which I conceive, nor do I see it as an onlooker, I effect it’ (1962: 421). Reaching out 7
into the taskscape I perceive, at this moment, a particular vista of past and a future; but 8
it is a vista that is available from this moment and no other (see Gell 1992: 269). As 9
such, it constitutes my present, conferring upon it a unique character. Thus the present is 20
not marked off from a past that it has replaced or a future that will, in turn, replace it; 1
it rather gathers the past and future into itself, like refractions in a crystal ball. And just 2
as in the landscape, we can move from place to place without crossing any boundary, 3
since the vista that constitutes the identity of a place changes even as we move, so like- 4
wise can we move from one present to another without having to break through any 5
chronological barrier that might be supposed to separate each present from the next in 6
line. Indeed the features that Durkheim identiﬁed as serving this segmenting function – 7
rites, feasts and ceremonies – are themselves as integral to the taskscape as are boundary 8
markers such as walls or fences to the landscape.
The temporality of the taskscape is social, then, not because society provides an external 30
frame against which particular tasks ﬁnd independent measure, but because people, in the 1
performance of their tasks, also attend to one another. Looking back, we can see that 2
Durkheim’s error was to divorce the sphere of people’s mutual involvement from that of 3
their everyday practical activity in the world, leaving the latter to be carried on by indi- 4
viduals in hermetic isolation. In real life, this is not how we go about our business. By 5
watching, listening, perhaps even touching, we continually feel each other’s presence in 6
the social environment, at every moment adjusting our movements in response to this 7
ongoing perceptual monitoring. For the orchestral musician, playing an instrument, 8
watching the conductor and listening to one’s fellow players are all inseparable aspects of 9
the same process of action: for this reason, the gestures of the performers may be said 40
to resonate with each other. In orchestral music, the achievement of resonance – or what 1
Schutz (1951: 78) called a ‘mutual tuning-in relationship’ – is an absolute precondition 2
for successful performance. But the same is true, more generally, of social life (Wikan 3
1992, Richards 1996). Indeed it could be argued that in the resonance of movement and 4
feeling stemming from people’s mutually attentive engagement, in shared contexts of prac- 5
tical activity, lies the very foundation of sociality.
Let me pursue the analogy between orchestral performance and social life a little further 7
since, more than any other artistic genre, music mirrors the temporal form of the taskscape. 118

The temporality of the landscape • 197 •

I want, by means of this analogy, to make three points. First, while there are cycles and
repetitions in music as in social life, these are essentially rhythmic rather than metronomic
(on this distinction, see Young 1988: 19). It is for precisely this reason that social time,
pace Durkheim, is not chronological. A metronome, like a clock, inscribes an artiﬁcial
division into equal segments upon an otherwise undifferentiated movement; rhythm, by
contrast, is intrinsic to the movement itself. Langer has argued that the essence of rhythm
lies in the successive building up and resolution of tension, on the principle that every
resolution is itself a preparation for the next building-up (1953: 126–7). There may of
course be rests or sustained notes within a piece, but far from breaking it up into segments,
such moments are generally ones of high tension, whose resolution becomes ever more
urgent the longer they are held. Only our last exhalation of breath is not a preparation
for the next inhalation – with that, we die; similarly with the last beat the music comes
to an end. Social life, however, is never ﬁnished, and there are no breaks in it that are
not integral to its tensile structure, to the ‘ebb and ﬂow of activity’ by which society itself
seems to breathe (Young 1988: 53).
My second point is that in music as in social life, there is not just one rhythmic cycle,
but a complex interweaving of very many concurrent cycles.4 While it reﬂects the temporal
form of social life, music in fact represents a very considerable simpliﬁcation, since it
involves only one sensory register (the auditory), and its rhythms are fewer and more
tightly controlled. In both cases, however, since any rhythm may be taken as the tempo
for any of the others, there is no single, one-dimensional strand of time. As Langer puts
it: ‘life is always a dense fabric of concurrent tensions, and as each of them is a measure
of time, the measurements themselves do not coincide’ (1953: 113). Thus the temporality
of the taskscape, while it is intrinsic rather than externally imposed (metronomic), lies not
in any particular rhythm, but in the network of interrelationships between the multiple
rhythms of which the taskscape is itself constituted. To cite a celebrated anthropological
example: among the Nuer of southern Sudan, according to Evans-Pritchard, the passage
of time is ‘primarily the succession of [pastoral] tasks and their relations to one another’
(1940: 101–2, my emphasis). Each of these relations is, of course, a speciﬁc resonance.
And so, just as social life consists in the unfolding of a ﬁeld of relationships among persons
who attend to one another in what they do, its temporality consists in the unfolding of
the resultant pattern of resonances.
Thirdly, the forms of the taskscape, like those of music, come into being through movement. Music exists only when it is being performed; it does not pre-exist, as is sometimes
thought, in the score, any more than a cake pre-exists in the recipe for making it. Similarly,
the taskscape exists only so long as people are actually engaged in the activities of dwelling,
despite the attempts of anthropologists to translate it into something rather equivalent to
a score – a kind of ideal design for dwelling – that generally goes by the name of ‘culture’,
and that people are supposed to bring with them into their encounter with the world.
This parallel, however, brings me to a critical question. Up to now, my discussion of
temporality has concentrated exclusively on the taskscape, allowing the landscape to slip
from view. It is now high time to bring it back into focus. I argued in the previous section
that the landscape is not nature; here I claim that the taskscape is not culture. Landscape
and taskscape, then, are not to be opposed as nature to culture. So how are we to understand the relation between them? Where does one end and the other begin? Can they
even be distinguished at all?
If music best reﬂects the forms of the taskscape, it might be thought that painting is
the most natural medium for representing the forms of the landscape. And this suggests

Dwelling
that an examination of the difference, in the ﬁeld of art, between music and painting 1
might offer some clues as to how a distinction might possibly be drawn between taskscape 2
and landscape as facets of the real world. I begin by following up this suggestion.
TEMPORALISING THE LANDSCAPE
At ﬁrst glance the difference seems obvious: paintings do not have to be performed, they 7
are presented to us as works that are complete in themselves. But on closer inspection, 8
this contrast appears more as an artefact of a systematic bias in Western thought, to which 9
I have already alluded, that leads us to privilege form over process. Thus the actual work 10
of painting is subordinated to the ﬁnal product; the former is hidden from view so that 1
the latter alone becomes an object of contemplation. In many non-Western societies, by 2
contrast, the order of priority is reversed: what is essential is the act of painting itself, of 3
which the products may be relatively short-lived – barely perceived before being erased 4
or covered up. This is so, for example, among the Yolngu, an Aboriginal people of northern 5
Australia, whose experience of ﬁnished paintings, according to their ethnographer, is limited 6
to ‘images ﬂeetingly glimpsed out of the corner of the eye’ (Morphy 1992: 187). The 7
emphasis, here, is on painting as performance.5 Far from being the preparation of objects 8
for future contemplation, it is an act of contemplation in itself. So, too, is performing or 9
listening to music. Thus all at once, the contrast between painting and music seems less 20
secure. It becomes a matter of degree, in the extent to which forms endure beyond the 1
immediate contexts of their production. Musical sound, of course, is subject to the prop- 2
erty of rapid fading: speeding outwards from its point of emission, and dissipating as it 3
goes, it is present only momentarily to our senses. But where, as in painting, gestures 4
leave their traces in solid substance, the resulting forms may last much longer, albeit never 5
indeﬁnitely.
Returning now from the contrast between music and painting to that between taskscape 7
and landscape, the ﬁrst point to note is that no more than a painting is the landscape 8
given ready-made. One cannot, as Inglis points out, ‘treat landscape as an object if it is 9
to be understood. It is a living process; it makes men; it is made by them’ (1977: 489). 30
Just as with music, the forms of the landscape are generated in movement: these forms, 1
however, are congealed in a solid medium – indeed, to borrow Inglis’s words again, 2
‘a landscape is the most solid appearance in which a history can declare itself ’ (ibid.). 3
Thanks to their solidity, features of the landscape remain available for inspection long 4
after the movement that gave rise to them has ceased. If, as Mead argued (1977 [1938]: 5
97), every object is to be regarded as a ‘collapsed act’, then the landscape as a whole must 6
likewise be understood as the taskscape in its embodied form: a pattern of activities ‘collapsed’ 7
into an array of features.
But to reiterate a point made earlier, the landscape takes on its forms through a process 9
of incorporation, not of inscription. That is to say, landscape formation is not a matter 40
– as James Weiner would have it (1991: 32) – of transforming ‘a sheer physical terrain 1
into a pattern of historically experienced and constituted space and time’, as though the 2
physical world pre-existed as a blank slate, a mere substrate of formless materiality, awaiting 3
the impress of cultural signiﬁcance. Human beings do not, in their movements, inscribe 4
their life histories upon the surface of nature as do writers upon the page; rather, these 5
histories are woven, along with the life-cycles of plants and animals, into the texture of 6
the surface itself (see Chapter Eighteen, pp. 347–8). Thus the forms of the landscape arise 7
alongside those of the taskscape, within the same current of activity. If we recognise a 118

The temporality of the landscape • 199 •

man’s gait in the pattern of his footprints, it is not because the gait preceded the footprints and was ‘inscribed’ in them, but because both the gait and the prints arose within
the movement of the man’s walking.
Since, moreover, the activities that comprise the taskscape are unending, the landscape
is never complete: neither ‘built’ nor ‘unbuilt’, it is perpetually under construction. This
is why the conventional dichotomy between natural and artiﬁcial (or ‘man-made’) components of the landscape is so problematic. Virtually by deﬁnition, an artefact is an object
shaped to a pre-conceived image that motivated its construction, and it is ﬁnished at the
point when it is brought into conformity with this image. What happens to it beyond
that point is supposed to belong to the phase of use rather than manufacture, to dwelling
rather than building. But the forms of the landscape are not pre-prepared for people to
live in – not by nature nor by human hands – for it is in the very process of dwelling
that these forms are constituted. We may recall here Heidegger’s remark, already cited
in the last chapter, that ‘to build is in itself already to dwell’ (1971: 146). Thus the
landscape is always in the nature of work in progress.
My conclusion that the landscape is the congealed form of the taskscape does enable
us to explain why, intuitively, the landscape seems to be what we see around us, whereas
the taskscape is what we hear. To be seen, a thing need do nothing itself, for the optic
array that speciﬁes its form to a viewer consists of light reﬂected off its outer surfaces.
To be heard, on the other hand, a thing must actively emit sounds or, through its movement, cause sound to be emitted by other objects with which it comes into contact. Thus,
outside my window I see a landscape of houses, trees, gardens, a street and pavement. I
do not hear any of these things, but I can hear people talking on the pavement, a car
passing by, birds singing in the trees, a dog barking somewhere in the distance, and the
sound of hammering as a neighbour repairs his garden shed. In short, what I hear is
activity, even when its source cannot be seen. And since the forms of the taskscape,
suspended as they are in movement, are present only as activity, the limits of the taskscape
are also the limits of the auditory world. (While I deal here only with visual and aural
perception, we should not underestimate the signiﬁcance of touch, which is important to
all of us but above all to blind people, for whom it opens up the possibility of access
to the landscape – if only through proximate bodily contact.)
This argument carries an important corollary. Whereas both the landscape and the
taskscape presuppose the presence of an agent who watches and listens, the taskscape must
be populated with beings who are themselves agents, and who reciprocally ‘act back’ in
the process of their own dwelling. In other words, the taskscape exists not just as activity
but as interactivity. Indeed this conclusion was already foreshadowed when I introduced
the concept of resonance as the rhythmic harmonisation of mutual attention. Having said
that, however, there is no reason why the domain of interactivity should be conﬁned to
the movements of human beings. We hear animals as well as people, such as the birds
and the dog in my example above. Hunters, to take another example, are alert to every
sight, sound or smell that reveals the presence of animals, and we can be sure that the
animals are likewise alert to the presence of humans, as they are also to that of one another.
On a larger scale, the hunters’ journeys through the landscape, or their oscillations between
the procurement of different animal species, resonate with the migratory movements of
terrestrial mammals, birds and ﬁsh. Perhaps then, as Reed argues, there is a fundamental
difference between our perception of animate beings and inanimate objects, since the
former – by virtue of their capacity for autonomous movement – ‘are aware of their
surroundings (including us) and because they act on those surroundings (including us)’

Dwelling
(Reed 1988a: 116). In other words, they afford the possibility not only of action but also 1
of interaction (cf. Gibson 1979: 135). Should we, then, draw the boundaries of the 2
taskscape around the limits of the animate?
Though the argument is a compelling one I ﬁnd it unsatisfactory, for two reasons in 4
particular. First, as Langer observes, ‘rhythm is the basis of life, but not limited to life’ 5
(1953: 128). The rhythms of human activities resonate not only with those of other living 6
things but also with a whole host of other rhythmic phenomena – the cycles of day and 7
night and of the seasons, the winds, the tides, and so on. Citing a petition of 1800 from 8
the seaside town of Sunderland, in which it is explained that ‘people are obliged to be 9
up at all hours of the night to attend the tides and their affairs upon the river’, Thompson 10
(1967: 59–60) notes that ‘the operative phrase is “attend the tides”: the patterning of 1
social time in the seaport follows upon the rhythms of the sea’. In many cases these natural 2
rhythmic phenomena ﬁnd their ultimate cause in the mechanics of planetary motion, 3
but it is not of course to these that we resonate. Thus we resonate to the cycles of light 4
and darkness, not to the rotation of the earth, even though the diurnal cycle is caused by 5
the earth’s axial rotation. And we resonate to the cycles of vegetative growth and decay, 6
not to the earth’s revolutions around the sun, even though the latter cause the cycle of 7
the seasons. Moreover these resonances are embodied, in the sense that they are not only 8
historically incorporated into the enduring features of the landscape but also develop- 9
mentally incorporated into our very constitution as biological organisms. Thus Young 20
describes the body as ‘an array of interlocking (or interﬂowing) cycles, with their own 1
spheres of partial independence within the solar cycle’ (1988: 41). We do not consult 2
these cycles, as we might consult a wrist-watch, in order to time our own activities, for 3
the cycles are inherent in the rhythmic structure of the activities themselves. It would 4
seem, then, that the pattern of resonances that comprises the temporality of the taskscape 5
must be expanded to embrace the totality of rhythmic phenomena, whether animate or 6
inanimate.
The second reason why I would be reluctant to restrict the taskscape to the realm of 8
living things has to do with the very notion of animacy. I do not think we can regard 9
this as a property that can be ascribed to objects in isolation, such that some (animate) 30
have it and others (inanimate) do not. For life is not a principle that is separately installed 1
inside individual organisms, and which sets them in motion upon the stage of the inan- 2
imate. To the contrary, as I have argued elsewhere, life is ‘a name for what is going on in 3
the generative ﬁeld within which organic forms are located and “held in place”’ (Ingold 4
1990: 215). That generative ﬁeld is constituted by the totality of organism–environment 5
relations, and the activities of organisms are moments of its unfolding. Indeed once we 6
think of the world in this way, as a total movement of becoming which builds itself into 7
the forms we see, and in which each form takes shape in continuous relation to those 8
around it, then the distinction between the animate and the inanimate seems to dissolve. 9
The world itself takes on the character of an organism, and the movements of animals – 40
including those of us human beings – are parts or aspects of its life-process (Lovelock 1
1979). This means that in dwelling in the world, we do not act upon it, or do things 2
to it; rather we move along with it. Our actions do not transform the world, they are part 3
and parcel of the world’s transforming itself. And that is just another way of saying that 4
they belong to time.
For in the ﬁnal analysis, everything is suspended in movement. David Reason expresses 6
the point in an eloquent passage that could stand as a summary of all I have argued 7
so far:

The temporality of the landscape • 201 •

Landscapes change; and change is itself an intrinsic aspect of our experience of landscape. The landscape is a polyrhythmic composition of processes whose pulse varies
from the erratic ﬂutter of leaves to the measured drift and clash of tectonic plates.
Relative to the human span, the view before us seems composed of ﬂeeting, ephemeral
effects which create a patina of transience on apparently stable forms.
(1987: 40)
As this passage reveals, what appear to us as the ﬁxed forms of the landscape, passive and
unchanging unless acted upon from outside, are themselves in motion, albeit on a scale
immeasurably slower and more majestic than that on which our own activities are
conducted. Imagine a ﬁlm of the landscape, shot over years, centuries, even millennia.
Slightly speeded up, plants appear to engage in very animal-like movements, trees ﬂex
their limbs without any prompting from the winds. Speeded up rather more, glaciers ﬂow
like rivers and even the earth begins to move. At yet greater speeds solid rock bends,
buckles and ﬂows like molten metal. The world itself begins to breathe. Thus the rhythmic
pattern of human activities nests within the wider pattern of activity for all animal life,
which in turn nests within the pattern of activity for all so-called living things, which
nests within the life-process of the world.
At each of these levels, as Mae-Wan Ho shows, coherence is founded upon resonance
(Ho 1989: 18–20). Reminding us of Whitehead’s maxim, that there is ‘no holding nature
still and looking at it’, Ho argues that the world is not anything we can look at but a
process that we are part of. Ultimately, then, by re-placing the tasks of human dwelling
in their proper context within the process of becoming of the world as a whole, we can
do away with the dichotomy between taskscape and landscape – only, however, by recognising the fundamental temporality of the landscape itself.6

THE HARVESTERS
In order to provide some illustration of the ideas developed in the preceding sections, I
reproduce here a painting which, more than any other I know, vividly captures a sense
of the temporality of the landscape. This is The harvesters, painted by Pieter Bruegel the
Elder in 1565 (Figure 11.1). I am not an art historian or critic, and my purpose is not
to analyse the painting in terms of style, composition or aesthetic effect. Nor am I
concerned with the historical context of its production. Sufﬁce it to say that the picture
is believed to be one of a series of twelve, each depicting a month of the year, out of
which only ﬁve have survived (Gibson 1977: 147). Each panel portrays a landscape, in
the colours and apparel appropriate to the month, and shows people engaged in the tasks
of the agricultural cycle that are usual at that time of year. The harvesters depicts the
month of August, and shows ﬁeld hands at work, reaping and sheaﬁng a luxuriant crop
of wheat, whilst others pause for a midday meal and some well-earned rest. The sense of
rustic harmony conveyed in this scene may, perhaps, represent something of an idealisation on Bruegel’s part. As Walter Gibson points out, Bruegel was inclined to ‘depict
peasants very much as a wealthy landowner would have viewed them, as the anonymous
tenders of his ﬁelds and ﬂocks’ (1977: 157–8). Any landowner would have had cause for
satisfaction in such a ﬁne crop, whereas the hands who sweated to bring it in may have
had a rather different experience. Nevertheless, Bruegel painted during a period of great
material prosperity in the Netherlands, in which all shared to some degree. These were
fortunate times.

Dwelling

Figure 11.1 The harvesters (1565) by Pieter Bruegel the Elder.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Rogers Fund, 1919 (19.164).
We are accustomed, by the conventions of modern society, to describe our experience 2
of landscape as though we were viewing a picture. What I am about to suggest, however, 3
is precisely the reverse. Rather than treating the world as its own painting I should like 4
you, the reader, to regard this painting by Bruegel as though it were its own world, into 5
which you have been magically transported. Imagine yourself, then, set down in the very 6
landscape depicted, on a sultry August day in 1565. Standing a little way off to the right 7
of the group beneath the tree, you are a witness to the scene unfolding about you. And 8
of course you hear it too, for the scene does not unfold in silence. So used are we to 9
thinking of the landscape as a picture that we can look at, like a plate in a book or an 40
image on a screen, that it is perhaps necessary to remind you that exchanging the painting 1
for ‘real life’ is not simply a matter of increasing the scale. What is involved is a funda- 2
mental difference of orientation. In the landscape of our dwelling, we look around (Gibson 3
1979: 203).7 In what follows I shall focus on six components of what you see around 4
you, and comment on each insofar as they illustrate aspects of what I have had to say 5
about landscape and temporality. They are: the hills and valley, the paths and tracks, the 6
tree, the corn, the church, and the people.

The temporality of the landscape • 203 •

The hills and valley
The terrain is a gently undulating one of low hills and valleys, grading off to a shoreline
that can just be made out through the summer haze. You are standing near the summit
of a hill, from where you can look out across the intervening valley to the next. How,
then, do you differentiate between the hills and the valley as components of this landscape? Are they alternating blocks or strips into which it may be divided up? Any attempt
at such division plunges us immediately into absurdity. For where can we draw the boundaries of a hill except along the valley bottoms that separate it from the hills on either side?
And where can we draw the boundaries of a valley except along the summits of the hills
that mark its watershed? One way, we would have a landscape consisting only of hills,
the other way it would consist only of valleys. Of course, ‘hill’ and ‘valley’ are opposed
terms, but the opposition is not spatial or altitudinal but kinaesthetic. It is the movements of falling away from, and rising up towards, that specify the form of the hill; and
the movements of falling away towards, and rising up from, that specify the form of the
valley. Through the exercises of descending and climbing, and their different muscular
entailments, the contours of the landscape are not so much measured as felt – they are
directly incorporated into our bodily experience. But even if you remain rooted to one
spot, the same principle applies. As you look across the valley to the hill on the horizon,
your eyes do not remain ﬁxed: swivelling in their sockets, or as you tilt your head, their
motions accord with the movement of your attention as it follows its course through the
landscape. You cast your eyes ﬁrst downwards into the valley, and then upwards towards
the distant hill. Indeed in this vernacular phrase, to ‘cast one’s eyes’, common sense has
once again grasped intuitively what the psychology of vision, with its metaphors of retinal
imagery, has found so hard to accept: that movement is the very essence of perception.
It is because, in scanning the terrain from nearby into the distance, your downward glance
is followed by an upward one, that you perceive the valley.
Moreover someone standing where you are now would perceive the same topographic
panorama, regardless of the time of year, the weather conditions and the activities in which
people may be engaged. We may reasonably suppose that over the centuries, perhaps even
millennia, this basic topography has changed but little. Set against the duration of human
memory and experience, it may therefore be taken to establish a baseline of permanence.
Yet permanence, as Gibson has stressed, is always relative; thus ‘it is better to speak of
persistence under change’ (Gibson 1979: 13). Although the topography is invariant relative to the human life-cycle, it is not itself immune to change. Sea-levels rise and fall with
global climatic cycles, and the present contours of the country are the cumulative outcome
of a slow and long drawn out process of erosion and deposition. This process, moreover,
was not conﬁned to earlier geological epochs during which the landscape assumed its
present topographic form. For it is still going on, and will continue so long as the stream,
just visible in the valley bottom, ﬂows on towards the sea. The stream does not ﬂow
between pre-cut banks, but cuts its banks even as it ﬂows. Likewise, as we have seen,
people shape the landscape even as they dwell. And human activities, as well as the action
of rivers and the sea, contribute signiﬁcantly to the process of erosion. As you watch, the
stream ﬂows, folk are at work, a landscape is being formed, and time passes.

The paths and tracks
I remarked above that we experience the contours of the landscape by moving through
it, so that it enters – as Bachelard would say – into our ‘muscular consciousness’. Reliving

Dwelling
the experience in our imagination, we are inclined to recall the road we took as ‘climbing’ 1
the hill, or as ‘descending’ into the valley, as though ‘the road itself had muscles, or rather, 2
counter-muscles’ (Bachelard 1964: 11). And this, too, is probably how you recall the paths 3
and tracks that are visible to you now: after all, you must have travelled along at least 4
some of them to reach the spot where you are currently standing. Nearest at hand, a path 5
has been cut through the wheat-ﬁeld, allowing sheaves to be carried down, and water and 6
provisions to be carried up. Further off, a cart-track runs along the valley bottom, and 7
another winds up the hill behind. In the distance, paths criss-cross the village green. Taken 8
together, these paths and tracks ‘impose a habitual pattern on the movement of people’ 9
(Jackson 1989: 146). And yet they also arise out of that movement, for every path or 10
track shows up as the accumulated imprint of countless journeys that people have made 1
– with or without their vehicles or domestic animals – as they have gone about their 2
everyday business. Thus the same movement is embodied, on the side of the people, in 3
their ‘muscular consciousness’, and on the side of the landscape, in its network of paths 4
and tracks. In this network is sedimented the activity of an entire community, over many 5
generations. It is the taskscape made visible.
In their journeys along paths and tracks, however, people also move from place to place. 7
To reach a place, you need cross no boundary, but you must follow some kind of path. 8
Thus there can be no places without paths, along which people arrive and depart; and 9
no paths without places, that constitute their destinations and points of departure. And 20
for the harvesters, the place to which they arrive, and whence they will leave at the end 1
of the day, is marked by the next feature of the landscape to occupy your attention . . . 2
The tree
Rising from the spot where people are gathered for their repast is an old and gnarled 6
pear-tree, which provides them with both shade from the sun, a back-rest and a prop for 7
utensils. Being the month of August, the tree is in full leaf, and fruit is ripening on the 8
branches. But this is not just any tree. For one thing, it draws the entire landscape around 9
it into a unique focus: in other words, by its presence it constitutes a particular place. 30
The place was not there before the tree, but came into being with it. And for those who 1
are gathered there, the prospect it affords, which is to be had nowhere else, is what gives 2
it its particular character and identity. For another thing, no other tree has quite the same 3
conﬁguration of branches, diverging, bending and twisting in exactly the same way. In its 4
present form, the tree embodies the entire history of its development from the moment 5
it ﬁrst took root. And that history consists in the unfolding of its relations with mani- 6
fold components of its environment, including the people who have nurtured it, tilled 7
the soil around it, pruned its branches, picked its fruit, and – as at present – use it as 8
something to lean against. The people, in other words, are as much bound up in the life 9
of the tree as is the tree in the lives of the people.8 Moreover, unlike the hills and the 40
valley, the tree has manifestly grown within living memory. Thus its temporality is more 1
consonant with that of human dwelling. Yet in its branching structure, the tree combines 2
an entire hierarchy of temporal rhythms, ranging from the long cycle of its own germi- 3
nation, growth and eventual decay to the short, annual cycle of ﬂowering, fruiting and 4
foliation. At one extreme, represented by the solid trunk, it presides immobile over the 5
passage of human generations; at the other, represented by the frondescent shoots, it 6
resonates with the life-cycles of insects, the seasonal migrations of birds, and the regular 7
round of human agricultural activities (Davies 1988). In a sense, then, the tree bridges 118

The temporality of the landscape • 205 •

the gap between the apparently ﬁxed and invariant forms of the landscape and the mobile
and transient forms of animal life, visible proof that all of these forms, from the most
permanent to the most ephemeral, are dynamically linked under transformation within
the movement of becoming of the world as a whole.

The corn
Turning from the pear-tree to the wheat-ﬁeld, it is no longer a place in the landscape but
the surrounding surface that occupies your attention. And perhaps what is most striking
about this surface is its uniformity of colour, a golden sheen that cloaks the more elevated
parts of the country for as far as the eye can see. As you know, wheat takes on this colour
at the particular time of year when it is ripe for harvesting. More than any other feature
of the landscape, the golden corn gathers the lives of its inhabitants, wherever they may
be, into temporal unison, founded upon a communion of visual experience. Thus whereas
the tree binds past, present and future in a single place, the corn binds every place in the
landscape within a single horizon of the present. The tree, we could say, establishes a
vivid sense of duration, the corn an equally vivid sense of what Fabian (1983: 31) calls
coevalness. It is this distinction that Bachelard has in mind when he contrasts the ‘beforeme, before-us’ of the forest with the ‘with-me, with-us’ of ﬁelds and meadows, wherein
‘my dreams and recollections accompany all the different phases of tilling and harvesting’
(Bachelard 1964: 188). You may suppose that the sleeper beneath the tree is dreaming of
corn, but if so, you may be sure that the people and the activities that ﬁgure in his dream
are coeval with those of the present and do not take him back into an encounter with
the past.9
Where the corn has been freshly cut, it presents a sheer vertical front, not far short of
a man’s height. But this is not a boundary feature, like a hedge or fence. It is an interface, whose outline is progressively transformed as the harvesters proceed with their work.
Here is a ﬁne example of the way in which form emerges through movement. Another
example can be seen further off, where a man is engaged in the task of binding the
wheat into a sheaf. Each completed sheaf has a regular form, which arises out of the
coordinated movement of binding. But the completion of a sheaf is only one moment
in the labour process. The sheaves will later be carried down the path through the ﬁeld,
to the haycart in the valley. Indeed at this very moment, one woman is stooped almost
double in the act of picking up a sheaf, and two others can be seen on their way down,
sheaves on their shoulders. Many more operations will follow before the wheat is eventually transformed into bread. In the scene before you, one of the harvesters under the
tree, seated on a sheaf, is cutting a loaf. Here the cycle of production and consumption
ends where it began, with the producers. For production is tantamount to dwelling: it
does not begin here (with a pre-conceived image) and end there (with a ﬁnished artefact),
but is continuously going on.

The church
Not far off, nestled in a grove of trees near the top of the hill, is a stone church. It is
instructive to ask: how does the church differ from the tree? They have more in common,
perhaps, than meets the eye. Both possess the attributes of what Bakhtin (1981: 84) calls
a ‘chronotope’ – that is, a place charged with temporality, one in which temporality takes
on palpable form. Like the tree, the church by its very presence constitutes a place, which

Dwelling
owes its character to the unique way in which it draws in the surrounding landscape. 1
Again like the tree, the church spans human generations, yet its temporality is not incon- 2
sonant with that of human dwelling. As the tree buries its roots in the ground, so also 3
people’s ancestors are buried in the graveyard beside the church, and both sets of roots 4
may reach to approximately the same temporal depth. Moreover the church, too, resonates 5
to the cycles of human life and subsistence. Among the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, 6
it is not only seen but also heard, as its bells ring out the seasons, the months, births, 7
marriages and deaths. In short, as features of the landscape, both the church and the tree 8
appear as veritable monuments to the passage of time.
Yet despite these similarities, the difference may seem obvious. The church, after all, is 10
a building. The tree, by contrast, is not built, it grows. We may agree to reserve the term 1
‘building’ for any durable structure in the landscape whose form arises and is sustained 2
within the current of human activity. It would be wrong to conclude, however, that the 3
distinction between buildings and non-buildings is an absolute one. Where an absolute 4
distinction is made, it is generally founded on the assumption that built form, rather than 5
having its source within nature, is superimposed by the mind upon it. That assumption, 6
however, presupposes the separation of mind and nature. But from the perspective of 7
dwelling there is no such separation. It is evident, from this latter perspective, that the 8
forms of buildings, as much as of any other features of the landscape, are neither given 9
in the world nor placed upon it, but emerge within the self-transforming processes of the 20
world itself. With respect to any feature, the scope of human involvement in these processes 1
will vary from negligible to considerable, though it is never total (even the most engi- 2
neered of environments is home to other species). Thus to recall our conclusion from the 3
last chapter, what is or is not a building is a relative matter; moreover as human involve- 4
ment may vary in the life history of a feature, it may be more or less of a building in 5
different periods.
Returning to the tree and the church, it is clearly too simple to suppose that the form 7
of the tree is naturally given in its genetic make-up, whereas the form of the church pre- 8
exists, in the minds of the builders, as a plan which is then realised in stone. In the case 9
of the tree, we have already observed that its growth consists in the unfolding of a total 30
system of relations constituted by the fact of its presence in an environment, from the 1
point of germination onwards, and that people, as components of the tree’s environment, 2
play a not insigniﬁcant role in this process. Likewise the ‘biography’ of the church consists 3
in the unfolding of relations with its human builders, as well as with other components 4
of its environment, from the moment when the ﬁrst stone was laid. The ﬁnal form of 5
the church may indeed have been preﬁgured in the human imagination, but it no more 6
issued from the image than did the form of the tree issue from its genes. In both cases, 7
the form is the embodiment of a developmental or historical process, and is rooted in the 8
context of human dwelling in the world.
In the case of the church, moreover, that process did not stop when its form came to 40
match the conceptual model. For as long as the building remains standing in the land- 1
scape, it will continue – as it does now – to ﬁgure within the environment not just of 2
human beings but of a myriad of other living kinds, plant and animal, which will incor- 3
porate it into their own life-activities and modify it in the process. And it is subject, too, 4
to the same forces of weathering and decomposition, both organic and meteorological, 5
that affect everything else in the landscape. The preservation of the church in its existing, 6
‘ﬁnished’ form in the face of these forces, however substantial it may be in its materials 7
and construction, requires a regular input of effort in maintenance and repair. Once this 118

The temporality of the landscape • 207 •

human input lapses, leaving it at the mercy of other forms of life and of the weather, it
will soon cease to be a building and become a ruin.

The people
So far I have described the scene only as you behold it with your eyes. Yet you do not
only look, you listen as well, for the air is full of sounds of one kind and another. Though
the folk beneath the tree are too busy eating to talk, you hear the clatter of wooden spoons
on bowls, the slurp of the drinker, and the loud snores of the member of the party who
is outstretched in sleep. Further off, you hear the swish of scythes against the cornstalks
and the calls of the birds as they swoop low over the ﬁeld in search of prey. Far off in
the distance, wafted on the light wind, can be heard the sounds of people conversing and
playing on a green, behind which, on the other side of the stream, lies a cluster of cottages.
What you hear is a taskscape.
In the performance of their particular tasks, people are responsive not only to the cycle
of maturation of the crop, which draws them together in the overall project of harvesting,
but also to each other’s activities as these are apportioned by the division of labour. Even
within the same task, individuals do not carry on in mutual isolation. Technically, it takes
only one man to wield a scythe, but the reapers nevertheless work in unison, achieving a
dance-like harmony in their rhythmic movements. Similarly the two women carrying
sheaves down into the valley adjust their pace, each in relation to the other, so that the
distance between them remains more or less invariant. Perhaps there is less co-ordination
between the respective movements of the eaters, however they eye each other intently as
they set about their repast, and the meal is a joint activity on which all have embarked
together, and which they will ﬁnish together. Only the sleeper, oblivious to the world, is
out of joint – his snores jar the senses precisely because they are not in any kind of
rhythmic relation to what is going on around. Without wakeful attention, there can be
no resonance.
But in attending to one another, do the people inhabit a world of their own, an exclusively human world of meanings and intentions, of beliefs and values, detached from the
one in which their bodies are put to work in their several activities? Do they, from within
such a domain of intersubjectivity, look at the world outside through the window of their
senses? Surely not. For the hills and valley, the tree, the corn and the birds are as palpably
present to them (as indeed to you too) as are the people to each other (and to you). The
reapers, as they wield their scythes, are with the corn, just as the eaters are with their
fellows. The landscape, in short, is not a totality that you or anyone else can look at, it
is rather the world in which we stand in taking up a point of view on our surroundings.
And it is within the context of this attentive involvement in the landscape that the human
imagination gets to work in fashioning ideas about it. For the landscape, to recall the
words of Merleau-Ponty (1962: 24), is not so much the object as ‘the homeland of our
thoughts’.

EPILOGUE
Concluding an essay on the ways in which the Western Apache of Arizona discover
meaning, value and moral guidance in the landscape around them, Keith Basso abhors
the tendency in ecological anthropology to relegate such matters to an ‘epiphenomenal’
level, which is seen to have little or no bearing on the dynamics of adaptation of human

Dwelling
populations to the conditions of their environments. An ecology that is fully cultural, 1
Basso argues, is one that would attend as much to the semiotic as to the material dimen- 2
sions of people’s relations with their surroundings, by bringing into focus ‘the layers of 3
signiﬁcance with which human beings blanket the environment’ (Basso 1984: 49). In 4
rather similar vein, Denis Cosgrove regrets the tendency in human geography to regard 5
the landscape in narrowly utilitarian and functional terms, as ‘an impersonal expression 6
of demographic and economic forces’, and thus to ignore the multiple layers of symbolic 7
meaning or cultural representation that are deposited upon it. The task of decoding the 8
‘many-layered meanings of symbolic landscapes’, Cosgrove argues, will require a geography 9
that is not just human but properly humanistic (Cosgrove 1989: 120–7).
Though I have some sympathy with the views expressed by these writers, I believe that 1
the metaphors of cultural construction they adopt have an effect quite opposite to that 2
intended. For the very idea that meaning covers over the world, layer upon layer, carries 3
the implication that the way to uncover the most basic level of human beings’ practical 4
involvement with their environments is by stripping these layers away. In other words, 5
such blanketing metaphors actually serve to create and perpetuate an intellectual space in 6
which human ecology or human geography can ﬂourish, untroubled by any concerns about 7
what the world means to the people who live in it. We can surely learn from the Western 8
Apache, who insist that the stories they tell, far from putting meanings upon the land- 9
scape, are intended to allow listeners to place themselves in relation to speciﬁc features of 20
the landscape, in such a way that their meanings may be revealed or disclosed. Stories 1
help to open up the world, not to cloak it.
And such opening up, too, must be the objective of archaeology. Like the Western 3
Apache – and for that matter any other group of people who are truly ‘at home’ in the 4
world – archaeologists study the meaning of the landscape not by interpreting the many 5
layers of its representation (adding further layers in the process) but by probing ever more 6
deeply into it. Meaning is there to be discovered in the landscape, if only we know how 7
to attend to it. Every feature, then, is a potential clue, a key to meaning rather than a 8
vehicle for carrying it.10 This discovery procedure, wherein objects in the landscape become 9
clues to meaning, is what distinguishes the perspective of dwelling. And since, as I have 30
shown, the process of dwelling is fundamentally temporal, the apprehension of the land- 1
scape in the dwelling perspective must begin from a recognition of its temporality. Only 2
through such recognition, by temporalising the landscape, can we move beyond the divi- 3
sion that has afﬂicted most inquiries up to now, between the scientiﬁc study of an 4
atemporalised nature, and the humanistic study of a dematerialised history. And no disci- 5
pline is better placed to take this step than archaeology. I have not been concerned here 6
with either the methods or the results of archaeological inquiry. However to the question, 7
‘what is archaeology the study of ?’, I believe there is no better answer than ‘the tempo- 8
rality of the landscape’. I hope, in this chapter, to have gone some way towards elucidating 9
what this means.

Culture, nature, environment • 209 •

Chapter Twelve

Globes and spheres
The topology of environmentalism

My purpose in this chapter is no more than to try out a rather embryonic idea. It concerns
the signiﬁcance of the image of the globe in the language of contemporary debate about
the environment. Though the image has long been deployed in geopolitical contexts, and
even longer in connection with navigation and astronomy, my impression is that its use
as a characterisation of the environment is rather recent. I have in mind such phrases,
which slip so readily off the tongues of contemporary policy-makers, as ‘global environmental change’. One is immediately struck by the paradoxical nature of this phrase. An
environment, surely, is that which surrounds, and can exist, therefore, only in relation to
what is surrounded (Ingold 1992a: 40). I do not think that those who speak of the global
environment mean by this the environment surrounding the globe. It is our environment
they are talking about, the world as it presents itself to a universal humanity. Yet how
can humans, or for that matter beings of any other kind, possibly be surrounded by a
globe? Would it not be fairer to say that it is we who have surrounded it?
My idea is that what may be called the global outlook may tell us something important
about the modern conception of the environment as a world which, far from being the
ambience of our dwelling, is turned in upon itself, so that we who once stood at its centre
become ﬁrst circumferential and are ﬁnally expelled from it altogether (Figure 12.1). In
other words, I am suggesting that the notion of the global environment, far from marking
humanity’s reintegration into the world, signals the culmination of a process of separation.
The image of the globe is familiar
to all of us who have gone through a
Western schooling and are used to
studying models upon which are
drawn, in outline, the continents and
oceans, and the gridlines of latitude
and longitude. We are taught that
this is what the earth looks like,
although none of us, with a handful
of signiﬁcant exceptions, has ever seen
it. By and large, life is lived at such
close proximity to the earth’s surface
that a global perspective is unobtainA
B
able. The signiﬁcant exceptions
comprise, of course, that privileged
band of astronauts who have viewed Figure 12.1 Two views of the environment: (A) as a lifeworld; (B)
the earth from outer space. In a sense, as a globe.

Dwelling

the astronaut’s relation to the real globe 1
seen through the window of the space- 2
craft mirrors the schoolchild’s relation to 3
the model globe in the classroom: in 4
both cases the world appears as an object 5
of contemplation, detached from the 6
domain of lived experience. For the child 7
the world is separately encapsulated in 8
the model; for the astronaut life is sepa- 9
rately encapsulated, albeit temporarily, in 10
the space module. My point with this 1
comparison is a simple one: with the 2
world imaged as a globe, far from coming 3
into being in and through a life process, 4
it ﬁgures as an entity that is, as it were, 5
presented to or confronted by life. The 6
global environment is not a lifeworld, it 7
is a world apart from life.
Before pursuing the implications of 9
this view, I should like to introduce an 20
Figure 12.2 The fourteen spheres of the world, as drawn by alternative image of the world which, 1
Giovanni Camillo Maffei of Solofra in his Scala Naturale (Venice, at least in European thought, is of far 2
1564). Giovanni’s patron, the Count of Altavilla, is shown begin- more ancient provenance. This is the 3
ning his ascent through the spheres.
image of the sphere. Something of 4
the difference in connotation between 5
‘globe’ and ‘sphere’ is suggested in their very acoustic resonance: ‘globe’ is hard and conso- 6
nantal; ‘sphere’ soft and vocalic. A globe is solid and opaque, a sphere hollow and 7
transparent. For the early astronomers, of course, the cosmos itself was seen to be comprised 8
of a series of such spheres, at the common centre of which stood man himself. The idea 9
was that as man’s attention was drawn ever outward, so it would penetrate each sphere 30
so as to reach the next. This is illustrated in Figure 12.2, taken from the Scala Naturale 1
of Giovanni Camillo Maffei, published in Venice in 1564, and dedicated to the Count 2
of Altavilla. Here there are fourteen concentric spheres which – Maffei tells us – may be 3
envisaged to form a giant stairway, the ascent of which affords, step-by-step, a compre- 4
hensive knowledge of the universe. In the picture, the Count is shown taking the ﬁrst 5
step, under Maffei’s direction (see Adams 1938: 58–9).
Unlike the solid globe, which can only be perceived as such from without, spheres – 7
as is clear from this ﬁgure – were to be perceived from within. The global view, we might 8
say, is centripetal, the spherical view centrifugal. Nor is it any accident that the percep- 9
tion of the spheres was imaged in terms of listening rather than looking. Visual perception, 40
insofar as it depends on the reﬂection of light from the outer surface of things, implies 1
both the opacity and inertia of what is seen and the externality of the perceiver. The 2
spheres, being transparent, could not be seen, but undergoing their own autonomous rota- 3
tions about the common centre, they could be heard: thus the motion of the spheres was 4
supposed to make a harmonious sound that could be registered by the sufﬁciently sensi- 5
tive ear. Dating back to Pythagoras and subsequently taken up by Plato and Aristotle, the 6
notion of the ‘music of the spheres’ was passed on to the Middle Ages through the writ- 7
ings of Boethius, and became integral to the ideas of the Renaissance, starting with Marsilio 118

Globes and spheres • 211 •

Ficino in the ﬁfteenth century (Hallyn 1993:
232). Still today, it is commonly argued that
the space of auditory perception is spherical
in form, a sphere that surrounds (without
enclosing) the listener at its centre. Thus
whereas we appear to be on the edge of visual
space looking in with the eye, we are always
at the centre of auditory space listening out
with the ear (Schafer 1985: 88, 94; cf. Ihde
1976, Carpenter and McLuhan 1960). The
globe is to the sphere, according to this argument, as vision is to hearing.1
The idea of the spherical cosmos is by no
means exclusive to the history of European
thought. Let me present one further example,
taken from Fienup-Riordan’s (1990) account
of the lifeworld of the Yup’ik Eskimos. Her
cross-sectional depiction of the cosmos as
perceived by the Yup’ik, reproduced in Figure
12.3, bears an uncanny resemblance to
Maffei’s diagram. At the centre is the dwelling,
from which roads lead in various directions
through the several surrounding spheres.

Figure 12.3 Yup’ik cosmology in cross section.
Reproduced from Eskimo essays: Yup’ik lives and how we
see them, by A. Fienup-Riordan, published by Rutgers
University Press, 1990, p. 111.

A person journeying far enough in any direction would eventually arrive at a point
where the earth folded back up into the skyland, the home of the spirits of the game
. . . Not only was the earth encompassed by a canopy from above, but below its thin
surface resided the spirits of the dead, both animal and human, each in separate villages.
Four or ﬁve ‘steps’ separated these two distinct but related domains.
(Fienup-Riordan 1990: 110)
Notice how in this image the surface of the earth, far from bounding the world externally, is but a thin and permeable membrane dividing the world internally, between upper
and lower hemispheres.
What I hope to have established, at least in outline, is that the lifeworld, imaged from
an experiential centre, is spherical in form, whereas a world divorced from life, that is
yet complete in itself, is imaged in the form of a globe. Thus the movement from spherical to global imagery is also one in which ‘the world’, as we are taught it exists, is drawn
ever further from the matrix of our lived experience. It appears that the world as it really
exists can only be witnessed by leaving it, and indeed much scientiﬁc energy and resources
have been devoted to turning such an imaginative ﬂight into an achieved actuality. One
consequence is the alleged discrepancy between what, in modern jargon, are called ‘local’
and ‘global’ perspectives. Insofar as the latter, afforded to a being outside the world, is seen
to be both real and total, the former, afforded to beings-in-the-world (that is, ordinary people) is regarded as illusory and incomplete. Retrieving from my shelves a geology textbook
published in 1964 – two years before the earth was ﬁrst photographed from space – I read
on the very ﬁrst page that ‘races of men [whose] horizons are limited to a tribal territory,
the conﬁnes of a mountain valley, a short stretch of the coast line, or the congested blocks

Dwelling
of a large city’ can have no conception of the true nature and extent of the world about 1
them (Putnam 1964: 3). If true knowledge is to be had by looking at the world, this state- 2
ment is self-evidently valid. My point, however, is that this speculist assumption is precisely 3
what has given us the imagery of the world as a globe. And it is this assumption, too, that 4
privileges the knowledge we get from school by looking at model globes over the know- 5
ledge we get from life by actively participating in our surroundings.
Do not misunderstand me. I am not some latter-day ﬂat-earther or pre-Copernican. I 7
do not mean to deny that the earth takes the form of a globe – something that has been 8
known, if not universally accepted, at least from the time of Pythagoras – or that it is 9
one of a number of planets revolving around a rather insigniﬁcant star. My question is 10
how it came to pass that this globe, the planet we call Earth, was taken to be an environ- 1
ment, or what my geology textbook called ‘the world about us’.
We can take a cue from the writings of Immanuel Kant who, in his Critique of pure 3
reason, drew a sophisticated analogy between the topological form of the earth and that 4
of the universe as a whole – that is, the ‘world’ conceived as the domain of all possible 5
objects of knowledge. Kant ﬁrst places himself in the shoes of one ignorant of the fact 6
that the earth is global in form:
If I represent the earth as it appears to my senses, as a ﬂat surface, with a circular 9
horizon, I cannot know how far it extends. But experience teaches me that wherever I 20
may go, I always see a space around me in which I could proceed further.
(1933: 606) 2
One is thus in the hapless position of realising that one’s knowledge is limited, but of 4
having no way of knowing just how limited it is. Once it is recognised, however, that the 5
earth is a globe, and given a knowledge of its diameter, it is immediately possible to calcu- 6
late, from ﬁrst principles, its surface area. And so, even though – as we traverse the surface 7
– new horizons are always opening up, not only can we work out, by subtraction, how 8
much there remains to be discovered, but also every fresh observation can be slotted into 9
position, in relation to each and every other, within a complete, unifying spatial frame- 30
work. Thus, to obtain a comprehensive knowledge of the environment, we must already 1
have in mind an image of the globe, or come pre-equipped with what Kant called ‘an 2
extended concept of the whole surface of the earth’, onto which may be mapped the data 3
of experience (see Richards 1974: 11). Moreover the same applies to knowledge in general, 4
which the mind sees as arrayed upon the surface of a sphere, at once continuous and 5
limited in extent: ‘Our reason is not like a plane indeﬁnitely far extended, the limits of 6
which we know in a general way only; but must rather be compared to a sphere, the 7
radius of which can be determined from the curvature of the arc of its surface . . .’ 8
(Kant 1933: 607). In this analogy, the topology of the earth’s surface comes to stand 9
for the fundamental idea, which the mind is said to bring to experience, of the unity, 40
completeness and continuity of nature. Here, surely, is to be found the very essence of 1
the global outlook.
Let us, then, compare an imaginary Kantian traveller, journeying across the globe in 3
search of new experiences to ﬁt into his overall conception, with the Yup’ik Eskimos, in 4
whose cycles of everyday and seasonal movement the cosmos, as they see it (Figure 12.3), 5
is continually being re-created (Fienup-Riordan 1990: 110–11). For both, the earth pro- 6
vides the ground on which they move, but whereas for the Yup’ik, this movement 7
is conducted within the world, the Kantian traveller, for whom the world is a globe, journeys 118

Globes and spheres • 213 •

upon its outer surface. It is at this surface, the interface between world and mind, sensation
and cognition, that all knowledge is constituted. Not only is the surface a continuous one,
it also lacks any centre. Anywhere upon it can serve, in principle, equally well as a point of
origin or as a destination. Thus if the ‘world about us’ is the globe, planet earth, it is not
a world within which we dwell, as is the Yup’ik world depicted with the house at its centre, but one on which we dwell. The globe, of course, does have a centre, yet a journey to
the centre of the earth, as immortalised in Jules Verne’s celebrated novel, is a voyage into
the unknown, a domain of strange and terrifying primordial forces.
In short, from a global perspective, it is on the surface of the world, not at its centre,
that life is lived.2 As a foundational level of ‘physical reality’, this surface is supposed
already to have been in existence long before there was any life at all. Then somehow,
through a series of events of near-miraculous improbability, there appeared on it ﬁrst life
and then, very much later, consciousness. These appearances are commonly pictured in
terms of the addition of extra layers of being to that basic layer represented by the earth’s
surface: hence the tripartite division into lithosphere, biosphere and noosphere, corresponding respectively to the inorganic substance of rocks and minerals, the organic substance
of living things and the superorganic substance of human culture and society.
Although spherical imagery is employed here, the spheres are deﬁned as layered surfaces
that successively cover over one another and the world, not as successive horizons disclosed
from a centre. And the outer wrapping is none other than the human mind and its products. This picture (see Figure 12.4) is the complete obverse of the medieval conception illustrated in Figure 12.2. The difference may be considered in relation to the genesis of
meaning. The world which the Count of Altavilla is setting out to explore in Maffei’s
diagram is itself a world of meaning which, through a kind of sensory attunement, an
education of attention, will be gradually revealed to him as he proceeds from one level of
understanding to the next. This world – like the world of the Dreaming in Aboriginal
Australia (see Chapter Three, p. 56) – has properties of both transparency and depth: not
only can one see into it, but also the more one looks the further one sees. By contrast, the
world depicted in Figure 12.4, insofar as it corresponds to ‘planet Earth’, consists of pure
substance, physical matter, presenting an opaque and impenetrable
surface of literal reality upon which
Noosphere
form and meaning are overlain by
the human mind. That is to say,
Biosphere
meaning does not lie in the relaLithosphere
tional context of the perceiver’s
involvement in the world, but is
rather inscribed upon the outer surface of the world by the mind of
the perceiver. To know the world,
then, is a matter not of sensory
attunement but of cognitive reconstruction. And such knowledge is
acquired not by engaging directly,
in a practical way, with the objects
in one’s surroundings, but rather
by learning to represent them, in
the mind, in the form of a map. Figure 12.4 Lithosphere, biosphere and noosphere.

Dwelling
I reserve discussion of the notions of mapping and mapmaking for the next chapter. It is 1
sufﬁcient to note, here, the immediate connection between the apprehension of the world 2
as a solid globe and the idea, commonly encountered even in anthropological literature, of 3
the environment as a substrate for the external imposition of arbitrary cultural form. The 4
world becomes a tabula rasa for the inscription of human history.
The familiar globes of geography classrooms provide a vivid example of such inscrip- 6
tion or covering over. Though the sea is painted blue, the continental land-masses are 7
frequently painted in a mosaic of contrastive colours, representing the territories of nation 8
states. Thus, we are led to think, has the order of human society wrapped itself around the 9
face of the world. Yet that order, we know, has its roots in the history of colonialism, and 10
the attendant voyages of (principally maritime) discovery and exploration. The image of the 1
world as a globe is, I contend, a colonial one. It presents us with the idea of a preformed 2
surface waiting to be occupied, to be colonised ﬁrst by living things and later by human 3
(usually meaning Western) civilisation. Through travel and exploration, it is said, mankind 4
has conquered the globe. Having now ﬁlled it up, and still multiplying in numbers at an 5
alarming pace, we are urgently searching around, not just in fantasy but also in fact, for 6
new worlds to colonise. Not only, then, does it appear that the world existed prior to 7
life; it also appears that life can hop from world to world and even – like a parasitic vector 8
ﬂying between successive hosts – exist temporarily in worldless suspension.
The idea that the world exists prior to the forms of life that come to occupy it, and 20
hence that each of these life-forms is itself separately encoded in a context-free vehicle, a 1
kind of free-ﬂoating capsule that can carry form from one site of occupation to another, 2
is deeply entrenched in both biological and anthropological thought. In biology it appears 3
as the doctrine of genetic preformation, according to which every organism may be spec- 4
iﬁed, independently of the environmental context of its development, as a unique 5
conﬁguration of self-replicating elements (genes). Through a process of variation under 6
natural selection, organisms are supposed to evolve in ways that make them better adapted 7
to the conditions of their environments, yet the very notion of adaptation implies that 8
these conditions are speciﬁable in advance, in terms of a set of exogenous parameters quite 9
distinct from the endogenous, genetically ﬁxed parameters of the adapting organisms. 30
There is thus one set of speciﬁcations for life, and another set for the world (see Lewontin 1
1983). In anthropology, cultural information is made to play much the same role as is 2
played by the genes in biology. Again, there is one set of speciﬁcations for the forms of 3
life that are carried around – as it used to be said – ‘inside people’s heads’. And there 4
is another set for the environment, often identiﬁed with ‘nature’ or ‘the physical world’, 5
upon which these forms are inscribed. And if we ask ‘What kind of world is this, that is 6
an environment for every form of life yet external to all of them?’, the answer, as we have 7
seen, is planet Earth, the globe.
Moreover, once the world is conceived as a globe, it can become an object of appro- 9
priation for a collective humanity. In this discourse, we do not belong to the world, neither 40
partaking of its essence nor resonating to its cycles and rhythms. Rather, since our very 1
humanity is seen to consist, in essence, in the transcendence of physical nature, it is the 2
world that belongs to us. Images of property abound. We have inherited the earth, it is 3
said, and so are responsible for handing it on to our successors in reasonably good condi- 4
tion. But like the prodigal heir, we are inclined to squander this precious inheritance for 5
the sake of immediate gratiﬁcation. Much of the current concern with the global environ- 6
ment has to do with how we are to ‘manage’ this planet of ours. That it is ours to manage, 7
however, remains more or less unquestioned. Such management is commonly described 118

Globes and spheres • 215 •

in the language of intervention. But to intervene in the world, as we have already had
occasion to note (Chapter Four, p. 63), implies the possibility of our choosing not to do
so (Williams 1972: 154). It implies that human beings can launch their interventions
from a platform above the world, as though they could live on or off the environment,
but are not destined to live within it. Indeed, this rendering of action towards the environment as planned intervention in nature is fundamental to the Western notion of production
(see Chapter Three, pp. 58–9). History itself comes to be seen as a process wherein human
producers, through their transforming reaction on nature, have literally constructed an
environment of their own making.
The idea is epitomised in the title of an inﬂuential volume, published in 1956, called
Man’s role in changing the face of the earth (Thomas et al. 1956). There are two points
about this title to which I wish to draw attention. The ﬁrst is that with the world envisaged as planet Earth, it is its face that is presented to humanity as the substrate for the
latter’s transforming interventions. This recalls my earlier observation that in the global
outlook, life appears to be lived upon the outer surface of the world rather than from an
experiential centre within it. The world does not surround us, it lies beneath our feet.3
The second point concerns the notion of change. It is not of course the case, as was
believed by some of the early advocates of uniformitarianism, that the earth has persisted
since the beginning of time in homeostatic equilibrium, at least until humans came along
to upset the balance. On the contrary, it has been – and continues to be – racked by
geological forces acting on such a scale as to make the most impressive feats of human
engineering seem puny by comparison. These earth-shaping processes, however, are considered to be immanent in the workings of nature. They are what the world undergoes. But
in speaking of the role of humanity, the world appears as an object of transformation.
Change ﬁgures as what is done to the planet by its present owner-occupiers, human beings.
It is thus exogenous rather than endogenous, not nature transforming itself, but nature
transformed through the imposition of non-natural, human design.
This is what is meant when, in ‘changing the face of the earth’, the universal agent –
‘man’ – is said to have replaced the natural environment with one which is, to an evergreater extent, artiﬁcial. Thus the construction of the human order appears to entail the
destruction of the natural one, as production entails consumption. We are, today, increasingly concerned to limit what are perceived to be the destructive consequences of human
activity. My point, however, is that the very notions of destruction and damage limitation,
like those of construction and control, are grounded in the discourse of intervention. That
is to say, they presume a world already constituted, through the action of natural forces,
which then becomes the object of human interest and concern. But it is not a world of
which humans themselves are conceived to be a part. To them, it is rather presented as a
spectacle. They may observe it, reconstruct it, protect it, tamper with it or destroy it, but
they do not dwell in it. Indeed, what is perhaps most striking about the contemporary
discourse of global environmental change is the immensity of the gulf that divides the
world as it is lived and experienced by the practitioners of this discourse, and the world
of which they speak under the rubric of ‘the globe’. No-one, of course, denies the seriousness of the problems they address; there is good reason to believe, however, that many of
these problems have their source in that very alienation of humanity from the world
of which the notion of the global environment is a conspicuous expression.
This point brings me back to the distinction, mentioned earlier, between ‘local’ and
‘global’ perspectives. The difference between them, I contend, is not one of hierarchical
degree, in scale or comprehensiveness, but one of kind. In other words, the local is not

Dwelling
a more limited or narrowly focused apprehension than the global, it is one that rests on 1
an altogether different mode of apprehension – one based on practical, perceptual engage- 2
ment with components of a world that is inhabited or dwelt-in, rather than on the 3
detached, disinterested observation of a world that is merely occupied. In the local perspec- 4
tive the world is a sphere, or perhaps a nesting series of spheres as portrayed in Figures 5
12.2 and 12.3, centred on a particular place. From this experiential centre, the attention 6
of those who live there is drawn ever deeper into the world, in the quest for knowledge 7
and understanding. It is through such attentive engagement, entailed in the very process 8
of dwelling, that the world is progressively revealed to the knowledge-seeker. Now different 9
centres will, of course, afford different views, so that while there is only one global perspec- 10
tive, indifferent to place and context, the number of possible local perspectives is potentially 1
inﬁnite. This does not mean, however, that they are in any sense incomplete, or that they 2
represent no more than fragments of a total picture. It is only when we come to repre- 3
sent local differences in terms of a globalising discourse that the centre from which each 4
perspective is taken is converted into a boundary within which every local view is seen to 5
be contained. The idea that the ‘little community’ remains conﬁned within its limited 6
horizons from which ‘we’ – globally conscious Westerners – have escaped results from a 7
privileging of the global ontology of detachment over the local ontology of engagement. 8
