A circumpolar night’s dream • 109 •

are those such as bears and eagles which are fellow participants in the same life-world,
and that one speciﬁc category of kin – namely ‘grandfathers’ – admits persons of both
human and other-than-human kinds. Ojibwa ontology, however, is incompatible with the
genealogical model at a more fundamental level. For if the forms of beings are not expressed
but generated within the life process, then these forms cannot be passed on as part of any
context-independent speciﬁcation. One cannot, in other words, lay down the form that
a being will take independently of the circumstances of its life in the world. Kinship, in
particular, is not about handing down components of a person-speciﬁcation, but about
the ways in which other persons in my environment, through their presence, their activities and the nurturance they provide, contribute to the process of my own growth and
wellbeing. And since these others may be non-human as well as human, there is nothing
in the least strange about the extension of kinship relations across the species boundary,
nor do we have to set up a distinction between ‘real’ and ‘ﬁctive’ kinship in order to
accommodate cases of this kind. To receive blessings from my other-than-human grandfathers, it is not necessary to suppose that I am descended from them in the genealogical
sense.

CONCLUSION
Ever since Darwin, Western science has cleaved strongly to the view that humans differ
from other animals in degree rather than kind. Yet it is a view that has raised more problems than it has solved. For if we ask on what scale these differences of degree are to be
measured, it turns out to be one that places human beings unequivocally at the top. It
is the scale of the rise of reason, and its gradual triumph over the shackles of instinct.
Where Darwin differed from many (though by no means all) of his predecessors was in
both attributing powers of reasoning to sub-human animals and recognising the powerful
sway of instinct even on the behaviour of humans beings. As he argued in The Descent
of Man (1871, Chs 3 and 4), the beginnings of reason can be found far down in the scale
of nature, but only with the emergence of humanity did it begin to gain the upper hand.
In short, for Darwin and his many followers, the evolution of species in nature was also
an evolution that progressively liberated the mind from the promptings of innate disposition. Moreover in bringing the rise of science and civilisation within the compass of the
same evolutionary process that had made humans out of apes, and apes out of creatures
lower in the scale, Darwin was forced to attribute the ascendancy of reason in the West
to innate endowment, a conclusion that is utterly unacceptable today. Modern science has
responded, by and large, by dissociating the historical process of civilisation from the
evolution of the species, thereby compromising the thesis of continuity. Humans are made
to appear different in degree, not kind, from their evolutionary antecedents by attributing
the movement of history to a process that differs in kind, not degree, from the process
of evolution!
I have been searching, in this chapter, for a way of understanding the continuity of the
relations between human beings and all the other inhabitants of the earth which does not
fall foul of the difﬁculties of the argument by degree – an argument that is unashamedly
anthropocentric in taking human powers of intellect as the measure of all things, that can
only comprehend the evolution of species in nature by supposing an evolution of reason
that takes them out of it, and that, if applied consistently, is incompatible with any ethical
commitment to shared human potential. I have tried to show that the ontology of a nonWestern people, the Ojibwa, points the way towards a solution. I do not mean to suggest

Livelihood
for one moment that the Ojibwa orientation to life in the world is without paradoxes of 1
its own. Nor would I wish to argue that it offers a viable substitute for science. Earlier, 2
I suggested that what the Ojibwa have arrived at is not an alternative science of nature 3
but a poetics of dwelling. In the past, there has been a tendency to write off such poetics 4
as the outpourings of a primitive mentality that has been superseded by the rise of the 5
modern scientiﬁc worldview. My conclusion, to the contrary, is that scientiﬁc activity is 6
always, and necessarily, grounded in a poetics of dwelling. Rather than sweeping it under 7
the carpet, as an embarrassment, I believe this is something worth celebrating, and that 8
doing so will also help us do better science.

Culture, nature, environment • 111 •

Chapter Seven

Totemism, animism and the
depiction of animals

INTRODUCTION
Art, it is often supposed, is one of the hallmarks of humanity. It reveals a capacity, common
to all human beings, to disengage consciousness from the current of lived experience, so
as to treat that experience as an object of reﬂection. Such reﬂection is the work of the
imagination, and its products are symbolic representations. In visual art, these representations are expressed in painting, drawing and sculpture. Throughout history, in cultures
around the world, non-human animals have always ﬁgured as key topics of artistic representation. Indeed from earliest times, human beings seem to have been fascinated by their
diverse forms and movements, and to have desired to express this aesthetic appreciation
in visual media.
What I have just set out is a fairly conventional view, not only in the academic disciplines of archaeology, anthropology and art history but also, I think, more widely among
those of us who have been raised within the conventions of the Western ‘art world’. I
believe, however, that it is almost entirely false, and in this chapter I want to show why.
My argument, in a nutshell, is that it results from the retrojection, onto the entire ﬁeld
of pre-modern or non-Western societies, of notions of humanity and animality, of culture
and nature, and of art as representation, that have their source in Western modernity.
The ﬁeld of non-Western ‘art’ is vast, and obviously I cannot deal with it all. Instead, I
shall conﬁne my attention to the paintings, drawings and carvings of certain peoples
conventionally known in anthropological literature as ‘hunters and gatherers’. This is not
the place to debate the validity of the category; the important point for our present
purposes is that people who hunt and gather for a subsistence generally have an extremely
close and intimate knowledge of the landscape and its plant and animal inhabitants, on
whose continuity or regeneration their life depends. They stand, if you will, at the opposite extreme from the afﬂuent Westerner who may ﬁnd the wild animal a beautiful thing
to look at, whether directly or more often through the lens of a camera, so long as it
remains at a safe distance which precludes any closer involvement.
In order to avoid the unwanted connotations of the concept of ‘art’, I shall refer to
the animal-like ﬁgures that hunter-gatherers draw, paint or carve as ‘depictions’. Though
far from ideal for the purpose, it is the most neutral term I can ﬁnd. Obviously, to say
of a ﬁgure that it depicts an animal is to suggest that it bears some iconic resemblance
to the creature in question. It does not necessarily follow, however, that the one represents
the other (Gibson 1979: 279–80). But if depictions are not representations, what are they?
How else are we to interpret the correspondence between the ﬁgure and the animal it
evokes? The answers to these questions, I argue, depend upon ways of understanding the

Livelihood
relationships between human beings, animals and the land. To show how this is so, I 1
intend to contrast two such understandings, which I denote by the terms ‘totemism’ and 2
‘animism’. These should be taken as labels of convenience only, and I should move at 3
once to correct the misleading impression to which adding the ‘-ism’ is apt to give rise, 4
namely that the terms refer to coherent and explicitly articulated doctrinal systems. They 5
are, of course, nothing of the sort, but rather orientations that are deeply embedded in 6
everyday practice. Or to put it another way, they are not so much systems to which people 7
relate as immanent in their ways of relating.
Furthermore, I have no wish to become embroiled in arguments about the extent to 9
which the diverse beliefs and practices that have been brought under the respective rubrics 10
of totemism and animism share features in common. Sufﬁce it to say that my view of 1
totemism rests largely on my reading of ethnographic material from Australian Aboriginal 2
societies, and my view of animism has its basis in the ethnography of the circumpolar 3
North. Ironically, the word ‘totem’ actually comes from the language of the Ojibwa, a 4
native people of northern North America whose basic ontology, as we saw in the last 5
chapter, is unquestionably animic. It entered the anthropological literature by way of an 6
account written by the Englishman J. K. Long, who was trading with the Ojibwa towards 7
the end of the eighteenth century, as a label for systems of ritual and belief that associate 8
particular social groups, such as clans, with particular natural species, usually of animals. 9
For various reasons, internal to the history of social anthropology, the locus classicus for 20
such systems subsequently shifted from North America to Australia. More recent ethno- 1
graphic studies of Australian Aboriginal societies showed, however, that the association of 2
clans with species is a corollary of a more fundamental set of linkages between people, 3
land and ancestral beings. Both for ethnographers of the region and for Aboriginal people 4
themselves, it is to these linkages that the concept of totemism has come to refer, and 5
this is the sense in which I will use the term here.1
In what follows I begin by spelling out the contrast between totemism and animism, 7
and go on from there to show how ﬁrst the totemic ontology, and then the animic one, 8
are reﬂected in the depiction of animals. This, in turn, provides a basis for their system- 9
atic comparison. Finally, I return to the orthodox view spelled out in the introductory 30
paragraph in order to show why it is so wrong, and to replace it with a more satisfactory 1
alternative. The activities of hunters and gatherers that lead to the production of what we 2
in the West call ‘art’ should, I argue, be understood as ways not of representing the world 3
of immediate experience on a higher, more ‘symbolic’ plane, but of probing more deeply 4
into it and of discovering the signiﬁcance that lies therein.
TOTEMISM AND ANIMISM
At the most fundamental level, the contrast is about the relative priority of form and 9
process. With a totemic ontology, the forms life takes are already given, congealed in 40
perpetuity in the features, textures and contours of the land. And it is the land that 1
harbours the vital forces which animate the plants, animals and people it engenders. With 2
an animic ontology, to the contrary, life is itself generative of form. Vital force, far from 3
being petriﬁed in a solid medium, is free-ﬂowing like the wind, and it is on its uninter- 4
rupted circulation that the continuity of the living world depends. In the following 5
paragraphs I elaborate on this contrast in more detail.
Throughout Aboriginal Australia, people’s sense of being is grounded in the under- 7
standing that the fundamentals of existence were laid down in an era known conventionally 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 113 •

as the Dreaming. During this era, which both underwrites the living present and encompasses it as but a moment of eternity, the initially shapeless earth was inhabited by beings
of immense scale and power who roamed across its surface, shaping it with the impress
of their movements and depositing something of their creative essence at place after place
as they passed along. These beings are said to be ancestral to all currently living creatures,
whether human or non-human. But the relationship between the ancestors and their living
progeny is not a genealogical one. That is to say, there is no line of descent, passing
through a series of intermediate steps, that would connect the one to the other, nor is
any living generation further removed from the ancestors than its predecessors. For every
living being, according to the Aboriginal conception, draws its essential form and substance
directly from the land, and the land, in turn, embodies the creative powers of the ancestors. Human beings and other creatures come and go: they emerge from the land, live
out their time, and are reincorporated into it when they die. But the land is always there,
and will continue to bring forth new life so long as those who dwell upon it – by fulﬁlling
their custodial responsibilities towards it, or ‘looking after’ it in the proper way – do not
allow its powers to be dissipated. It is this understanding of the relationship between the
ancestors, the land which is the enduring form of their presence, and the living beings it
engenders, that I call ‘totemic’.
Among the native peoples of the circumpolar North the land does not have quite the
same signiﬁcance that it has in Aboriginal Australia. For the powers that bring forth life,
instead of being concentrated in the land itself, are rather distributed among the manifold beings that inhabit it. There is no power source, analogous to the totemic ancestors
of Aboriginal cosmology, that subtends the life process itself. Consequently, animate beings
are engendered not by the land but reciprocally, by one another. Far from revealing the
shape of a world that already exists, as it were, out of time, life is the temporal process
of its ongoing creation. The world of this ‘animic’ understanding is home to innumerable beings whose presence is manifested in this form or that, each engaged in the project
of forging a life in the way peculiar to its kind. But in order to live, every such being
must constantly draw upon the vitality of others. A complex network of reciprocal interdependence, based on the give and take of substance, care and vital force – the latter
often envisaged as one or several kinds of spirit or soul – extends throughout the cosmos,
linking human, animal and all other forms of life. Within this network, the generation
of animate form in any one region necessarily entails its dissolution in another. Vitality
must be surrendered here so that it may be reconstituted there. For this reason, no form
is ever permanent; indeed the transience or ephemerality of form is necessary if the current
of life is to keep on ﬂowing. All of existence is suspended in this ﬂow. Borne along in
the current, beings meet, merge and split apart again, each taking with them something
of the other. Thus life, in the animic ontology, is not an emanation but a generation of
being, in a world that is not pre-ordained but incipient, forever on the verge of the actual.
Having set out the basic contrast between totemism and animism, I now want to
consider how it bears upon the relation between human beings and non-human animals.
How, for example, is it reﬂected in the attitudes of hunters towards their prey? In a
totemic system, to hunt (or to refrain from hunting) animals of a particular species is part
of the proper way of living one’s life on the land according to a pre-established order of
things. Thus the relation between human and animal is subsumed by the relation of both
to the ancestral powers of which they are the living incarnations. People of course have
to hunt (as well as gather) to secure a livelihood, but the actual pursuit of animals lacks
cosmological signiﬁcance. It is, as Philippe Descola writes, ‘a quite mundane activity of

Livelihood

food procurement’ (1996: 95). While it helps to keep people fed it does not, in itself, 1
establish their presence in the world. It is in dwelling upon the land – in the senses both 2
of inhabiting it and of sustained focal attention towards its ancestral essence in acts of 3
ceremony – that people forge their sense of being. In an animic system, on the other 4
hand, hunting effects the circulation of vital force between humans and animals and thus 5
contributes directly to the regeneration of the lifeworld of which both are part. The animals 6
offer something of their potentiality and substance to human beings so that the latter may 7
live, while humans, in return, through the proper treatment of the animals in death, ensure 8
the release of their life force and hence their subsequent reincarnation. Human life, which 9
in the totemic ontology is predicated upon the immortality of the land, is here predicated 10
upon the mortality of animals. In the animic ontology, the killing and eating of game is 1
far more than mere provisioning; it is world-renewing.
Let me put the contrast in another way. The totemic world is essential, the animic 3
world dialogical. When an Australian Aboriginal man proclaims himself to be a kangaroo, 4
he means that he – along with other persons who share this afﬁliation – actually partakes 5
of the same substance as the kangaroo. The connection, in other words, lies in the essen- 6
tial consubstantiality of members of the human group, and of the animal species, all of 7
whom derive the lineaments of their being from the same place in the landscape in which 8
is deposited the creativity of the kangaroo ancestor. But what of the shaman, in a northern 9
circumpolar society, who walks abroad as a bear? Recall that the animic cosmos is popu- 20
lated by beings of both human and non-human kinds engaged in ongoing mutual 1
interaction. Animals, like humans, are supposed to form their own communities, and 2
members of each can visit the communities of the other. From a perspective located within 3
the human community, non-human beings will appear in their animal guise. However 4
upon ‘crossing over’ to the animal side, a man will see his hosts as creatures like himself, 5
while to the people back home he will now appear in animal form. In short, in the 6
dialogue between human and 7
animal, each in turn takes up 8
the point of view of the other, 9
becoming temporarily other to his 30
or her own people. The shaman, in 1
animic society, is a person of excep- 2
tional power, who can move with 3
relative ease across the human– 4
animal interface. But particular 5
animals may also be credited with 6
similar powers: indeed right across 7
the circumpolar North, the bear is 8
regarded as such a one. If the bear 9
can appear human, so too, the 40
human shaman can show up as a 1
bear (see Figure 7.1). Whether you 2
see one or the other depends on 3
Figure 7.1 An Inuit man and a polar bear cordially greet one another. where you are looking from; in 4
Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collection of Professor other words it has to do not with 5
Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
the substance of being but with the 6
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Nanook, super-male, Signifying animals: relative positioning of self and 7
human meaning in the natural world, ed. R. Willis, 1990, p. 179.
other in contexts of dialogue.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 115 •

Now one of the principal reasons why the shamans of animic society make their often
arduous journeys to the communities of non-human animals is to recover vitality that
may have been lost, due to some untoward circumstance, to the ‘other side’. Such loss is
generally experienced in the form of serious illness, and by bringing vitality back to the
sufferer the shaman aims to effect a cure. Another reason may be to negotiate with the
spirit masters, who control the disposition of animals, for their release to human hunters.
To make the crossing to the animal domain, the shaman has to avail himself of the assistance of bodies other than his own. Animals of various kinds, known as his ‘helpers’, carry
his inner being aloft on its journey, yet all the while his corporeal body remains where it
stands. The shaman’s liberation from the constraints of his bodily bearing in the human
world is generally achieved through going into trance. In this state, the normal boundaries between human and animal are dissolved. However, such ‘out-of-body’ experience
has no place within a totemic system, for the simple reason that the unity of human and
animal, in a totemic ontology, lies in
their very consubstantiality. A man does
not have to leave his body to take on
that of his totem, for his own
body and that of his totem share the
same essence whose ultimate source, as
we have seen, lies in the land. Whereas
the animist must go beyond the body to
transcend the human-animal distinction,
the totemist ﬁnds the distinction dissolved at the very core of his being –
within the body, not beyond it. Human
and animal, separated in life, are reunited on death and burial, that is
through the ultimate return of the body
to the land from which it grew (see
Figure 7.2).

THE DEPICTION OF ANIMALS
Now that we have established the basic
contrast between totemic and animic ontologies, our next, and principal problem
is to consider how each, in turn, bears
upon the depiction of animals. As a lead
into the problem, consider the two
depictions reproduced in Figures 7.3 and
7.4. The ﬁrst was executed on bark
by the Australian Aboriginal painter
Namerredje Guymala, one of a group of
Kunwinjku-speaking painters residing in
the town of Oenpelli in Western Arnhem
Land. It dates from about 1975. The
second was drawn on paper around the
same time by Davidialuk Alasuaq, an

Figure 7.2 This bark painting by Djawada Nadjongorle, a
Kunwinjku Aboriginal artist from Western Arnhem Land,
Australia, juxtaposes the ﬁgures of a dead human spirit and the
sand monitor, Varanus gouldii. The juxtaposition vividly brings
out the uniﬁcation, in death, of human and animal, joined by
their shared ancestral essence.

Livelihood

Inuit from Povungnituk in northern 1
Quebec. On the face of it, both appear 2
to depict hunting scenes. The animal in 3
Figure 7.3 is an antilopine kangaroo, and 4
in the top right corner is a ﬁgure of 5
undoubtedly human form, spear-thrower 6
in hand, on the point of launching a spear 7
towards the head of his victim. The 8
animal in Figure 7.4 is a caribou, which 9
stares directly at the Inuit hunter 10
crouching half-concealed in the under- 1
growth. The hunter is about to loose an 2
arrow from his bow to dispatch the 3
caribou. Now in both pictures, there is 4
actually more going on than immediately 5
meets the eye. The ﬁrst, as I shall show, 6
is not really a hunting scene at all. The 7
second, though it does indeed describe an 8
encounter between hunter and prey, also 9
catches a moment of reﬂection in a 20
dialogue between two sentient beings, 1
each of whom is offering something to 2
the other while wondering about the 3
other’s intentions. I begin with the 4
former.
Painting the ancestors:
Aboriginal Australia
Figure 7.3 Painting of an antilopine kangaroo with mimih spirit, It is obvious, looking at Figure 7.3, that 30
by Namerredje Guymala, c.1975.
the depictions of the anthropomorphic 1
hunter and of the kangaroo that he 2
appears to be spearing follow quite 3
different conventions.2 The hunter is portrayed as a diminutive, stick-like ﬁgure, caught 4
in an unstable posture that conveys a powerful sense of movement. He is clearly doing 5
something, using tools, engaging in an activity. The kangaroo, by contrast, does not appear 6
to be doing anything at all. It is depicted in limp, static proﬁle, resembling nothing so 7
much as a perfectly preserved fossil in a slab of stone. Not only is it shown on a much 8
larger scale than is the hunter, but the artist has also chosen to concentrate on the animal’s 9
bodily architecture – on its design, morphology and the internal layout of its organs – 40
rather than on the dynamics of movement, posture and behaviour. A particularly remark- 1
able characteristic of the depiction is its use of so-called ‘X-ray’ style to display the principal 2
features of anatomy, including the heart and lungs, liver, and intestinal tract, as well as 3
the backbone (Taylor 1996: 135–7). Indeed the static, anatomical portrayal of the animal 4
contrasts so strikingly with the dynamic, postural portrayal of the hunter that it seems 5
almost calculated to draw attention to the former’s existential status as an inanimate being, 6
as opposed to the animacy of the latter. The kangaroo, whatever else it may be supposed 7
to be, is not a living creature.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 117 •

Figure 7.4 Inuit hunter and caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collection of
Professor Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Inuit and caribou, published by Université Laval, Canada, 1979, p. 61.

The ﬁgure of the hunter in this painting, though human-like in appearance, in fact
depicts a spirit being, one of a class of such beings known as mimih. Wispish and delicate but nevertheless agile, mimih are believed to inhabit crannies in the rocky escarpment
that dominates the landscape of Western Arnhem Land. From their abodes within the
rock face they carry on a form of life precisely parallel to that of ordinary living humans,
engaging in such activities as hunting, ﬁghting and ceremonials. It was through observing
the practices of these spirits that people in the past learned, among other things, how to
hunt, to cook, to divide up game in the proper way, and to dance. But above all, mimih
taught them how to paint. Small red monochrome paintings of mimih ﬁgures abound on
the walls of caves in the escarpment. Many of these, as a matter of fact, are extremely
old and are thought by archaeologists to have been produced between nine and eighteen
thousand years ago, though the exact dating remains a subject of some controversy.
Kunwinjku people, however, assert that the ﬁgures were painted by mimih themselves,
and that they accurately portray both their bodily appearance and their customary activities (Taylor 1996: 89, 183–4).
So much for the ﬁgure of the hunter, but what about the ﬁgure of the kangaroo? This
could be read on two levels. On the one hand the kangaroo is a perfectly ordinary animal,
which is hunted and killed for food. Long ago, mimih used to hunt kangaroo to eat, as
humans do today, and many stories are told of their exceptional skill and prowess in this
regard (Carroll 1977: 123–5, Taylor 1996: 134). Yet paradoxically, these stories have virtually nothing to say about the activity of hunting itself, and focus almost exclusively on
the procedure for cutting up and cooking the animal once it has been killed. Likewise in
depictions of mimih hunters apparently spearing kangaroos, such as that in Figure 7.3,
neither the behaviour of the animal on encountering the hunter, nor its attitude in death,

Livelihood
is portrayed. It is rather shown as if already dead, and collapsed upon the ground. The 1
area enclosed by the body proﬁle is schematically divided into sections by double parallel 2
lines, which also indicate the way in which the carcass should be cut up for presentation 3
to various categories of kin. The picture can thus be interpreted as a kind of instruction 4
manual, carrying the imprimatur of the mimih spirits, for butchery and distribution. 5
In some pictures, the animal is shown already dismembered into several pieces (Carroll 6
1977: 123). As the distribution of cuts follows the paths of kinship, so the image of the 7
divided animal body provides a kind of scheme or template for the enactment of signif- 8
icant human relationships (Taylor 1996: 199, 225–7). But neither in the pictures nor in 9
the accompanying stories is there a sense of the animal as anything other than mere meat, 10
or of the hunt as an encounter entailing any kind of relationship between one animate 1
being and another.
Read on another level, however, the ﬁgure of the kangaroo is a portrayal of no ordi- 3
nary animal. It depicts, rather, an ancestral being, one of many whose world-shaping 4
activities are recounted in the stories of the Dreaming. The ancestral standing of such 5
beings is usually indicated by means of a ‘geometric’ internal division of the body area 6
into triangular or rhombic panels which are ﬁlled in with ﬁne cross-hatching (Taylor 1996: 7
139–43). This cross-hatching produces a shimmering effect that is understood as an emana- 8
tion of the ancestral power immanent in the depiction: the closest equivalent in Western 9
experience, perhaps, is the brilliance of a stained glass window lit up by sunlight.3 In the 20
painting shown in Figure 7.3 these features are not pronounced, and so it is probably not 1
intended to be interpreted on this level. But many other paintings on the same theme, 2
complete with a mimih hunter in the corner, do depict the kangaroo in a vividly ‘ances- 3
tral’ light (Taylor 1996: 23, 180). Once again the animal is portrayed, by contrast to the 4
hunter, as fundamentally inanimate. This does not mean, however, that it is dead rather 5
than alive, as in the ﬁrst-level reading. Ancestral beings are inanimate in the same way as 6
is the land they energise: their presence underlies the cycle of life and death in which the 7
existence of all mortal creatures, both human and animal, is suspended.
Now painting, whether on cave walls or bark shelters, is one of the ways through which 9
the order of the Dreaming is presented to humans. Another way is through their obser- 30
vation of the landscape itself, created as it was through ancestral activity. One can, rather 1
literally, ‘follow’ the story of creation either by walking about over the landscape and 2
attending to its features, or by similarly roaming with one’s eyes across the surface of the 3
picture. It might be suggested, on these grounds, that the painting should be understood 4
as a kind of map of the landscape. Thus the body of the ancestral being, depicted in the 5
form of an animal (the kangaroo), would stand for the landscape in its totality, and its 6
internal divisions to places and the relations between them, and between their respective 7
inhabitants. Yet while there is certainly a correspondence between the form of the painting 8
and the morphology of the landscape, it would not be right to suppose that the one repre- 9
sents the other. Rather, both landscape and painting exist on the same ontological level, 40
as alternative ways in which an underlying, ancestral order is revealed to human experi- 1
ence (Taylor 1996: 229–32, see Morphy 1991: 221–2, 237). The immobility of the animal 2
in the painting, then, is strictly equivalent to the permanence of the landscape: the move- 3
ment is entirely on the side of the painter through whose work the form of the ancestral 4
being is gradually unveiled, just as it is on the side of the hunter who makes his way 5
through the terrain.
But likewise in the painting, the movement appears to be wholly on the side of the 7
mimih spirit as it clambers over the motionless body of the ancestral creator being. Like 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 119 •

ordinary humans, mimih have no creative power of their own but are bound to an already
established order of things. And in these spirits living humans see the reﬂections of themselves. Thus the relation between the mimih-ﬁgure and the ancestral kangaroo in the
painting is precisely analogous both to that between the painter and the world as it is
revealed through his work, and to that between the hunter and the landscape over which
he roams in pursuit of game. The human painter, depicting the mimih, paints his own
reﬂection as it looks back at him from the rock face. It is almost a self-portrait, but not
quite, for the human’s activity of painting is reﬂected back as the spirit’s activity of hunting.
In this the equivalence between hunting and painting, as alternative ways of opening up
an ancestral order to visual perception, is perfectly epitomised – though I should stress
again that hunting, in Aboriginal understanding, is primarily a kind of movement on the
land rather than something you do to, or with, animals. This interpretation, incidentally,
immediately makes sense of Kunwinjku assertions to the effect that the original mimih
paintings were produced by the spirits themselves. But ancestral beings do not paint themselves; they simply are, and are revealed in the enduring forms of their creation.
Three further stylistic features of totemic depiction follow from what I have said so far.
First, animal-like ﬁgures are not generally arranged together to form a narrative scene.
For to show such a ﬁgure engaged in any kind of activity, on its own or with others,
would be fundamentally incompatible with both readings of what it depicts, whether the
dead body of a creature that has been hunted and killed or the body of an ancestral being
metamorphosed into the landscape. It is true that in some compositions, animal ﬁgures
appear in symmetrically disposed pairs (Taylor 1996: 164), but this appears to be in the
interests of formal balance rather than due to any narrative requirements. Once again, this
is in striking contrast to paintings of anthropomorphic mimih ﬁgures, both ancient and
recent, which often show many ﬁgures together engaged in a variety of activities (Carroll
1977: 122–5, Taylor 1996: 188). Secondly, the animal is speciﬁed, in pictorial form, by
a ﬁxed proﬁle or silhouette which itself frames the painting. For what is depicted is
not a particular being situated within a world, but rather the world as it is enfolded within
a particular being. The bodily limits of the being are therefore the limits of the world.
There is nothing beyond. Admittedly, in Figure 7.3 the portrait of the mimih spirit lies
outside the proﬁle of the animal. But as we have seen this portrait, rather like a signature in the corner of a modern Western work of art, is a projection of the identity of the
painter rather than a disclosure of the underlying order of the world, and in this sense is
not really part of the picture at all. Thirdly, since there is nothing beyond the body proﬁle,
we must look to what is inside it – to the relations between its divisions and between
these and the whole – to understand the signiﬁcance of the painting. Where, for example,
an ancestral being is credited with the creation of sacred objects to be used in ceremonies,
these objects are indicated in paintings as organs internal to the ancestral body in its
animal form, rather than as implements in its hands (Taylor 1989: 379–80). Here, too,
there is an obvious contrast with depictions of mimih, which are often shown brandishing
tools and weapons that serve to indicate the activities in which they are engaged (Taylor
1996: 187–9).
In order to reinforce my general argument about the static nature of totemic depictions and their association with the morphology of the landscape, I should like to refer
brieﬂy to two other painting traditions from Aboriginal Australia, both very different from
that of Western Arnhem Land which has been the focus of my discussion up to now.
Among peoples of the desert regions of Central Australia, such as the Walbiri, Pintupi
and Luritja, animal forms do not appear at all. What are depicted, in the past by being

Livelihood
drawn or sculpted in the sand, and nowadays painted in acrylic on board, are not ances- 1
tral beings themselves but the permanent traces of their activity.4 A horseshoe-shaped 2
motif, for example, indicates the impression that was left in the ground where the kangaroo 3
ancestor sat down to rest; a pair of parallel wavy lines is the path left in the sand by the 4
ancestral python, and a cluster of small circles are the eggs laid by the ancestral lizard. 5
To each of these motifs there correspond speciﬁc features of the landscape: the kangaroo’s 6
resting place is a water-hole, the snake’s track a creek-bed, the python’s eggs a patch of 7
rounded boulders (Layton 1985: 437–8). In sand-drawings and paintings, graphic elements 8
of this kind are linked by connecting lines into a kind of network, and the various routes 9
that can be traced through the network correspond to the paths taken by ancestral beings 10
as they travelled from place to place, creating the landscape as they went.
Now in these depictions from the Australian Central Desert, just as in those from 2
Western Arnhem Land, nothing is going on, or being done. They portray a world that 3
is already made, not one in the making. Yet the two traditions of painting seem to be 4
the exact inverse of one another. In the ﬁrst we see an unbounded ground, but no animal 5
ﬁgures – only ‘black holes’ corresponding to their enduring imprints in the surface of the 6
earth. In the second we see bounded animal ﬁgures, but no ground – there is nothing 7
beyond them. Further reﬂection, however, shows these to be mutually exclusive alterna- 8
tives. For to combine ﬁgure and ground – that is, to show the animal ﬁgures and their 9
imprints in the landscape together in the same composition – would at once be to convert 20
it into a narrative scene of the world-in-creation. Suppose, for example, that we were to 1
take a ﬁgure depicting the ancestral kangaroo and place it upon a line of horseshoe-motifs 2
to show its track. The effect would be to turn the ﬁgure inside out: no longer enfolding 3
the world in its being, the kangaroo ancestor would be portrayed instead as a being in 4
the world, engaged in the activity of journeying from place to place with its character- 5
istic alternation of movement and rest. If, on the other hand, we were to take a depiction 6
of the line of ancestral travel and the impressions left along the way, and add to it an 7
image of the kangaroo-being itself, then the latter would – by its very presence – indi- 8
cate that the depiction is of a world-shaping journey that is still ongoing rather than over 9
and done with. To portray a world whose formation is complete, the agents of creation 30
have either to be removed from the scene, thus demonstrating that their work is ﬁnished, 1
or shown metamorphosed into the forms of their own creation, in which case the world 2
itself becomes one with the immobilised bodies of its creators, each of which incorporates 3
the whole in a particular aspect. The ﬁrst solution has been adopted by the painters of 4
the Central Desert, the second by those of western Arnhem Land.
Among the peoples of the Western Kimberleys of northwestern Australia, we ﬁnd yet 6
another solution.5 In this case the ﬁgures in paintings, which are found on the walls of 7
certain caves, are immobile like the landscape because they are actually fused with it. That 8
is to say, they are as tied to the sites in which they occur as are the rock faces that bear 9
them. The principal ﬁgures depicted in these paintings are anthropomorphic creator beings 40
known as Wandjina. These beings are of bulbous, rotund build, somewhat resembling the 1
human neonate, which gives the impression that they would be incapable of supporting 2
themselves, let alone of autonomous movement. The head is usually surrounded by a 3
broad, halo-like band often divided by lines that radiate outwards. Having neither mouths 4
with which to breathe or sing, nor ears to hear, they are clearly inanimate, while their 5
large round eyes stare vacantly out from the rock face. The Wandjina ﬁgures are often 6
accompanied by similarly lifeless ﬁgures of animal form, depicting the species that they 7
are supposed to have originally brought into being. According to Aboriginal legend, having 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 121 •

shaped the landscape through their activities in the Dreaming, the Wandjina eventually
came to rest at particular sites where they can still be seen. At these sites, they literally
painted themselves into the cave walls. Living humans paint too, of course: thus every
clan is responsible for the regular retouching of the Wandjina in its own country, in order
to keep them in good condition. For if a painting were to fade and disappear, so would
the being it depicts, and with it would go the life-giving energy which it imparts to the
land. Painting as retouching, in short, is not just a matter of disclosing an already created
world, but of conserving or looking after it.
Both in appearance and in status, the Wandjina of the Kimberleys are at the opposite
end of the scale from the mimih of Arnhem Land. Mimih, as we have seen, are mobile,
and in ancient times they used the walls of caves as convenient surfaces on which to depict
their everyday activities in a straightforwardly narrative style, subsequently copied by
human beings. But the Wandjina did not paint pictures of themselves on the rock, they
painted themselves into it. In the painting, they metamorphosed into their own depictions. Wandjina ﬁgures, in short, are not depictions of anything. Rather, they are what
they depict, the creator beings themselves, forever immobilised in the rock face. Comparing
the mimih ﬁgures with the animal forms of ancestral beings in the paintings of Western
Arnhem Land, we have seen that in the ﬁrst case depiction is a mode of narration, and
in the second a mode of revelation. In the Wandjina of the Kimberleys, by contrast, depiction is a mode of being.

Carving the spirits: the circumpolar North
Now let me return to Figure 7.4, and from the totemic ontology of Aboriginal Australia
to the very different, animic system of northern circumpolar societies – exempliﬁed in
this instance by the Inuit. There is no doubt that the drawing depicts a narrative scene.
Critically, it is one in which the animal is just as much a participant as the human hunter.
Both are clearly situated in an environment, with a ground surface and scrub vegetation.
There is, indeed, a world of difference between the observation of a living animal in its
normal environment and the examination of its anatomical form, as though it were
laid out before you like a corpse. On a surface reading, this is what distinguishes the
ﬁgure of the caribou in Davidialuk Alasuaq’s picture from Namerredje Guymala’s rendering
of the kangaroo. The picture is a ﬁnely observed portrayal of the characteristic posture and behaviour of the caribou when it encounters the hunter face to face. It is a fact
well known both to hunters and to biologists who have set out to study caribou behaviour by scientiﬁc methods, that at the point when the animal becomes aware of the close
presence of a potential predator, whether human or non-human, it stands still, turning
to stare directly at its pursuer (see Chapter One, p. 13). The attitude of the animal at
this point, and the tension and suspense of the moment, are beautifully caught in the
picture.
From my discussion in Chapter One, it will be recalled that native people have a particular explanation for why the caribou stands its ground. This is the moment, they say, at
which the animal intentionally offers itself up to the hunter. This leads us to a deeper
reading of the drawing of the caribou in Figure 7.4, which once again contrasts with the
‘inside’ reading of the ﬁgure of the kangaroo in Kunwinjku painting. Recall that the latter
reveals a motionless essence, embodied in the land, upon which is founded the life-cycles
of ordinary, mortal creatures. The depiction of the caribou, to the contrary, reveals powers
of agency, intentionality, and sentience embodied in a living, moving being. On this

Livelihood
reading, the human hunter relates to the animal as one such being to another, and the 1
encounter is a moment in the ongoing dialogue between them. Among hunters who take 2
this view of animals, there is a general feeling that one should not kill an animal that 3
does not consent to be taken. To kill without the animal’s active connivance would 4
be an act of violence, carrying the threat of equally violent retribution in the future. How, 5
then, can a hunter know for sure whether an animal means to give itself up or not? 6
This dilemma, a very real one in the experience of Inuit and other northern hunting 7
peoples, is fundamentally what the drawing is about. Let us take a closer look at what is 8
going on.
Like humans, animals reveal their identities and intentions through their behaviour. 10
But the animal in the picture is behaving suspiciously. Speciﬁcally, it has a sprig of willow 1
clenched between its jaws. With this, it seems to be trying to say something. But what? 2
Could it be a warning of some kind? The hunter does not know for sure. Uncertain about 3
the caribou’s intentions towards him he turns his eyes away from its gaze, and does not 4
shoot. Another picture by Davidialuk Alasuaq, reproduced in Figure 7.5, shows what could 5
have happened had he done so. Here the arrow has already penetrated the body of the 6
caribou, whose forelegs are giving way in a posture that vividly portrays its imminent 7
death. But look at the faces of the hunter and his prey! The man stares at us with an 8
expression of wide-eyed terror. As for the animal, the skin and fur covering of its head 9
has been pulled back to reveal a wolf-like visage, with round eyes, a long, thin snout and 20
bared fangs. The gentle caribou has turned into a frightening predator, and we are left 1
wondering who, in fact, is hunting whom.6
Now animals that appear thus, with the head covering removed or retracted, are known 3
as ‘hoodless’ (nasaittuq).7 Generally, they are individuals that have been maltreated in one 4
way or another by humans in the past, and therefore harbour some malice towards them. 5
I have already shown how, in an animic system, the regeneration of the lifeworld depends 6
Figure 7.5 On killing a hoodless caribou. Drawing by Davidialuk Alasuaq, from the personal collec- 6
tion of Professor Bernard Saladin d’Anglure.
From B. Saladin d’Anglure, Inuit and caribou, published by Université Laval, Canada, 1979, p. 63.

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 123 •

upon the maintenance of balance in the reciprocal give-and-take of vital force. Animals
give life to humans, but humans should receive only what is offered rather than seek to
extract vitality by forcible or violent means. For otherwise the animals, seeking equally
violent recompense, would be turned from life-givers to life-takers. This is precisely what
has happened in the case of the hoodless caribou depicted in Figure 7.5. Signiﬁcantly
nasaittuq, if killed, are deemed to be inedible: as potential eaters of human beings they
cannot be eaten by humans – not, at least, without courting considerable danger.
However the image of the retractable hood tells us something more, about the way in
which living beings are generally thought to be constituted in animic systems. Despite
considerable variation in the detail, a fundamental division is always recognised into two
parts: an interior, vital part that is the source of all awareness, memory, intention and
feeling, and an exterior, bodily covering that provides the equipment and confers the
powers that are necessary to conduct a particular form of life.8 The ﬁrst is continuous
through time, the second is inherently unstable. Creatures of the sea, for example, can
exchange ﬁns and ﬂippers for the armature of a terrestrial quadruped, or vice versa: whales,
say the Yup’ik of Alaska, can turn into wolves (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 74–5), but behind
the altered bodily form and lifestyle lies a continuity of being. Now for animals in their
own communities, as for humans in theirs, the body is transparent. Beings perceive and
interact with one another directly, wearing their feelings and intentions, so to speak, ‘on
the surface’, and above all – as we shall see – on the face. However it is not ordinarily
possible for a human being to perceive a living animal in this way: its true face remains
concealed behind the bodily covering. To witness it ‘face-to-face’, with its hood removed,
one must already have crossed over from the human to the animal domain. Indeed a
common theme of stories all around the circumpolar North is of how a traveller, having
lost his or her bearings in the human world, strays or is lured into the abode of a certain
animal, whereupon the latter stands revealed in its inner being. For the traveller, this is
a dangerous, indeed potentially fatal predicament. One may never make it back to the
company of humankind. Small wonder, then, that the hunter depicted in Figure 7.5 looks
scared. For not only does the hoodless caribou, its predatory intentions revealed, pose a
direct threat to life and limb, but also the very sight of it casts a pall of uncertainty over
his existential status as a human being.
In short, the faces of animals are visible only to humans who have taken up the subject
positions of the animals themselves, and who have therefore – in the eyes of other humans
– actually turned into animals. Only shamans have the power to do this intentionally
and with relative impunity. Human beings can, however, invoke the presence of animals
in their midst by means of masks. Here, in effect, it is the animal, whose inner being
or spirit is revealed on the surface of the mask, which takes up the subject position of
a human, namely that occupied by the mask-bearer. The carving of wooden masks
depicting the faces of animals and other non-humans, for display in dances and ceremonies,
is widespread among the indigenous peoples of the circumpolar North. In some regions,
such as among Inuit and Yup’ik people of Alaska, and on the American northwest
coast, the construction of masks reached quite extraordinary degrees of elaboration. This
is not the place for a detailed analysis of their symbolic content.9 I want merely to make
three general observations about the depiction of animals in masks. First, the central
component of every mask, around which all else revolves, is a face. Secondly, the mask
is not a disguise intended to hide the identity of the bearer. Thirdly, in appearance, the
masks often show little obvious resemblance to the animals whose spirits they are supposed
to depict.

Livelihood
As a surface, the face has some very peculiar properties. I can feel my own face, and 1
others can see it. But it remains invisible to me. Where others see my face, I see the 2
world. Thus the face is the visible appearance, in others’ eyes, of my own subjective pres- 3
ence as an agent of perception. It is, if you will, the look of human being. By the same 4
token, the face-depicting mask is the look of non-human being. Both face and mask are 5
the phenomenal forms of ‘the Other as Subject’, that is, as the ‘second person’ whom one 6
would address as ‘you’ and who would respond in kind (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 483). 7
Now when the hunter in Figure 7.5 witnessed the caribou with its hood drawn back, 8
what he saw was the animal’s real face. However, far from its having been unmasked, as 9
a conventional understanding of masking as disguise or cover-up would lead us to expect, 10
the mask was what was revealed. In other words, the mask is not the skin and fur of the 1
hood but the face itself. As visible manifestations of inner being, face and mask are onto- 2
logically equivalent. Thus a being can no more look through a mask than it can look 3
through its own face. There is no face peering out from behind the mask. In effect the 4
identity of the human mask-bearer is not so much disguised as displaced by the mask he 5
carries. For this reason, in masked dances the eyes of the bearers should be downcast – 6
rendered passive in order to make way for the active perceptual powers of the mask 7
(Fienup-Riordan 1987).10
Moreover, precisely because the mask’s purpose is to reveal the true, or spirit face of 9
the animal rather than to conceal that of its human bearer behind an animal disguise, its 20
appearance is nothing like the animal’s facial covering. The standard features of the mask- 1
face include eyes, mouth and nostrils. On perceiving these features we are inclined to 2
regard the face as human, or at least human-like, in appearance, and there is some evidence 3
that native people did the same, thus supposing that animal spirits are human in form 4
(Oosten 1992: 115–16). Yet the faces on many masks are so grotesquely distorted that 5
they bear no more resemblance to the human visage than to that of any other creature, 6
and mask-makers were certainly not constrained by any conventions of realism. Their aim, 7
it seems, was not to depict any attributes of morphology or behaviour that might be drawn 8
from empirical observation of the animal in question, but rather to capture the under- 9
lying character and personal idiosyncrasies attributed to the spirit that has assumed its 30
form. This was done by inﬂecting the curve of the mouth, the splay of the nostrils or 1
the slant of the eyes in recognisable ways. Some masks have hinged ﬂaps of outwardly 2
naturalistic appearance, but these are designed to open up so as to disclose the face, 3
effecting a transformation precisely equivalent to the caribou’s removal of its hood. Other 4
masks achieve the same effect through visual punning or ﬁgure–ground reversal: thus a 5
whale’s-tail mask looks realistic enough when viewed from one angle, but from another 6
the contours of the tail turn out to reveal a mouth, nose and browridges (Ray 1967: 212 7
and Plate 52, Oosten 1992: 128–9, see also Carpenter 1966: 224).
It is in the matter of clothing, not masks, that considerations of animals’ diverse bodily 9
forms, and of the behavioural capacities that go along with them, come to the fore. 40
Circumpolar hunters attach great importance to clothing, dressing up in the skins and 1
furs of the animals they have killed. Of course they have to keep warm, but there is more 2
to it than that. We have seen that animals’ bodily covering is understood as so much 3
equipment which enables them to lead the kinds of lives they do. Human beings differ 4
from other animals in that they are born naked, without any covering. To survive, they 5
must clothe themselves with animal bodies, and in so doing, they can also draw on the 6
effectivities these bodies confer (see Chapter Six, p. 94). Very often, parts of the animal 7
skin would be tailored to cover corresponding parts of the human body: thus the skin of 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 125 •

the head would be made into a hood, that of the legs into trousers and boots, and so on
(Chaussonnet 1988: 213). In short, whereas animals take body-skin off to reveal themselves in their inner being, humans put it on in order to function in the world.11 This is
the difference between the bear and the man in Figure 7.1. The man wears a coat, leaving
his face and hands uncovered. The bear, however, has uncovered his face and hands by
peeling back the skin. The one, in a sense, dresses up, the other dresses down. Dressing
in skin clothing, however, is very different from wearing a mask. For the mask is distinguished from clothing precisely as the inner being of the animal is distinguished from its
exterior body. Dressed in its skin, the human acquires the effectivities of the animal;
donning the mask, the human makes way for the spirit of the animal.
Before leaving the subject of masks, I should like to comment on a curious feature of
masks from the Kuskokwim-Yukon area of Alaska. One such is illustrated in Figure 7.6A.
This is an example of the type of mask referred to above, with hinged doors that open
to reveal a face. Painted on the inside surface of each door are quite realistic, silhouette
depictions of seals (on the left) and caribou (on the right). Now the mask-face belongs
to a tunghak, one of the spirit ‘masters’ or keepers of game animals. Evidently, the tunghak
has its charges in mind, since even with the shutters closed the seal and caribou ﬁgures
dance before its eyes. Now it is often said in these parts that a hunter, if he is to succeed,
should likewise keep the animals he will pursue at the forefront of his thoughts. Thinking
of animals is one of the ways of keeping up a proper relationship with them; conversely
the animals, if well regarded, will think positively of humans. Yup’ik hunters, according

Figure 7.6 Two masks from the Kuskokwim-Yukon area of Alaska, from Nelson (1983 [1896–7]: Plates
50 and 51). The ﬁrst (A) depicts a spirit master of the animals (tunghak). According to Nelson (1983:
406) the animal ﬁgures on the inside left shutter are seals; Ray, however, claims they are whales (1967:
65). A colour photograph of the same mask appears in Fitzhugh (1988: 306 ﬁg. 435), but in this the
ﬁgures on the left appear too worn to be identiﬁed with certainty. The second mask (B) depicts a salmon,
with its back cut away to reveal the face of the salmon’s inua, or spirit.
From E. W. Nelson, The Eskimo about Bering Strait, published by Smithsonian Institution Press, 1983,
p. 408.

Livelihood
to Fienup-Riordan, ‘admonished young men to “keep the thought of seals” foremost in 1
their minds as they shoveled snow, carried out trash, and hauled water’ (1994: 53). So 2
whatever he is doing, whether actually out hunting or engaged in routine domestic chores, 3
the animals should always be there before a man’s mind’s eye. Hunters, as we might say, 4
typically have animals ‘on the brain’. In the extraordinary, bird-like hunting helmets tradi- 5
tionally worn by the Aleut, adorned with exquisitely lifelike animal ﬁgurines carved from 6
ivory, and sometimes painted with narrative depictions of hunting scenes as well, this 7
became almost literally true (Rousselot, Fitzhugh and Crowell 1988: 152, 164–5). But 8
the carving of realistic animal ﬁgurines is a practice of truly circumpolar distribution, and 9
– besides the signiﬁcance attached to masks and clothing – is probably one of the most 10
distinctive features of animic depiction. I would like to conclude this section with a few 1
words about it.
In my analysis of the animal depictions of Western Arnhem Land, I showed how the 3
activity of painting can be compared, in a certain sense, to that of hunting. In the circum- 4
polar North there is a similar parallel between carving and hunting. Yet the similarity 5
hides a contrast, for in the experience of the carver, hunting is not so much a movement 6
through the terrain as a mode of relating to animals. The important thing in hunting is 7
never to impose one’s will upon animals, to force them against their inclinations. When 8
it is ready, but not before, the animal reveals itself to the hunter, who can then grace- 9
fully receive its gift of bodily substance. In just the same way, carving is not the wilful 20
imposition of preconceived form on brute matter, but a process in which the carver is 1
continually responsive to the intrinsic qualities of the material, to how it wants to be. 2
The following passage, in which Edmund Carpenter describes an Inuit carver at work, 3
could almost have been written of the hunter on the ice:
As the carver holds the unworked ivory lightly in his hand, turning it this way and 6
that, he whispers, ‘Who are you? Who hides there?’ And then: ‘Ah, Seal!’ . . . Then he 7
brings it out: seal, hidden, emerges. It was always there: He did not create it. He released 8
it: he helped it step forth.
(1966: 206) 30
If painting, for the people of Western Arnhem Land, is a way of focusing attention on 2
the land and its immanent ancestral powers, then carving for the Inuit and other peoples 3
of the North is a way of keeping animals in mind. Moreover it is the process – of dwelling 4
on the animals in one’s thought – that is important, rather more than the products – the 5
carvings themselves – which are readily lost or discarded (Carpenter 1966: 212).
This interpretation helps us to make sense of two outstanding features of carved animal 7
ﬁgurines: their minute size and their realism (Figure 7.7). Among carvings from the so- 8
called Dorset Culture, dating to as early as 800 BC, Carpenter notes that one – of a 9
ptarmigan – ‘is scarcely larger than the head of a match’, another – of a running bear, 40
complete with claws – ‘is less than three-eighths of an inch high’, and a third – of a glau- 1
cous gull – ‘weighs less than one-sixtieth of an ounce’. Yet each was so accurate that there 2
could be no doubt about the species depicted (1966: 218). These tiny objects are the 3
material embodiments of thoughts, or more strictly they are thoughts. For the carver would 4
not separate thinking in the head from thinking with the hands, nor, consequently, would 5
he distinguish the products of these respective activities. But as embodied thoughts, carv- 6
ings are of such a microcosmic scale that they can be turned around in the hand as can 7
images in the mind. They are not designed to be set upon a pedestal and looked at, 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 127 •

indeed most will not stand up unless artiﬁcially mounted. Rather, like memories, they are
held close to the person – generally fastened to the clothing – and are carried around
with that person wherever he or she goes. Indeed the relation between the hunter and
the miniature ﬁgurines he carries is precisely analogous to that between the tunghak
depicted in the mask shown in Figure 7.6A and the tiny animal ﬁgures painted on its
inside doors. Both the mask-spirit who has seals and caribou to bestow, and the hunter
who has hopes of receiving them, have animals in mind.
These little animals are like tokens in the ongoing relationship of give and take between
human hunters and the spirit beings on
whose continued generosity the supply of
game depends. They are, in that sense,
equivalent to the animals actually killed in
the hunt, and this accounts for the realism
of their depiction. Equally lifelike ﬁgures are
frequently carved on hunting and other
equipment: knife-handles, harpoon heads,
toggles, lamps, bowls and containers, and
sundry other items could all be ornamented
in this way. As Fitzhugh explains, throughout northern North America (and for that
matter, in the Eurasian North as well),
‘hunting art, the ornamentation of weapons,
and the use of ritual hunting clothing were
the hunter’s way of asking for the gift of an
animal rather than overpowering it physically or spiritually’ (1988: 310–11). It should
come as no surprise, then, that among
Australian Aboriginal hunter-gatherers, who
have no such reciprocal ties with animaldonors, the ornamentation of equipment is
conspicuously absent. Indeed in the relation
between the ancestral beings of Western
Arnhem Land and the tiny mimih spirits we
ﬁnd the precise inverse of the relation,
among northern circumpolar hunters, between human or spirit beings and the little
animal tokens that they carry. Where the
human-like mimih adheres to the much
larger body of the zoomorphic ancestral Figure 7.7 Miniature waterfowl carved in walrus ivory by
being, the carved animal ﬁgurine adheres to Inuit of the Ungava District, northern Quebec; from Turner
the clothing of the hunter, and the painted (1979 [1889–90]: 96 ﬁg. 63). The species depicted include
animal silhouette to the mask of the spirit. loons, eider ducks, geese, sea pigeons, and guillemots. Turner

SOME MORE COMPARISONS
I have shown that perhaps the most fundamental contrast between the totemic and
animic depiction of animals is between a

writes: ‘It is readily discerned, in most instances, what position and action of the bird was intended to be represented.
The last shows in the plainest possible manner that the loon
is just starting to swim from an object which has given it
alarm’.
From L. M. Turner, Ethnology of the Ungava District,
published by Presses Coméditex, Quebec, 1979.

Livelihood
focus on morphology and anatomy in the former, and on posture, movement and behav- 1
iour in the latter. It would be a mistake to infer from this, however, that in totemic 2
society, people know and experience the land, and the ancestral beings that shaped it, 3
only by their ﬁnal immobile forms. And it would be equally mistaken to infer that in 4
animic society, animals and other non-human beings are known and experienced only by 5
way of their mobility. After all, the animal spirit whose face is carved on a mask is no 6
more shown to be ‘doing something’ than is the ancestral being whose proﬁle is painted 7
on rock or bark. Neither the painting nor the mask depicts movement. The difference 8
between them, however, is that in totemic depiction the signiﬁcant movement lies in the 9
process of painting itself, whereas in animic depiction it is imparted to the ﬁnished object, 10
the mask.
In their ceremonies Australian Aboriginal people re-enact, through song, dance and 2
storytelling, the events of ancestral world-creation. Dance steps, in particular, mime the 3
original movements of the ancestral beings, and are closely modelled on the characteristic 4
postures and gestures of the animals whose forms they take. In storytelling, the narrator 5
may move a ﬁnger across the sand in imitation of the movement of the ancestral hero of 6
the story, leaving a trace that has its counterpart in the landscape which the hero shaped 7
in its journey. Now like dancing and storytelling, painting, too, is a performance. The 8
movement of painting is congealed in the depiction just as that of the storyteller is 9
congealed in the traces of his gestures in the sand, or that of the dancers in the imprint 20
of their feet upon the earth. But the analogy is between painting, dancing and storytelling, 1
not between paintings, dances and stories. The painter does not, in his picture, seek to 2
portray the actions of ancestral beings, as do dancers in their steps and storytellers in their 3
words. But like them, he seeks to re-enact ancestral activity – to ‘go over’ it again and 4
again, quite literally in the case of retouching – in the very movement of his work. Thus 5
while painting is an activity, paintings do not depict activity.
Carving, of course, is an activity too. But among Inuit and Yup’ik of Alaska, where 7
the making of masks was most highly elaborated, the carving itself was rather quickly 8
and furtively done so, it was said, as not to offend the spirits depicted (Ray 1967: 52). 9
A shaman who had experienced a vision of the spirit in question would often commis- 30
sion an expert carver to do the work for him, according to his instructions. Once 1
completed, the mask would be hidden away, only to be revealed in the ceremony for 2
which it was intended. Here, borne aloft by a dancer and animated by his movements, 3
the mask would come to life, to be witnessed by the audience as a being in their midst. 4
Thus while the Yup’ik or Inuit mask of an animal spirit, in itself, no more depicts activity 5
than does the Australian Aboriginal painting of a totemic ancestor, the former is perceived 6
as a dynamic, mobile presence whereas the latter is perceived as a static locus of congealed 7
power. This difference maps directly onto the basic distinction between totemic and animic 8
ontologies with which I began. It therefore furnishes an explanation for the remarkable 9
ethnographic fact that masks, which are such a striking feature of the animic societies of 40
the circumpolar North, are conspicuously absent from the totemic societies of Aboriginal 1
Australia.
In preparation for dances and ceremonies, however, Australian Aboriginal people do 3
apply painted designs to their own bodies, and it is perhaps to these, rather than to paint- 4
ings on external surfaces, that the masks of northern circumpolar societies should be 5
compared. Among the Kunwinjku of Western Arnhem Land, the painted body bears 6
the same pattern, consisting of a division into panels ﬁlled in with cross-hatching, that 7
is also applied to painted depictions of ancestral beings in their animal forms, thereby 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 129 •

establishing the essential consubstantiality of the two (Taylor 1996: 118–19). Thus decorated, a ritual participant becomes the living embodiment of the being whose distinctive
pattern he or she bears. So too, the Inuit masked dancer takes on the persona of the spiritbeing whose face is depicted on the mask he carries. But the similarity hides a crucial
contrast. In the masked dance one being, the spirit, takes the place of another, the dancer.
In Aboriginal ceremony, to the contrary, the identities of participants merge with those
of the beings whose deeds they enact. The mask, in short, effects a displacement, whereas
the body painting effects a reincorporation. The one asserts a metaphorical relation of
formal substitution, the other a metonymical link of substantial identity.
Almost exactly the same contrast was suggested by Andrew and Marilyn Strathern, in
a comparison of modes of self-decoration in the Mount Hagen area with those of the
Sepik River and elsewhere in Papua New Guinea. Sepik peoples carve elaborate ﬁgures
and masks, the people of Hagen do not:
The process of decoration in Hagen is not representational but metonymical: that is,
when Hageners wish to associate themselves with magically powerful things, such as
birds, they do not construct masks, carvings or paintings of these. Instead they actually take the parts of the birds, their feathers, and attach these to themselves as
decorations.
(Strathern and Strathern 1971: 176–7)
Likewise, Australian Aboriginal body decoration enhances the power and vitality of humans
through direct contact with ancestral substance, whereas the carved masks of northern
circumpolar peoples invoke the presence of non-human sources of power, namely animal
spirits, with which humans must perforce transact in order to keep vitality in circulation.
In this connection it is signiﬁcant that disposable parts of animals such as feathers, down
and hair, which are used for decoration in both traditions, are attached directly to the
body in Aboriginal Australia, but are invariably attached to masks in the circumpolar
North.
While body painting can be contrasted along one dimension with masks, along another
it can be contrasted with clothing. For northern circumpolar hunters, as we have seen,
the body is conceived as a covering that provides the wherewithal to conduct a certain
form of life. By ‘dressing up’ in the bodies of animals, humans can draw on the practical
effectivities they confer. Painting the body, however, is quite different from clothing it,
for rather than surrounding it with an envelope of capacities, painting serves to bring out,
or render visible, its inner constitution. This contrast, in turn, enables us to explain the
difference between two quite distinct styles of so-called ‘X-ray’ depiction. Kunwinjku
painters, as we have seen, concentrate on the insides of the animal body: its internal parts
and organs and their positioning in relation to one another (see Figure 7.3). In the northern
style, on the other hand, the X-ray view always reveals what is inside the body – its spiritual
inhabitant – invariably manifested as a face. An example is shown in Figure 7.6B, another
mask from the Kuskokwim-Yukon region of Alaska. The mask portrays the body of the
salmon in a somewhat ﬂattened form, but the back has been cut away to reveal the facial
features of the salmon’s spirit. Quite unlike the totemic style of X-ray depiction, exempliﬁed by Kunwinjku painting, in which the emphasis is on the body’s enduring essence,
its bones; in the animic style of the Yup’ik the body ﬁgures as a skin that enclothes its
spiritual inhabitant. The former style is no more interested in the face than is the latter
with the details of internal skeletal architecture.

Livelihood
Finally, there is a contrast to be drawn between painting and carving as techniques of 1
depiction. Australian Aboriginal people were traditionally skilled carvers, yet with the 2
exception of some crude specimens intended for the tourist market (Layton 1992a: 151–2), 3
they did not carve animal ﬁgures. Northern circumpolar people, conversely, knew very 4
well how to paint, and they applied paint to – among other things – their carved masks. 5
But painted depictions of animals or other beings are remarkably rare. I would like to 6
suggest that the difference between painting and carving might be related to that between 7
the totemic focus on the land and the animic focus on its living inhabitants. This sugges- 8
tion is admittedly speculative, and doubtless calls for a good deal of qualiﬁcation and 9
reﬁnement. Nevertheless, the parallel between painting, as a movement that ‘goes over’ 10
and transforms a surface, and the movement of ancestral beings going over and trans- 1
forming the surface of the earth, seems more than coincidental. Likewise, there is a 2
remarkable afﬁnity between carving, as a way of bringing out the form immanent in a 3
lump of material, be it ivory, wood or stone, and the animic understanding of being as 4
immanent within the manifold appearances of the lifeworld. I have shown, moreover, that 5
while painting is akin to hunting in the totemic context, where to hunt is to make one’s 6
way over the land, carving is akin to hunting in the animic context, where to hunt is to 7
engage in a dialogue with its non-human inhabitants.
CONCLUSION
Up to now I have been concerned with the differences between totemic and animic depic- 2
tion. To conclude, it is time to turn to what they have in common. This is most easily 3
expressed in terms of what they are not. In a word, they are not representational. Neither 4
in their painting nor in their carving do people seek to reconstruct the material world 5
they know, through their mundane subsistence pursuits of hunting and gathering, on a 6
higher plane of cultural or symbolic meaning. Whether their primary concern be with the 7
land or its non-human inhabitants, their purpose is not to represent but to reveal, to 8
penetrate beneath the surface of things so as to reach deeper levels of knowledge and 9
understanding. It is at these levels that meaning is to be found. There is no division, here, 30
between ‘ecology’ and ‘art’, as though hunting were merely a matter of organic provi- 1
sioning and carving or painting gave vent to the free play of the symbolic imagination. 2
This division, along with the dualism of nature and culture on which it rests, is of modern 3
provenance, and it lies behind the conventional notion of the work of art as proof of a 4
uniquely human capacity for creative thought and expression.
It is commonly believed that art, like language, is a species universal whose evolutionary 6
emergence marked the advent of humanity itself. This belief, however, belongs to a Western 7
myth of origin which, like all such myths, does more to legitimate the present than shed 8
light on the past. Projecting onto our hunter-gatherer forbears the capacities for every- 9
thing we most value in contemporary civilisation, the entire course of history – including 40
the history of art – is revealed as the glorious but pre-ordained movement of their 1
progressive fulﬁlment.12 The famous paintings of Lascaux or Chauvet surprise us 2
because they seem better than they ought to be at such an early epoch, but we never 3
doubt that they are art. Of course we know nothing about how the people who painted 4
these pictures, some 30,000 years ago, felt about animals, ancestors and the land. It is, 5
however, extremely unlikely that they subscribed to the hierarchical ranking of human- 6
ity over nature that leads contemporary Western observers to celebrate their achievement 7
as the high point of artistic development in prehistory. Such ranking would certainly 118

Totemism, animism and the depiction of animals • 131 •

have been utterly inconceivable within the totemic and animic ontologies that I have
discussed here.
To be sure, hunters and gatherers have been painting and carving ﬁgures of one kind
or another for thousands of years. But only in recent times, now that their paintings and
carvings have entered the Western ‘art world’ – where they attract curiosity, admiration
and sometimes high prices – have these people begun to engage in the production of art
in the conventional art-world sense of objects for sale or for display in museums and
galleries. Hunters and gatherers of the past were painting and carving, but they were not
‘producing art’. To understand the original signiﬁcance of what they were doing, I contend,
we must cease thinking of painting and carving as modalities of the production of art,
and view art instead as one rather peculiar, and historically very speciﬁc objectiﬁcation of
the activities of painting and carving. We are right to admire the skills of Australian
Aboriginal painters, and of Inuit and Yup’ik carvers. Like all skills, they are acquired
through practice and training within an environment. They are not, however, culturally
speciﬁc dialects of a naturally evolved, and developmentally preconstituted ‘capacity for
art’. The existence of such a capacity is a ﬁgment of the Western imagination.

Livelihood
INTRODUCTION
‘Indigenous or aboriginal peoples’, according to a recent United Nations document, ‘are 5
so-called because they were living on their lands before settlers came from elsewhere’ 6
(United Nations 1997: 3). At the time of colonisation, they were the original inhabitants. 7
This is no guarantee, of course, that their forbears had not, during some earlier wave of 8
population movement, displaced a yet earlier people, nor is it to deny that people of settler 9
origin might develop deep and lasting attachments to the land. But these possibilities 20
raise some awkward questions. Does not the conﬂation of the two terms, indigenous and 1
aboriginal, merely perpetuate a thoroughly Eurocentric image of the precolonial world as 2
a mosaic of cultures and territories that was already ﬁxed in perpetuity before history 3
began? And is it reasonable to withhold indigenous status from persons who were born 4
and raised in a country, among people who likewise have a lifelong familiarity with it, 5
on no other grounds than that many generations previously, their ancestors had arrived 6
from somewhere else?1 Behind both questions is a more fundamental issue about what it 7
actually means to be an ‘original inhabitant’. Suppose – as is widely the case – that the 8
people who were already living on the land when the settlers arrived are no longer alive 9
today. On what grounds can contemporary generations partake of the ‘originality’ of their 30
predecessors?
In the ofﬁcial organs of the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation 2
(ILO), this question is answered in terms of descent. Thus the document cited above goes 3
on to explain, in the same passage, that indigenous peoples ‘are the descendants – according 4
to one deﬁnition – of those who inhabited a country or a geographical region at the time 5
when people of different cultures or ethnic origins arrived’.2 This answer, however, intro- 6
duces paradoxes of its own. For the descendants of these prior inhabitants of the country 7
need no longer live there. Indeed in many cases a substantial majority do not. The very 8
idea that originality can be passed on by descent, along chains of genealogical connec- 9
tion, seems to imply that it is a property of persons that can be transmitted, rather like 40
a legacy or endowment, independently of their habitation of the land. On the other hand, 1
this very habitation is claimed as the root source of aboriginal identity. How, then, can 2
an identity that lies in people’s belonging to the land reappear as a property that belongs 3
to them? There is a profound contradiction here, which it is my purpose in this article 4
to explore. It turns, as I shall argue, on the interpretation of ﬁve terms that have been 5
central to the debate on indigenous peoples, as conducted by academics, policy-makers 6
and representative organisations of the peoples themselves. They are: ancestry, generation, 7
substance, memory and land.

Chapter Eight

Ancestry, generation, substance,
memory, land

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 133 •

I aim to show that the meanings of these terms are linked, within this debate, by way
of their common grounding in what I shall call the ‘genealogical model’. I begin by spelling
out this model, and the assumptions it entails: that original ancestry lies at the point
where history rises from an ahistorical substrate of ‘nature’; that the generation of persons
involves the transmission of biogenetic substance prior to their life in the world; that
ancestral experience can be passed on as the stuff of cultural memory, enshrined in language
and tradition; and that the land is merely a surface to be occupied, serving to support its
inhabitants rather than to bring them into being. I go on to argue that the genealogical
model fundamentally misrepresents the ways in which the peoples whom we class as indigenous – that is, who are regarded as such from a sympathetic, anthropologically informed
perspective – actually constitute their identity, knowledgeability, and the environments in
which they live. I suggest an alternative, relational approach to interpreting the ﬁve key
terms which is more consonant with these people’s lived experience of inhabiting the land.
In this approach, both cultural knowledge and bodily substance are seen to undergo continuous generation in the context of an ongoing engagement with the land and with the
beings – human and non-human – that dwell therein. I conclude that it is in confronting
the need to articulate their experience in an idiom compatible with the dominant discourses
of the state that people are led to lay claim to indigenous status, in terms that nevertheless systematically invert their own understandings.
Before proceeding further I should enter two qualiﬁcations. First, it may reasonably be
objected that formal attempts to deﬁne the indigenous can only be understood in the
political context of peoples’ struggles, against the odds, to restore their security, dignity,
well-being and self-esteem after years of marginalisation and oppression. The intent and
meaning of any deﬁnition, in other words, must lie in the effort to reconﬁgure the relations
between a historically disadvantaged and numerically under-represented minority and the
encompassing nation state (Saugestad 1998: 31). To focus exclusively on criteria of eligibility – let alone on one particular criterion, that of descent – in isolation from the contexts
of their application, surely misses the point. My response to this objection is simply to
stress that what follows is not intended as a contribution to the analysis of the relations
between indigenous minorities and nation states. Rather, I take one particular deﬁnition
of indigenous status, formulated by the ILO, as an example of a way of thinking about
what it means to be indigenous which, I believe, is symptomatic of more fundamental
patterns of thought. It is these underlying patterns that I aim to explore. To observe that
people face a genuine dilemma in articulating their aspirations within the hegemonic
discourse of their erstwhile oppressors is not to question the worth or the integrity of
their political project. They may indeed have no alternative.
The second qualiﬁcation concerns the connection between the genealogical model and
the troublesome notion of modern or Western thought. The examples on which I draw
come predominantly from studies of hunting and gathering societies. In such societies,
people are rarely concerned with tracing paths of genealogical ancestry and descent. Yet
we know from ethnography that in a great many agricultural and pastoral societies, the
narration of such paths is a major preoccupation. Do agriculturalists and pastoralists, then,
operate with a genealogical model? Is this, to revert to an older anthropological terminology, what distinguishes ‘tribal’ from ‘band-level’ societies? By and large, I think not.
As a ﬁrst hypothesis, I would suggest that genealogical thinking in agricultural and pastoral
societies is carried on within the context of a relational approach to the generation of
knowledge and substance. That is to say, it is embedded in life-historical narratives of the
deeds of predecessors, of their movements and emplacements, and of their interventions

Livelihood

– oftentimes from beyond the grave – in the lives of successors. The genealogical model 1
turns this logic on its head. Here, genealogical connection becomes the context both for 2
thinking about relationships and for their enactment, rather than vice versa. Such a model 3
is indeed characteristic of Western modernity. But I would hesitate to attribute it exclu- 4
sively to the modernist episteme. Modern thought cannot have sprung, fully fashioned, 5
from nowhere, but must owe something to more deep-seated and enduring forms of 6
consciousness. As a second hypothesis, I would suggest that the genealogical model is an 7
aspect of just such a form and that it belongs, in this respect, with the generative condi- 8
tions for modernity rather than with modernity per se. To test either of the aforementioned 9
hypotheses, however, would call for a major investigation that lies well beyond the scope 10
of the present chapter.
THE GENEALOGICAL MODEL
Ancestry
One of the most potent images in the intellectual history of the Western world has been 7
that of the tree (Deleuze and Guattari 1988: 18). We use tree diagrams to represent hier- 8
archies of control, schemes of taxonomic division, and above all, chains of genealogical 9
connection. It is the tree as genealogy that speciﬁcally concerns me here. Early drawings 20
of such trees in the Western tradition draw copiously on Biblical imagery, depicting the 1
family of man as so many branches radiating from a trunk whose roots are planted ﬁrmly 2
in the land. Here, at the base of the trunk, lies the autochthonous Adam, the ﬁrst man 3
– who, as St Paul declared in his Epistle to the Corinthians, is unequivocally ‘earthy’. 4
Despite the revolution wrought by evolutionary theory in our conceptions of time and of 5
humankind’s place in nature, this basic picture has remained little changed (Bouquet 1995: 6
42–3). Thus Alfred Kroeber, in his Anthropology of 1948, used the Biblical ﬁgure of the 7
‘tree of the knowledge of good and evil’, rooted in the Garden of Eden, to illustrate his 8
view of the history of human culture as a tree whose branches – unlike those of its neigh- 9
bour, the ‘tree of life’ – could grow 30
together as well as split apart (see 1
Figure 8.1). Contemporary palaeo- 2
anthropologists continue to delve in 3
the earth for human origins, and while 4
the earliest ancestors of man are no 5
longer thought to have been specially 6
created but rather to have arisen by 7
way of an evolutionary phylogeny that 8
is itself depicted as a vast genealogical 9
tree, they remain uniquely placed at 40
the roots of history: in possession of 1
the full suite of human capacities, yet 2
still committed – like all other crea- 3
tures – to a life wholly conﬁned 4
Figure 8.1 ‘The tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good within the natural world.
and evil – that is, of human culture’.
Almost invariably, these ancestors are 6
Reproduced from Anthropology by A. L. Kroeber, Harcourt Brace portrayed as hunter-gatherers. Like 7
Jovanovich, 1948, p. 260.
the earthy Adam, they are supposed 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 135 •

to remain of the land, as opposed to cultivators who, having broken through the
bounds of nature and ‘branched out’ over the territories of the globe, proceed to settle
upon it. This opposition, between people of and on the land, continues to inform public
awareness, in the West, of the difference between indigenous people and colonists.
The former are seen to embody, in their present way of life, the ancestral condition of
those who were ‘there ﬁrst’, at the point where history began. Concern for the heritage
of indigenous peoples is thus tempered by a perception that they, in turn, represent
an essential part of the heritage of global humanity. Their place is understood to lie at
the foot of the tree of human culture. As culture rises from the land, branching out into
its many lines, so history rises up from the ground of nature. That history, however,
is conceived as one of colonisation. In the popular conception, colonists – by the
very fact of their occupation of the land – inevitably establish their domination over
indigenes, just as culture is bound to dominate nature. Land is there to be occupied, but
does not itself contribute to the constitution of its occupants. It therefore lies outside
of history.
How, then, is the connection established between ancestral humans and contemporary
indigenes? The answer, as we have already seen, is generally couched in the idiom of
descent. Present-day indigenous people, it is supposed, are in some sense ‘the same’ as the
people who were there at the very beginning, because the former are descended from
the latter. There is, however, a striking contrast between the image of the tree, ‘rising up’,
and that of descent as ‘going down’, and it is probably no accident that images of the
ﬁrst kind tend to dominate in progressivist accounts of the advance of human civilisation,
whereas images of the latter kind appear in more relativistic accounts of the continuity
and diversiﬁcation of local tradition. Certainly, ever since W. H. R. Rivers introduced
what he called the ‘genealogical method’ into anthropological inquiry, it has been conventional to upend the tree, placing its roots at the top (Bouquet 1995: 42–3; 1996). The
effect of this inversion, however, is to erase the image of the tree as a living, growing
entity, branching out along its many boughs and shoots, and to replace it with an abstract,
dendritic geometry of points and lines, in which every point represents a person, and every
line a genealogical connection. Thus a vertical line connecting two points, A and B, stands
for the proposition, ‘person B is descended from person A’.3 My question, which goes to
the heart of anthropological studies of kinship, is: what, exactly, is implied by this line?
Or to rephrase the question in negative terms, what does it leave out?

Generation
To begin with the positive part of the answer: the implication is that the essential or
substantive components of personhood are ‘handed on’, fully-formed, as an endowment
from predecessors. Their origins, in other words, lie in the completed past, rather than
in the present lives of recipients. From this it follows that the practical activities of people
in the course of their lives – in relating to others, making artefacts and inhabiting the
land – are not themselves generative of personhood but are rather ways of bringing already
established personal identities into play. And this, in turn, answers our question in its
negative formulation. For if the essential elements of personhood are given by virtue of
genealogical connection, independently of the situational contexts of human activity, then
a person’s location on a genealogical chart – in which every line is a link in a chain of
descent – says nothing about his or her actual placement in the world.4 As every person
in the chain is but an intermediary, passing on to successors the rudiments of being

Livelihood

descent-line

received from predecessors, what each does in his or her life – though it may inﬂuence 1
the possibility of transmission – has no bearing on its content. The circumstances of your 2
existence could affect whether you have many, few or no descendants, but not what you 3
pass on to them. A genealogy therefore presents a history of persons in the very peculiar 4
form of a history of relatedness, which unfolds without regard to people’s relationships – 5
that is to their experience of involvement, in perception and action, with their human 6
and non-human environments. I shall return to the distinction between relatedness and 7
relationship, since it is critical for my argument.
What we have just discovered, cleverly concealed behind the apparently innocent graph 9
of the line of descent, is an assumption that persons are brought into being – that is, 10
generated – independently and in advance of their entry into the lifeworld, through the 1
bestowal of a set of ready-made attributes from their antecedents. This assumption lies at 2
the very core of the genealogical model, and all its remaining features can be derived from 3
it. In particular, it implies that the generation of persons is not a life process. On the 4
contrary, life and growth are conceived as the enactment of identities, or the realisation 5
of potentials, that are already in place. It is descent, the passing down of the components 6
of being underwriting one life-cycle to the site of inauguration of another, that generates 7
persons. Thus the genealogical model, in separating out the generation of persons from 8
their life in the world, also splits the descent-line from the life-line. In so doing it estab- 9
lishes the conventional notion of the generation, deﬁned by the Oxford English Dictionary 20
as ‘offspring of the same parent regarded as a step in a line of descent from an ancestor’. 1
Whereas life goes on within each generation, descent crosses from one generation to the 2
next in a cumulative, step-by-step sequence (Figure 8.2).
With each new generation, those preceding it regress ever further into the past. Life, 4
however, is lived in the present. Thus the present is set over against the past along the 5
lines of generational succession and replacement. The conﬁnement of life to the present 6
leaves the past lifeless or extinct. Philippe Descola catches the essence of this view, so 7
characteristic of modernity, in his observation that ‘the present exists for us only thanks 8
to the inexorable abolition of the past from which it proceeds’ (1996b: 226). The idea 9
of the past as an age that is spent, and 30
that has no further part to play in what 1
is to come, is one of the hallmarks of 2
genealogical thinking. But in separating 3
PAST
the descent-line from the life-line, the 4
genealogical model also divorces time 5
from being. The events that follow one 6
another along a line of descent, like 7
life-line
beads on a string, do not take place in 8
PRESENT
generation
the lives of persons, they are persons. 9
The existence of each is collapsed into 40
the moment of the event it represents. 1
And these events, in turn, are suspended 2
in a time that is abstract and chrono- 3
FUTURE
logical (Ingold 1986b: 128–9). The 4
same logic that maps being upon the 5
plane of the present also stretches time 6
to eternity, yielding the classic dicho- 7
Figure 8.2 The relation between descent-line, life-line and
generation, according to the genealogical model.
tomy between synchrony and diachrony. 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 137 •

Arrayed diachronically in linear sequence, reaching back to ‘time immemorial’, persons
of the past are removed from their present descendants by a distance measured out in
generations.

Substance
Now it is commonly supposed that the total endowment a person-to-be receives, by way
of descent, can be divided into two components, respectively material and ideational. The
ﬁrst comprises the ingredients of bodily substance; the second the contents of cultural
memory. It was once customary to speak of the former in terms of kinds – or colours –
of ‘blood’, a usage preserved in the technical concept of consanguineal kinship (connection based on ‘shared blood’) as well as in a multitude of expressions of everyday currency
in the Western world (Schneider 1968: 23–5, Bouquet 1993: 17–21). Nowadays, one is
as likely to hear it said of some feature of a person that it is ‘in the genes’ as to be told
that it is ‘in the blood’. But the sense of such pronouncements has hardly been altered
by the substitution of genetic for sanguinary metaphors. If anything, the science of genetics
has not so much challenged as taken on board – and in turn lent authority to – the
founding principles of the genealogical model, namely that persons embody certain attributes of appearance, temperament and mentality by virtue of their ancestry, and that these
are passed on in a form that is unaffected by the circumstances or achievements of their
life in the world. These principles underly the belief, for example, in a species-wide human
nature which has come down to us more or less unchanged from its evolutionary origins
in the Pleistocene era, while remaining immune to the upheavals of history (see Chapter
Twenty-one).
Where, however, the very same principles are adduced to justify a narrower claim to
ethnic distinctiveness, based on the assertion of common descent from an ‘original’ ancestral population, the claim is bound to take on implicitly – if not explicitly – racial overtones.
This should come as no surprise, since the concepts of race and of generation, in the
speciﬁc sense of procreation implied by the genealogical model, are etymologically linked,
both derived from the Latin generare, ‘to beget’ (Wolf 1994: 1). All attempts to ascribe
indigenous identity on the criterion of descent have been plagued by the problem of miscegenation, and by concern over the degrees of racial impurity to which this is perceived
to give rise. What proportion of colonists can one number among one’s ancestors while
yet qualifying as an indigenous person? If indigenous people are marked out by their
common possession of an ancestral essence, how can some persons claim to be more
indigenous than others? In practice, efforts to accommodate the real complexities of
genealogical connection within essentialist categorisations based on the sharing of substance
through descent have invariably led to the endless ramiﬁcation of ever ﬁner lines of discrimination and exclusion whose imposition – which may have real consequences for those
affected in terms of access to resources and arenas of decision-making – appears increasingly arbitrary.

Memory
Turning from the transmitted component of bodily substance to the ideational component of cultural memory, we ﬁnd the assumptions of the genealogical model replicated,
once again, in an approach to culture as a corpus of traditional wisdom, handed
down as a legacy from the past, and which is applied or expressed, rather than actually

Livelihood
generated, in the contexts of present activity. This approach has venerable anthropo- 1
logical antecedents, and continues to inform much contemporary discussion. Culture, it 2
is commonly said, consists of ‘what one needs to know in order to behave as a func- 3
tioning member of one’s society’.5 Notice how, in this view, the acquisition of cultural 4
knowledge is clearly distinguished from the practicalities of its use that come under the 5
rubric of ‘functioning’. What divides acquisition from functioning is none other than the 6
division, inherent in the genealogical model, between the generation of persons and their 7
life in the world. As the descent-line is split off from the life-line, so the intergenerational 8
transmission of knowledge is distinguished from environmentally situated experience. And 9
in psychology as in biology, mainstream science has incorporated the principles of the 10
model into its own conceptual frame. Thus a distinction is posited between ‘social learning’, 1
by which information is copied into the head of the novice, and ‘individual learning’, 2
born of the experience of putting it into practice (I return to this distinction in Chapter 3
Twenty-one, pp. 386–7). The former takes place across generations; the latter is conﬁned 4
within each generation. A glance at Figure 8.2 reveals the congruence between these 5
concepts and the terms of the genealogical model.
What does all this imply about memory? If culture is taken to consist of a body of 7
acquired information that is available for transmission independently of the contexts 8
of its application in the world, then memory must be something like an inner cabinet of 9
the mind, in which this information is stored and preserved from the vagaries of everyday 20
life. Whatever people do, or wherever they go, they carry the contents of memory with 1
them. It is an encyclopaedic resource on which they can continually draw for guidance 2
on how to proceed in a manner appropriate to the circumstances in which they ﬁnd them- 3
selves. Remembering, then is a matter of retrieving from storage – or ‘calling up’ – items 4
of information relevant to the situation at hand. Critically, this implies that objects of 5
memory pre-exist, and are imported into, the contexts of remembering. They are already 6
present, in some representational form, within the native mind. Thus, far from bringing 7
memories into being, remembering serves to bring out, or to disclose, knowledge that has 8
been there from the start. In short, from the perspective of the genealogical model, remem- 9
bering is no more generative of the contents of memory than is life activity generative of 30
the person. And this, in turn, means that if people share memories, it is not because of 1
their mutual involvement in joint activity within a certain environment, but because their 2
knowledge has come down to them from the same ancestral source, along the lines of 3
common descent. They are bound by an identity not only of bodily substance but also 4
of cultural tradition – by both inheritance and heritage.
Land
If the sharing of substance and memory by dint of common descent is what makes people 9
the same, then what makes them different? Here I want to argue that one of the key 40
entailments of the genealogical model is that difference is rendered as diversity. That is to 1
say, the model leads us to compare individuals in terms of such qualities as they may 2
possess, by virtue of their essential natures, irrespective of their positioning vis-à-vis one 3
another in the world. Diversity is the measure of difference as construed within a compar- 4
ative project of this kind, one that presumes a world already divided into discrete, unit 5
entities – ‘things-in-themselves’ – which may then be grouped into classes of progressively 6
higher order on the basis of perceived likeness. This classiﬁcatory exercise gives rise to the 7
familiar tree-diagrams of taxonomy, with their roots in the highest, most inclusive levels 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 139 •

and branches reaching out into lower levels of ever ﬁner discrimination. Where it is further
supposed that every individual derives the speciﬁcations of its essential nature by descent,
then the taxonomic tree readily translates into a genealogical one.
To be sure, the translation is not perfect – a fact that has ignited ﬁerce and still unresolved controversies among scholars engaged in the reconstruction of both evolutionary
phylogenies and cultural (especially philological) histories. These controversies need not
detain us here:6 they have to do with the method of reconstruction but do not touch the
more fundamental assumption that difference arises from the accumulation of minor variations along lines of descent in the content of transmitted information, whether biogenetic
or cultural, due to errors in the process of intergenerational transcription. In genetics these
errors are known as mutations; analogous forms of miscopying have often been suggested
for the histories of language and culture. Assuming, then, that difference increases with
genealogical distance, we might reasonably conclude that one indigenous person is more
like another from the same ethnic group than a colonist whose ancestors came from elsewhere, but more like the latter – who is, after all, a fellow human being – than, say, a
chimpanzee. But these similarities and differences have absolutely nothing to do with the
life-histories of the individuals whom we are comparing: where they have lived, what they
have done, or whether they share any experiences in common. Their source, in other
words, lies not in current ﬁelds of relationship but in past histories of relatedness.
Now as we have already seen, a person’s position within such a history – that is, their
genealogical position – is ﬁxed quite independently of their position and involvement in
the lifeworld. It follows that the difference between the indigenous person and the colonist,
insofar as it is attributable to descent, does not reﬂect their respective modalities of habitation of the land. Indeed the land, conceived in its broadest sense as a ﬁeld of dwelling
for beings of all kinds, human and non-human, simply has no place at all within a
genealogically inspired conception of biocultural diversity. If each and every individual is
constituted by the sum total of bodily substance and cultural knowledge received down
the line from ancestors, then the land itself can be no more than a kind of stage upon
which is enacted a historical pageant consisting of the succession of generations. At no
point does it enter directly into the constitution of persons – with one exception, namely
at the mythical point of autochthonous origin. And this takes us back to the question of
ancestry.
The genealogical model, it seems, presents us with a stark choice. Either we grant indigenous peoples their historicity, in which case their existence is disconnected from the land,
or we allow that their lives are embedded in the land, in which case their historicity is
collapsed into an imaginary point of origin. In the ﬁrst option, an original connection to
the land is converted into an object of memory that is handed down as a heritable attribute
of individuals without further regard to its source. In the second, it is as though indigenous people lived in suspended animation in a prehistoric world of unadulterated nature
which the rest of humanity has long since left behind. Land and history, in short, ﬁgure
as mutually exclusive alternatives. For indigenous people themselves, by contrast, it is in
their relationships with the land, in the very business of dwelling, that their history unfolds.
Both the land and the living beings who inhabit it are caught up in the same, ongoing
historical process. To comprehend this process, we need a different, relational model, and
it is to this that I now turn.

Livelihood
Ancestry
‘We’re tired of trees’, sigh Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in a moment of exaspera- 5
tion. ‘They’ve made us suffer too much’ (1988: 15). In place of the arborescent, dendritic 6
imagery of the genealogical model they offer an alternative ﬁgure, that of the rhizome. 7
This is to be envisaged as a dense and tangled cluster of interlaced threads or ﬁlaments, 8
any point in which can be connected to any other. Whether the image is botanically accu- 9
rate need not concern us here.7 It has the virtue of giving us a way of beginning to think 10
about persons, relationships and land that gets away from the static, decontextualising 1
linearity of the genealogical model, and allows us to conceive of a world in movement, 2
wherein every part or region enfolds, in its growth, its relations with all the others. ‘The 3
rhizome’, as Deleuze and Guattari repeatedly insist, ‘is an antigenealogy’ (1988: 11, 21). 4
To put it more positively, it is a progeneration, a continually ravelling and unravelling 5
relational manifold. I believe that a relational model, with the rhizome rather than the 6
tree as its core image, better conveys the sense that so-called indigenous people have of 7
themselves and of their place in the world. In what follows, I review the ﬁve terms of my 8
earlier discussion – ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land – in the light of this 9
alternative model. To begin with the ﬁrst, our question is: what is the meaning of ancestry 20
in a rhizomatic world where the rudiments of being are not transmitted along arboreal 1
lines of genealogical connection?
Part of the difﬁculty we have in addressing this question lies in the sheer multiplicity 3
of possible answers. Here I suggest just four. Ancestors can be ordinary humans who lived 4
in the past, or spirit inhabitants of the landscape, or mythic other-than-human charac- 5
ters, or original creator beings. As an illustration of the ﬁrst possibility, consider the 6
following passage in which Signe Howell describes the myriad signs that the Chewong of 7
Malaysia discern as they move around in their jungle environment. ‘These may be paths 8
made by animals, a fruit tree planted by an ancestor, stones which are inhabited by poten- 9
tially harmful beings, fallen tree-trunks, the place where an event in a particular myth 30
took place, etc.’ (1996: 132). The ancestor mentioned in this passage was an ordinary 1
human predecessor whose activity, in this case of planting a tree, left an enduring token 2
in the landscape. But his contribution to successors was not to hand anything down by 3
way of substance or memory (thereby converting ‘successors’ into ‘descendants’); it was 4
rather to play a small part, along with the innumerable other beings – human, animal, 5
spiritual – that have inhabited the forest at one time or another, in creating the environ- 6
ment in which people now live, and from which they draw their sense of being. Passing 7
by the fruit tree, contemporary Chewong may be reminded of the ancestor’s erstwhile 8
presence and deeds, but it is in such acts of remembrance, not in any transmitted endow- 9
ment carried in their bodies and minds, that he lives on.
The second possibility may be illustrated by means of an example from Nurit Bird- 1
David’s account of the Nayaka of Tamil Nadu, South India. ‘Nayaka refer’, she reports, 2
‘to the spirits that inhabit hills, rivers, and rocks in the forest and to the spirits of their 3
immediate forefathers alike as dod appa (“big father”) and dod awa (“big mother”)’ (1990: 4
190, see also Chapter Three, pp. 43–4). For anthropological analysts primed with the 5
genealogical model of kinship, such usages have caused no end of trouble. Surely, it is 6
argued, people cannot really be descended from beings embodied in features of the land- 7
scape, as they are from their own forefathers. Classically, anomalies of this kind have been 118

THE RELATIONAL MODEL

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 141 •

dealt with by constructing a special category of ‘ﬁctive kinship’ which is modelled on, but
nevertheless fundamentally distinct from, the ‘real’ kinship founded in genealogical connection. But the people themselves, for whom there is no anomaly, are telling us something
quite different. It is that the role of parents is not, as the genealogical model implies, to
pass on to their offspring the essential speciﬁcations of personhood in advance of their
entry into the lifeworld, but rather – by their presence, their activities and the nurturance
they provide – to establish the necessary conditions in the environment for their children’s growth and development. This is what kinship is all about. And since the spirit
inhabitants of the land contribute to human well-being equally, and on the same footing,
as do human forbears, providing both food, guidance and security, they too can be ‘big’
fathers and mothers. As such, they are ancestors of a sort, albeit ones that are alive and
active in the present.8
For an illustration of the third possibility, we can return to A. Irving Hallowell’s ethnography of the Ojibwa of Berens River, Manitoba, which I have already considered at
length in Chapter Six. The characters of Ojibwa myths are known collectively by a term,
ätíso’kanak, that translates as ‘our grandfathers’. They include the Sun, the Four Winds,
and the ‘masters’ of various animal species. Despite their mythic status, these ‘other-thanhuman’ characters are entirely real in Ojibwa experience. They are regarded, according to
Hallowell, ‘as living entities who have existed from time immemorial. While there is genesis
through birth and temporary or permanent form-shifting through transformation, there
is no outright creation’ (1960: 27). In other words, the other-than-human grandfathers
have been there all along, living a parallel existence to ordinary humans with whom they
may enter into close and, for the latter, lifelong relationships. Just like human grandfathers, they are a source of protection, and especially of wisdom. But this wisdom, gained
above all through dream experience, takes the form not of knowledge that is ‘passed down’
but of a heightened perceptual awareness that reveals the world of one’s waking life in a
new or enriched light. Crucially, Ojibwa make no more claim to be descended from their
grandfathers than do Nayaka to be descended from the spirits of the landscape.
Grandfathers are ancestors because they were there before you, and because they guide
you through the world. In that sense you follow them. But you are not descended from
them.
The fourth and ﬁnal possibility is most fully elaborated in the ethnography of Aboriginal
Australia. The ancestors celebrated in Aboriginal myth and ceremony were creator beings
who, in their world-forming activities, roamed across the face of the earth, emerging onto
the surface here, going ‘back in’ there, and travelling from place to place – though in no
particular direction – in between. The landscape itself is a reticulate maze of criss-crossing
lines of ancestral travel, with the most signiﬁcant localities at its nodal points. Localities
identiﬁed by particular landscape features – hills, rocks, gullies, waterholes and so on –
embody the ancestors’ powers of creativity and movement in a congealed form. It is these
powers, in turn, that engender living persons. Through conception, birth or long-term
residence a person incorporates the essence of a locality into his or her own being, even
to the extent of substantial identity. A nice illustration of the point comes from Nancy
Munn’s (1970) study of the Pitjantjatjara of the Australian Western Desert. On the subject
of birthmarks – which are called djuguridja, ‘of or pertaining to the ancestors’ – Munn
recalls one woman explaining that a mark on her body was also to be found on a particular ancestral rock at her birthplace. ‘The rock was the transformed body of the ancestor
lying down and the marking was originally his hair’ (Munn 1970: 146). In this case there
is indeed a bond of substance between the ancestor and the living person, but it is not

Livelihood
one of descent. Following Munn, it might better be described as a kind of reverse meta- 1
morphosis, in which the subject-turned-object (the ancestor transformed into the rock in 2
the Dreaming) becomes an object-turned-subject (the rock imprinting upon the body of 3
the living person at birth).
Now if there is one thing that our four examples have in common, it is that in no 5
case can the connections between ancestors and living people be described in terms of a 6
dendritic geometry of points and lines. Indeed there are no points as such. Every being 7
is instantiated in the world as the line of its own movement and activity: not a move- 8
ment from point to point, as though the life-course were already laid out as the route 9
between them, but a continual ‘moving around’, or coming and going. Signiﬁcant moments 10
– births, deaths, encounters with animals or spirits, coming out of the ground or going 1
back in – are constituted within this movement, where the life-lines of different beings 2
cross, interpenetrate, appear or disappear (only, perhaps, to reappear at some other 3
moment). Try to depict the relations between beings, ancestral and living, in the form of 4
a tree, and its boughs would intertwine, grow together as well as split apart, in a profu- 5
sion of cross-cutting connections. Indeed our tree, comprehensively entangled in such 6
transverse ties, would cease to look like a tree at all, and take on all the appearance of a 7
rhizome! As Deleuze and Guattari observe, ‘transversal communications between different 8
lines scramble the genealogical trees’ (1988: 11).9 Our next task is to examine the impli- 9
cations of this rhizomatic view for the concept of generation.
Generation
We have seen that the genealogical model collapses the life of each person into a single 4
point, which is connected to other such points by lines of descent. A relational model 5
presents us with precisely the opposite picture. There are no lines of descent linking succes- 6
sive ‘generations’ of persons. Rather, persons are continually coming into being – that is, 7
undergoing generation – in the course of life itself. To put it in a nutshell: whereas in 8
the genealogical model life is encompassed within generations, in the relational model 9
generation is encompassed within the process of life. But this also entails a radically 30
different conception of the person. According to the genealogical model, every person is 1
a substantive entity, whose particular make-up is a function of biogenetic and cultural 2
speciﬁcations received from predecessors, prior to its involvement with other entities of 3
like or unlike kinds. By contrast, the relational model situates the person in the lifeworld 4
from the very start, as a locus of self-organising activity: not a generated entity but a site 5
where generation is going on.10 Perhaps no-one has expressed the point better than a Cree 6
man from the James Bay region, who, as will be recalled from Chapter Three (p. 51), 7
explained to the ethnographer, Colin Scott, that to be a person is to live, and that life 8
(pimaatisiiwin) is a process of ‘continuous birth’ (Scott 1996: 73).
This, too, is what I had in mind in positively redescribing the antigenealogical, 40
rhizomatic character of the lifeworld as progenerative. Entailed here is a distinction between 1
pro-generation and procreation. The latter term captures the sense of begetting implied 2
when we say that one being is descended from another. It suggests a one-off event: the 3
making of something absolutely new out of elements derived from immediate antecedents. 4
By progeneration, in contrast, I refer to the continual unfolding of an entire ﬁeld of rela- 5
tionships within which different beings emerge with their particular forms, capacities and 6
dispositions. Consider, for example, the relations between human hunters and their animal 7
prey. Thinking genealogically, one would suppose that as humans beget humans, so moose 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 143 •

(say) beget moose – so long as hunters leave sufﬁcient animals alive to ensure their procreative replacement. Not so, however, for the Rock Cree of northern Manitoba, whose
understanding of human–animal relations has been richly documented by Robert
Brightman (1993). Cree say that moose present themselves willingly to be killed by hunters,
and in that way contribute actively to the production of human existence. But conversely,
hunters, in their treatment of kills in consumption and disposal of the remains, bring it
about that the vitality of animals is restored, and so contribute to the production of animal
existence. As Brightman explains, ‘hunter and prey successively renew each other’s lives,
and, indeed, each seems to realize its innate nature in the transaction, the hunter as supplicant and the animal as benefactor’ (1993: 188).
Here, hunting – including acts of killing, consumption and disposal – is the very epitome
of progeneration. In the unfolding of the relation between hunters and prey both humans
and animals undergo a kind of perpetual rebirth, each enfolding into its inner constitution the principle of its relationship to the other. Actual events of birth and death, therefore,
are merely moments in the progenerative process, points of transition in the circulation
of life. Once again, this conclusion stands in stark contrast to the images of life and death
evoked by the genealogical model. For according to this model, as we have seen, life does
not cross generations, but is expended in the present, in the procreative project of
forwarding the elements needed to get it restarted in the future.11 In each successive generation, the life-cycle begins at the point of conception and ends at death. When a person
dies his or her life is over, ﬁnished. With a relational model, by contrast, life does not
start or stop. To borrow a phrase from Deleuze and Guattari, it is a matter of ‘coming
and going rather than starting and ﬁnishing’ (1988: 25). Particular persons may come and
go, but the life process continues. All of existence is suspended in this process. Animals
come when, following the successful hunt, they enter the human community, they go
again with the eventual disposal of the remains. But the animal that has gone has not
ceased to be: it still exists, albeit in another form. And for this reason, there is always the
possibility of its return. As one Cree hunter told Brightman, ‘they say it just comes up
again and again’ (1988: 240).
What goes for animals also goes for human beings. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the relational model tends to be associated with ideas of reincarnation and
cyclical rebirth. When an old person dies, it does not mark the end of a generation, which
will henceforth recede ever further into the past as it is buried under layer after layer of
new people. The fact that deceased persons are no longer present does not mean that they
belong to a past that has been irrevocably left behind, but rather that they have departed
from the living, along a path that takes them to what is often conceived as another land.
Co-presence may be temporally bounded, but existence is not. Or to put it in another
way, the past may be absent from the present but is not extinguished by it. Death punctuates, but does not terminate, life. Writing of the Yup’ik Eskimos of Alaska, Ann
Fienup-Riordan notes that ‘death as a ﬁnal exit had no place in [their] system of cosmological reproduction . . . Birth into the land of the dead was ultimately the source of
continuing life’ (1994: 250). Thus, far from calling for the replacement of one generation by another, death afﬁrms the continuity of the progenerative process. Life is not
compacted, as the genealogical model implies, into a linear sequence of procreative
moments suspended in time, but is itself intrinsically temporal. As the philosopher Henri
Bergson wrote, ‘wherever anything lives, there is, open somewhere, a register in which
time is being inscribed’ (1911: 17). And the life of every being, as it unfolds, contributes
at once to the progeneration of the future and to the regeneration of the past.

Livelihood
I have suggested that from a relational perspective, persons should be understood not as 3
procreated entities, connected to one another along lines of genealogical connection or 4
relatedness, but rather as centres of progenerative activity variously positioned within an 5
all-encompassing ﬁeld of relationships. Every such centre, as Rom Harré puts it, is ‘a site 6
from which a person perceives the world and a place from which to act’ (1998: 3). It is 7
from their emplacement in the world that people draw not just their perceptual orienta- 8
tions but the very substance of their being. Conversely, through their actions, they 9
contribute to the substantive make-up of others. Such contributions are given and received 10
throughout life, in the context of a person’s ongoing relationships with human and non- 1
human components of the environment. Thus, far from having their constitution speciﬁed 2
in advance, as the genealogical model implies, persons undergo histories of continuous 3
change and development. In a word, they grow. Indeed more than that, they are grown. 4
By this I mean that growth is to be understood not merely as the autonomous realisa- 5
tion of pre-speciﬁed developmental potentials, but as the generation of being within what 6
could be called a sphere of nurture.12 It is the role of ancestors, as our earlier examples 7
demonstrated, to establish this sphere by way of their presence and their activity, rather 8
than to pass on the rudiments of being per se. That is to say, ancestors grow their succes- 9
sors, although the latter are not literally descended from them. But this nurturing role is 20
not limited to ancestors: ordinary living persons, too, contribute reciprocally to the condi- 1
tions of each other’s growth as embodied beings. It is in these contributions, as we have 2
seen, that their kinship consists.
Now while each person is at the centre of their own ﬁeld of perception and action, the 4
position of this centre is not ﬁxed but moves relative to others. As it does so, it lays a 5
trail. Every trail, however erratic and circuitous, is a kind of life-line, a trajectory of growth. 6
This image of life as a trail or path is ubiquitous among peoples whose existential orien- 7
tations are founded in the practices of hunting and gathering, and in the modes of 8
environmental perception these entail. Persons are identiﬁed and characterised not by the 9
substantive attributes they carry into the life process, but by the kinds of paths they leave. 30
Beings of extraordinary power, such as the world-shaping ancestors of Australian Aboriginal 1
cosmology or the other-than-human persons of the Ojibwa, can be recognised from their 2
unusual paths which can, for example, leave indelible impressions on the landscape or 3
even disappear underground. In the world of the Yup’ik Eskimos, one class of extraordi- 4
nary persons, the tenguirayulit, are so ﬂeet of foot that they can literally take off, leaving 5
a trail of wind-blown snow in the trees (Fienup-Riordan 1994: 80). While the paths of 6
ordinary human beings and other terrestrial animals remain on ground level, even plants 7
deposit trails in the form of roots and runners in the wake of their advancing tips. Batek 8
women from Pahang, Malaysia, say that the roots of wild tubers ‘walk’, as humans and 9
other animals do (Lye 1997: 159). This may seem an odd idea to us, but only because 40
we think of walking as the spatiotemporal displacement of already completed beings from 1
one point to another, rather than as the movement of their substantive formation within 2
an environment. Both plants and people, we could say, ‘issue forth’ along lines of growth, 3
and both exist as the sum of their trails (see Wagner 1986: 21).
Putting together all the trails of all the different beings that have inhabited a country 5
– human, animal and plant, ordinary and extraordinary – the result would be a dense 6
mass of intersecting pathways, resembling nothing so much as a rhizome. This is not to 7
rule out the possibility that particular growth conﬁgurations may be dendritic in form. 118

Substance

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 145 •

After all, among hunters and gatherers who inhabit a forest environment, some of the
most important persons can be trees! This is beautifully demonstrated in Tuck Po Lye’s
recent study of the Batek, to which I referred a moment ago. For the Batek, trees are
people. They possess agency and sociality. They can be both nurturing and protective,
and dangerous (Lye 1997: 156–63). But of course there is a world of difference between
the real, living tree in the forest and the abstract tree of the genealogical model. For the
former is caught up in a dense network of entanglements with the vegetation that clings
to it, the animals that forage and nest in it, and the humans that live under it. In short,
the tree is but one part of that vast rhizome that is the forest as a whole. Only when it
is abstracted from these rhizomatic entanglements does it appear in its ‘pure’, dendritic
form.
I have already shown that a person’s genealogical position is ﬁxed independently of
their location in the lifeworld. By contrast, every position in the total network of trails
or life-lines is itself an emplacement. Lye draws explicitly on the ‘rhizomatic epistemology’
of Deleuze and Guattari to explain how, for the Batek, places are constituted as nodes in
the endless comings and goings of people, each characterised by its particular assemblage
of relations, and connected to all the others both socially and physically. ‘Important placenames, trails and familiar campsites, like the roots of a rhizome, integrate diverse elements
of the forest and serve as passageways for the ongoing experiences of people’ (1997: 166).
Among hunters and gatherers generally, the most signiﬁcant places are where the paths
of different beings intersect, or perhaps merge for a while before diverging again. It is
here that exchanges of substance occur, for example in episodes of hunting, where the
trails of human and animal cross and from which each leaves bearing something of the
substance of the other, or of gathering, where people pick and consume the fruit of a tree
once planted by an ancestor. Among themselves human persons exchange substance
through feeding and being fed, in the nurturance and sharing that characterises the everyday
life of a camp – which may be envisaged, in turn, as a place upon which the trails of
many people temporarily converge.
Once again, this relational understanding inverts the genealogical model. Instead of
thinking of substance as passing along a line of transmission connecting lives that –
conﬁned within their respective generations – proceed in parallel but never join, persons
are conceived as passing along lines of movement and exchanging substance at the places
where their respective paths cross or commingle. ‘Throughout their lives’, as Bird-David
puts it, persons ‘perpetually coalesce with, and depart from, each other’ (1994: 597).13 I
have attempted to depict the contrast schematically in Figure 8.3; however in limiting the
picture to a mutually constitutive encounter between two persons, A and B, it has been
drastically oversimpliﬁed. In reality, as Fienup-Riordan says for the Yup’ik, ‘the variety of
persons and creatures that one might encounter in one’s path is immense’ (1994: 87). All
of these beings may further one’s growth and development, not only through contributions of substance, but also by way of the experiences they afford.
Thus the contrast shown in Figure 8.3 applies just as well to the growth of knowledge
as to that of bodily substance. Knowledge, from a relational point of view, is not merely
applied but generated in the course of lived experience, through a series of encounters in
which the contribution of other persons is to orient one’s attention – whether by means
of revelation, demonstration or ostention – along the same lines as their own, so that one
can begin to apprehend the world for oneself in the ways, and from the positions, that
they do. In every such encounter, each party enters into the experience of the other and
makes that experience his or her own as well. One shares in the process of knowing, rather

Livelihood

than taking on board a pre-established body of know- 1
ledge. Indeed in this education of attention, nothing, 2
strictly speaking, is ‘handed down’ at all. The growth 3
transmission
and development of the person, in short, is to be 4
of substance
understood relationally as a movement along a way of 5
life, conceived not as the enactment of a corpus of 6
B
rules and principles (or a ‘culture’) received from 7
predecessors, but as the negotiation of a path through 8
the world (see Chapter Thirteen).
A
Memory
With this, we are led to pose a question about 3
memory not unlike the one posed earlier, about 4
ancestry. There we asked: what is the meaning of 5
exchange of
ancestry in a lifeworld where the elements of a 6
substance
person’s substantive make-up are not passed on along 7
lines of descent? The question that concerns us now 8
is: what is the meaning of memory in a world of 9
B
experience where the rudiments of knowledge are not 20
handed down along analogous lines of cultural trans- 1
Figure 8.3 Schematic contrast between the trans- mission? A large part of the answer hinges on our 2
mission of substance according to the genealogical understanding of language. For according to the 3
model, and the exchange of substance according to genealogical model, it is above all thanks to language 4
the relational model. For simplicity, the diagram that the concepts and values of a culture are trans- 5
depicts only two persons, A and B.
mitted from one generation to the next. Not only 6
does this presuppose that cultural knowledge exists 7
in the form of a corpus of transmissible, context-free representations; it also implies that 8
the words of language take their meanings from their attachments to these representa- 9
tions, quite apart from the situations of their utterance in speech. The purpose of speaking, 30
then, is to render explicit, or publicly accessible, meanings that would otherwise remain 1
conﬁned within the interiority of the mind – nevertheless only to those who share the 2
language and are therefore in a position to decode the messages conveyed therein.14 It 3
follows that the loss of a language inevitably leads to the loss of the knowledge expressed 4
in it, which will die out with the last generation of speakers. Much concern over the 5
disappearance of indigenous languages is fuelled by a fear that with them will go tradi- 6
tions that have been handed down from time immemorial, severing once and for all the 7
increasingly tenuous threads that connect present humanity to its ancestral past.
If, however, as the relational model implies, the source of cultural knowledge lies not 9
in the heads of predecessors but in the world that they point out to you – if, that is, one 40
learns by discovery while following in the path of an ancestor – then words, too, must 1
gather their meanings from the contexts in which they are uttered. Moving together along 2
a trail or encamped at a particular place, companions draw each other’s attention, through 3
speech and gesture, to salient features of their shared environment. Every word, spoken 4
in context, condenses a history of past usage into a focus that illuminates some aspect of 5
the world. Words, in this sense, are instruments of perception much as tools are instru- 6
ments of action. Both conduct a skilled and sensuous engagement with the environment 7
that is sharpened and enriched through previous experience. The clumsiness of the novice 118
A

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 147 •

in handling unfamiliar tools is matched, as every anthropological ﬁeldworker knows, only
by his incomprehension of spoken words. What the novice lacks, however, and the knowledgeable hand possesses, is not a scheme of conceptual representations for organising the
data of experience but rather the perceptual sensitivity that enables him to discern, and
continually to respond to, those subtle variations in the environment whose detection is
essential to the accomplishment of ongoing activity. From this point of view, and contrary
to the tenets of the genealogical model, speech is not so much the articulation of representations as the embodiment of feeling. It is a way, as Maurice Merleau-Ponty once put
it, ‘for the human body to sing the world’s praises and in the last resort to live it’ (1962:
187). I return to this point in Chapter Twenty-three (pp. 408–10).
But to live the world is also to inhabit it. Thus a way of speaking is, in itself, a way
of living in the land. Far from serving as a common currency for the exchange of otherwise private mental representations, language celebrates an embodied knowledge of the
world that is already shared thanks to people’s mutual involvement in the tasks of habitation. It is not, then, language per se that ensures the continuity of tradition. Rather, it
is the tradition of living in the land that ensures the continuity of language. Conversely,
to remove a community of speakers from the land is to cut the language adrift from its
generative source of meaning, leaving it as the vestige of a form of life that has long since
been overtaken by its representation as an object of memory. In this regard, the assumptions of the genealogical model have had fateful consequences for the peoples it construes
as indigenous. For so long as it is supposed that the language, and the traditions encoded
therein, can be passed along like a relay baton from generation to generation, it appears
to make no difference where the people are. On these grounds, administrations have often
seen no principled objection to moving their ‘indigenous’ peoples off the land, or greatly
restricting their access, whether in the interests of industrial development or wildlife conservation. It did not occur to them that such displacement might rupture the continuity of
tradition or cut the people off from their pasts.
I have already shown that traditional knowledge, in the genealogical conception,
comprises an inventory of transmitted items that are stored in memory, from which they
may be accessed as required, and expressed in speech or practice. From a relational perspective, by contrast, knowledge subsists in practical activities themselves, including activities
of speaking. And just as to follow a path is to remember the way, so to engage in any
practice is, at the same time, to remember how it is done. Thus hunters and gatherers,
following in the paths of their ancestors as they make their way through the terrain,
remember as they go along. The important thing, so far as they are concerned, is that
the process should keep on going, not that it should yield precise replicas of past performance. Indeed ‘keeping it going’ may involve a good measure of creative improvisation.
A skill well remembered is one that is ﬂexibly responsive to ever-variable environmental
conditions. Thus there is no opposition, in the terms of the relational model, between
continuity and change. Change is simply what we observe if we sample a continuous
process at a number of ﬁxed points, separated in time. The growth of an organism, for
example, is continuous, but if we compare its appearance at different times it will appear
to have changed. So too, the growth of knowledge, conceived relationally, is an aspect of
the growth of persons, in the contexts of their involvement with one another and with
the environment. Just because people are doing things differently now, compared
with the way they did them at some time in the past, does not mean that there has been
a rupture of tradition or a failure of memory. What would really break the continuity,
however, would be if people were forcibly constrained to replicate a pattern ﬁxed by

Livelihood
genealogical descent, or to ‘traditionalize the traditional’, as Bjørn Bjerkli has nicely put 1
it (1996: 18). The effect would be similar to that of a needle becoming stuck in the 2
groove of a record. One could not keep the music going.
We are now in a better position to answer the question I posed at the start of this 4
section. For if knowledge is not received from predecessors in advance of its application 5
in the world, then objects of memory cannot pre-exist acts of remembering. Nor can such 6
acts be understood as purely cognitive operations, of calling up representations already 7
installed within the mind. On the contrary, it is through the activity of remembering that 8
memories are forged. This activity, moreover, is tantamount to the movement of the person 9
through the world. Memories, then, are generated along the paths of movement that each 10
person lays down in the course of his or her life. Earlier, I pointed out that in the terms 1
of the relational model, the progeneration of the future is also a regeneration of the past. 2
Another way of putting this would be to say that the growth of knowledge is, at one and 3
the same time, the production of memory. Journeying forward along a path or trail, one 4
is also taken back to places imbued with the presence of ancestors. ‘Trails’, as Lye observes 5
in her study of the Batek, ‘are routes to remembrance just as they are routes to know- 6
ledge’. She recalls one Batek man pointing out a particular trail to her. ‘That’, he is 7
reported to have said, ‘is a trail of the old people. So when people feel ha?ip [longing] 8
for the old people, they come back here and use the trail so that they can remember the 9
old people’ (Lye 1997: 149).
One more example, from the other side of the world, may be drawn from Richard 1
Nelson’s study of the Koyukon of Alaska (Nelson 1983: 243). He describes how he was 2
taken by an old woman to see a place in the forest where, long ago, the late Chief Henry 3
and his wife Bessie had their ﬁshing camp. Looking closely, one could make out dark 4
bands on the birch trees, where the bark had been removed from which Bessie used to 5
make baskets, and axe marks on the rotting stumps of trees that Chief Henry had felled. 6
Examining these signs, which an untrained eye would have passed over completely, 7
Nelson’s companion began to talk a little sadly about the deceased couple and their activ- 8
ities. She spoke of the skill and sensitivity that enabled Chief Henry to select wood with 9
the best grain for making sleds or snowshoes, or Bessie to weave excellent baskets from 30
birchbark. Yet this same sensitivity, grounded in an intimate familiarity with the country 1
and its inhabitants, also enabled the old woman, in her turn, to recognise the signs of 2
the couple’s erstwhile presence in an otherwise featureless and overgrown patch of forest. 3
Memories may be forged with words, and artefacts with tools; both, however, are the 4
fruits of a certain way of living in the land. For the old woman this way of life was not 5
just an object of memory, represented and passed down in oral tradition, but also a prac- 6
tice of remembering, embedded in the perception of the environment.
Land
What, then, given this relational view of growth and remembrance, makes people more 1
or less the same or different? Not their genealogical proximity as determined by a past 2
history of relatedness, but the extent to which their own life-histories are intertwined 3
through the shared experience of inhabiting particular places and following particular paths 4
in an environment. Common involvement in spheres of nurture, rather than any prin- 5
ciple of shared descent, creates likeness. Persons, as we have seen, are to be understood 6
from this perspective not as preconstituted – or procreated – entities, but rather as loci 7
of growth, of the progenerative unfolding of the entire ﬁeld of relationships within which 118

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 149 •

each comes into being. The source of their differentiation is to be found in this unfolding.
There is no room, within such a view, for the kind of classiﬁcatory project that groups
individuals on the basis of whatever intrinsic characteristics they might happen to possess,
by virtue of their biogenetic inheritance or cultural heritage, irrespective of their life
in the world. Thus ethnic and racial classiﬁcations are as foreign to relational thinking as
are the genealogically conceived taxonomies devised by biologists for the classiﬁcation of
living things. It is not by their inner attributes that persons or organisms are identiﬁed,
but by their positions vis-à-vis one another in the relational ﬁeld (Ingold 1993a: 229).
The relational model, in short, renders difference not as diversity but as positionality.15
The idea of a ﬁeld of relationships may seem highly abstract, far removed from the
reality of entities and events ‘on the ground’. Yet it is the very dominance of the genealogical model in our thinking, I would argue, that leads us to suppose that things exist, in
the real world, independently of their relations. The relational model overturns this understanding. To exist, it asserts, is already to be positioned in a certain environment and
committed to the relationships this entails. Reality, then, is relational through and through.
The relational ﬁeld is no abstraction but the very ground from which things grow, and
take on the forms they do. Another word for this ground is land. Up to now I have
spoken of beings of various kinds as ‘inhabiting’ the land. This should not be taken to
imply mere occupancy, as though inhabitants, already endowed by descent with the attributes of substance and memory that make them what they are, were slotted into place like
pegs on a peg-board. Positions in the land are no more laid out in advance for persons
to occupy, than are persons speciﬁed prior to taking them up. Rather, to inhabit the land
is to draw it to a particular focus, and in so doing to constitute a place. As a locus of
personal growth and development, however, every such place forms the centre of a sphere
of nurture. Thus the generation of persons within spheres of nurture, and of places in
the land, are not separate processes but one and the same. In the relational model, as
Leach has put it, ‘kinship is geography’ (Leach 1997: 36).
All this has implications for our ideas about permanence and replacement. Recall that
according to the genealogical model, life is encompassed within generations. Every
organism comes with its allotted lifespan, and has eventually to make way for copies of
itself if its kind is to continue. Life, in short, is conceived as but a means to the end of
procreative replacement. The land, by contrast, since it is supposed to contain or support
living things, cannot itself be alive. For if every form of life exists upon the land, then
the land must be inanimate. It does not, therefore, have to be replaced; it is simply, and
permanently there, an enduring surface over which generation after generation of individuals pass like cohorts on the march. The relational model, on the other hand, does
not counterpose the land to its inhabitants along the axis of a dichotomy between the
animate and the inanimate. A founding premise of the model is that life, rather than
being an internal property of persons and things, is immanent in the relations between
them. It follows that the land, comprised by these relations, is itself imbued with the
vitality that animates its inhabitants. The important thing is to ensure that this vitality
never ‘dries up’. As hunters and gatherers have explained to their ethnographers, with
remarkable consistency, it is essential to ‘look after’ or care for the land, to maintain in
good order the relationships it embodies; only then can the land, reciprocally, continue
to grow and nurture those who dwell therein.
This perspective gives us a view of the land quite unlike the inert and timeless, twodimensional substrate of the genealogical model. It ﬁgures rather as an immense tangle of
interlaced trails – an all-encompassing rhizome – which is continually ravelling here, and

Livelihood
unravelling there, as the beings of which it is composed grow, or ‘issue forth’, along the 1
lines of their relationships. I have referred to this ravelling and unravelling as a process 2
of progeneration. Every being, in the course of its life history, works in the ﬁrst place to 3
keep the progenerative process going rather than to secure its own procreative replace- 4
ment. Thus there is no opposition, here, between history and land. Both carry the same 5
intrinsic temporality. Woven like a tapestry from the lives of its inhabitants, the land is 6
not so much a stage for the enactment of history, or a surface on which it is inscribed, 7
as history congealed. And just as kinship is geography, so the lives of persons and the histo- 8
ries of their relationships can be traced in the textures of the land.
CONCLUSION
Indigenous peoples regard all products of the human mind and heart as interrelated, 3
and as ﬂowing from the same source: the relationships between the people and their 4
land, their kinship with the other living creatures that share the land, and with the 5
spirit world. Since the ultimate source of knowledge and creativity is the land itself, all 6
of the art and science of a speciﬁc people are manifestations of the same underlying 7
relationships, and can be considered as manifestations of the people as a whole.
So writes Erica-Irene Daes on behalf of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, 20
which was established in 1982, under the auspices of the United Nations, to hear 1
the views of the representatives of such populations on the issue of the protection of 2
their collective ‘heritage’ (Daes 1997: 3). In this passage she offers a cogent and succinct 3
restatement of the relational perspective. Yet it also contradicts, point by point, the ‘ofﬁ- 4
cial’ deﬁnition of what it means to be indigenous, with which I began. To recapitulate: 5
this deﬁnition classiﬁes as indigenous the descendants of people who were already 6
inhabiting some country or region at the time when colonists arrived from elsewhere. The 7
axiom, formulated so clearly by Daes, that indigenous peoples draw their being from 8
their relationships with the land, is here brushed aside in favour of a claim based purely 9
and simply on proof of prior presence, judged in terms of a linear concept of time and 30
history.
The fact that a certain region was home to a population of human beings prior to its 2
colonial settlement tells us nothing about how these ‘original inhabitants’ understood their 3
relationships to the land. They may of course have felt themselves to have been connected 4
to other components of the lifeworld in the way the relational model suggests. But for 5
contemporary people to claim indigenous status on the criterion of descent from this ances- 6
tral population is tantamount to an admission that for them, ‘living in the land’ is no 7
more than a distant memory. For the principle of descent implies, as we have seen, that 8
people do not draw their substance and knowledge from the land, or from their relation- 9
ships with it, but rather from their immediate genealogical antecedents. At the same time 40
it rules out the possibility of any real kinship with other creatures that share the land, 1
and reduces the activity of dwelling to mere occupancy. In short, the appeal to descent 2
as a basis on which to ascribe indigenous identity contravenes those very understandings 3
that for the indigenous groups themselves, are most fundamental to their way of life. 4
Indeed it seems that a sense of being founded on people’s relationships to the land is 5
bound to be compromised by its articulation in terms of a model that treats these relation- 6
ships as no more than epiphenomena of genealogically transmitted, biogenetic and cultural 7
attributes.

Ancestry, generation, substance, memory, land • 151 •

To describe indigenous people as those who were ‘there ﬁrst’ is to situate them within
a history conceived as a narrative of colonial conquest and state formation. It is a designation, as André Béteille comments, that ‘acquires substance when there are other populations
in the same region that can reasonably be described as settlers or aliens’ (1998: 188). In
the eyes of the settlers who went on to take possession of their lands, these earlier inhabitants may well have seemed like archetypal ‘natives’. In a sense, then, the ofﬁcial deﬁnition
of indigenous status faithfully reﬂects the self-perception of the non-indigenous populations of nation states, as descendants of settlers who founded the nations they represent
on alien soil. In these terms, contemporary indigenes are descendants of the colonially
dispossessed. Indeed the categorical opposition of indigenous and non-indigenous
populations, conceived respectively as the descendants of natives and settlers, is itself a
construction of colonialism. For the genealogical model is fundamentally a colonial model,
with its notion of the land as a surface to be occupied, of the lifeworld as a country to
which people can move in order to take up residence, bringing their endowments of heritable substance and knowledge with them, and of generation as serial replacement, such
that the present takes over from, and extinguishes, the past.
To conclude: we are left with the question of why people should feel the need to articulate claims to indigenous status in terms that, by their own accounts, are incompatible
with their experience and understanding of the world. The answer, I believe, is that these
people are compelled to operate in a modern-day political context in which they are also
citizens of nation states. The genealogical model is deeply implicated in the discourse of
the state: indeed it is the principal source of legitimation for the state’s sovereign entitlement to defend and administer its territory in the name of the nation. For the state, the
land belongs to the national heritage, and is held in trust by each generation of citizens
on behalf of their descendants. If it is by appeal to common heritage that the citizens of
the state are made to appear the same – that is, to share a national identity – then only
by stressing their separate heritage can encapsulated groups express their difference. The
construction of indigenous status upon the principle of descent is thus, as I have argued
elsewhere, ‘a product of the representation of difference in the discourse of homogeneity’
(Ingold 1993a: 218). In this construction, the very relationships within which persons are
positioned and from which they derive their identity and belonging are recast as the
outward expressions of inner, inherited properties or attributes that belong to them. It is
in the attempt to recover a lost or threatened sense of relational identity in attributional
terms that people come to deﬁne themselves, and to be deﬁned by others, as ‘indigenous’.

Livelihood

Part II

Dwelling

INTRODUCTION
The chapters in this part explore various aspects of what I have called the dwelling perspective. By this I mean a perspective that treats the immersion of the organism-person in an
environment or lifeworld as an inescapable condition of existence. From this perspective,
the world continually comes into being around the inhabitant, and its manifold
constituents take on signiﬁcance through their incorporation into a regular pattern of life
activity. It has been rather more usual, in social and cultural anthropology, to suppose
that people inhabit a world – of culture or society – to which form and meaning have
already been attached. It is assumed, in other words, that they must perforce ‘construct’
the world, in consciousness, before they can act in it. I refer to this view as the building
perspective. Each chapter explores some aspect of the contrast between the building and
dwelling perspectives, in relation to such topics as the signiﬁcance of architecture, the
perception of the landscape, the idea of environmental change, the practice of wayﬁnding,
and the properties of vision and hearing. In order to lay a foundation for these explorations, however, I begin in Chapter Nine with a general introduction to anthropological
theories of perception and cognition. The fundamental question that all such theories seek
to address is the following: why should people from different cultural backgrounds perceive
the world in different ways?
In the ﬁrst part of the chapter I outline the history of anthropological attempts to
answer this question, starting with the classical work of Emile Durkheim, through inﬂuential statements by Edmund Leach, Clifford Geertz and Mary Douglas, to the more
recent development of the ﬁeld known as cognitive anthropology. Throughout this history,
the assumption has persisted that people construct the world, or what for them is ‘reality’,
by organising the data of sensory perception in terms of received and culturally speciﬁc
conceptual schemata. But in recent anthropology, this assumption has been challenged by
advocates of ‘practice theory’, who argue that cultural knowledge, rather than being
imported into the settings of practical activity, is constituted within these settings through
the development of speciﬁc dispositions and sensibilities that lead people to orient themselves in relation to their environment and to attend to its features in the particular ways
that they do. In the second part of Chapter Nine, I assess the relevance for anthropological understanding of alternative approaches drawn from cognitive science, ecological
psychology and phenomenology. Though my conclusion is that anthropology has more
to gain from an alliance with ecological psychology than with cognitive science, and that
such an alliance accords well with a phenomenology of dwelling, there are still problems
to be faced in overcoming the dichotomy between culture and biology, in reconciling a

Dwelling
phenomenology of the body with an ecology of mind, and in translating the overall theo- 1
retical perspective into a practicable programme of research.
Chapter Ten explores how a dwelling perspective might affect our understanding of the 3
similarities and differences between the ways in which human beings and other animals 4
create environments for themselves. I am concerned, in particular, with the meaning of 5
architecture, or that part of the environment conventionally described as ‘built’. I start by 6
documenting the transition in my own thinking from a ‘building perspective’, according 7
to which worlds are made before they are lived in, to a ‘dwelling perspective’, according 8
to which the forms people build, whether in the imagination or on the ground, only arise 9
within the current of their life activities. Drawing on Jakob von Uexküll’s notion of 10
Umwelt, I show how we might distinguish between human and non-human constructions 1
in the terms of the building perspective, on the basis of the presence or absence of an 2
intentional project of design. This argument, however, implies the existence of some kind 3
of threshold in human evolution, beyond which our ancestors were able to author their 4
own projects. This idea has motivated the search for a point of origin for humanity in 5
general, and for human architecture in particular. Through the adoption of a dwelling 6
perspective, inﬂuenced by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger, I show that the point of 7
origin is illusory. There can, then, be no absolute distinction between ‘natural’ and ‘arti- 8
ﬁcial’ structures. Buildings, like other environmental structures, are never complete but 9
continually under construction, and have life-histories of involvement with both their 20
human and non-human inhabitants. Whether, at a certain point in its life history, a struc- 1
ture looks to us like a building or not will depend on the extent and nature of human 2
involvement in its formation.
In Chapter Eleven I turn to what I consider to be the unifying themes of archaeology 4
and sociocultural anthropology: namely, landscape and temporality. This chapter is an 5
attempt to show how the temporality of the landscape might be understood by way of a 6
dwelling perspective. I ﬁrst set out to clarify the meaning of ‘landscape’ by contrast to 7
the concepts of land, nature, space and environment. I then introduce the notion of 8
‘taskscape’ to denote a pattern of dwelling activities. The intrinsic temporality of the 9
taskscape, I argue, lies in its rhythmic interrelations or patterns of resonance. At ﬁrst glance 30
the opposition between landscape and taskscape seems to mirror that, in the ﬁeld of art, 1
between painting and music. However by considering how taskscape relates to landscape, 2
the distinction between them is ultimately dissolved, and the landscape itself is shown to 3
be fundamentally temporal. I illustrate the thesis of the temporality of the landscape 4
through an analysis of the scene depicted by Pieter Bruegel the Elder in his painting The 5
harvesters. In conclusion, I criticise the view that a properly cultural ecology would be one 6
that would go beyond strictly pragmatic concerns with the conditions of adaptation to 7
focus on the multiple layers of symbolic meaning with which people cover over their envi- 8
ronments. For meaning, I contend, does not cover the world but is immanent in the 9
contexts of people’s pragmatic engagements with its constituents. But the discovery of 40
meaning in the landscape has to begin from a recognition of its temporality, and in this 1
lies the essence of archaeological investigation.
The signiﬁcance of the contrast between building and dwelling perspectives for cosmo- 3
logical conceptions of ‘the earth’ is my theme in Chapter Twelve. I argue that the image 4
of the earth as a globe, implied in such phrases as ‘global environmental change’, is one 5
that actually expels humanity from the lifeworld, such that rather than the environment 6
surrounding us, it is we who have surrounded it. Far from reintegrating human society 7
into the world of nature, the idea of the earth as a solid globe of opaque materiality marks 118

Introduction to Part II • 155 •

their ﬁnal separation. Thus the biodiversity of locally distributed life-forms presents itself
to a universal, globally distributed humanity. The conservation ethic entailed in such a
global vision, which places nature on the inside and humanity on the outside, is at once
ecocentric and anthropocircumferential. Against this, I examine the contrasting image of
the sphere, conjuring up a transparent lifeworld which is perceived by its inhabitants from
within. This image, which is characteristic of the cosmologies of pre-modern societies, is
genuinely anthropocentric, but in a way that counterposes neither humanity and nature,
nor the local and the global. I show how the shift from a spherical to a global perspective marks the triumph of technology over cosmology. But it also leads to the systematic
disempowerment of local communities, taking from them – in the name of preserving
biodiversity – the responsibility to care for their own environments.
From my discussion of the landscape and of the topological image of the globe in
Chapters Eleven and Twelve, it is clear that in the building perspective (as in the genealogical model of Chapter Eight) the earth is presented to humanity as a surface to be occupied
rather than a world to be inhabited. It is further supposed that the disposition of things
and places on this surface is known by representing it, either in the mind or on paper,
in the form of a map. Thus to know where one is entails identifying one’s current position with a corresponding location on the map, and to ﬁnd one’s way from one position
to another is to navigate by means of it. In Chapter Thirteen I take a critical look at the
notion of the map, and its application in anthropological studies of wayﬁnding and navigation. I argue that while dwelling in the world entails movement, this movement is not
between locations in space but between places in a network of coming and going that I
call a region. To know one’s whereabouts is thus to be able to connect one’s latest movements to narratives of journeys previously made, by oneself and others. In wayﬁnding,
people do not traverse the surface of a world whose layout is ﬁxed in advance – as represented on the cartographic map. Rather, they ‘feel their way’ through a world that is itself
in motion, continually coming into being through the combined action of human and
non-human agencies. I develop a notion of mapping as the narrative re-enactment of journeys made, and of maps as the inscriptions to which such re-enactments may possibly
give rise. However, the building perspective enshrined in modern science splits mapping
into the phases of mapmaking and map-using, and likewise splits wayﬁnding into the twin
projects of cartography and navigation.
In Chapter Fourteen I turn to a problem in the anthropology of the senses. Does a
building perspective imply the hegemony of vision? Is hearing the predominant sense of
dwelling? To regain an appreciation of human dwelling in the world is it necessary to
rebalance the sensorium, giving greater weight to the ear, and less to the eye, in the ratio
of the senses? Many philosophers and historians have noted the ‘ocularcentrism’ of the
Western tradition, its privileging of sight over the other senses as a source of human knowledge. Anthropologists, for their part, have stressed the importance of hearing in the
sensorium of many non-Western peoples. Yet the comparison remains couched in terms
of a dichotomy between vision and hearing whose roots lie ﬁrmly in the intellectual history
of the West. In the terms of this dichotomy, vision is distancing, objectifying, analytic,
and atomising; hearing is unifying, subjective, synthetic and holistic. Vision represents an
external world of being, hearing participates in the inwardness of the world’s becoming:
the former is inherently static, the latter suspended in movement. Whereas one hears
sound, one does not see light, but only the things off whose surfaces light is reﬂected.
This is why hearing is supposed to penetrate the inner, subjective domain of thought and
feeling in a way that vision cannot. It is also why Western thought, for all its dependence

Dwelling
on the written word, and in apparent contradiction to its elevation of sight as the ‘noblest’ 1
of the senses, has tended to treat writing (which is seen) as inferior to speech (which is 2
heard).
But ethnography suggests that people in non-Western societies do not regard vision 4
and hearing as radically opposed, but rather as virtually interchangeable. Nor does their 5
apparent emphasis on understanding through sensory participation rather than external 6
observation entail a bias towards hearing over vision. For many, vision remains paramount. 7
But it is a vision that is non-representational, a matter of watching rather than seeing. 8
Like hearing, it is caught in the ﬂow of time and bodily movement. One can, in short, 9
dwell just as fully in the world of visual as in that of aural experience: indeed for the 10
most part these worlds are one and the same. That this point has been missed in the 1
anthropology of the senses is due to its tendency to treat sensory experience as but a 2
vehicle for the expression of extra-sensory, cultural values. The key question, I conclude, 3
is: what is the relationship between the cultural evaluation of the senses and the ways in 4
which they are practically deployed in acts of perception?

Culture, nature, environment • 157 •

Chapter Nine

Culture, perception and cognition

There is one question that, perhaps more than any other, motivates anthropological inquiry.
Take people from different backgrounds and place them in the same situation; they are
likely to differ in what they make of it. Indeed such difference is something that every
anthropologist experiences in the initial phases of ﬁeldwork. But why should this be so?
How do we account for it? In their attempts to answer this question, anthropologists have
come up against some of the most contested issues in the psychology of perception and
cognition. My purpose in this chapter is to show how they have dealt with these issues.
The chapter is divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part I trace something of the history
of the problem over the past century of anthropological thought. In the second, I go on
to assess the relevance for anthropological understanding of alternative approaches drawn
from cognitive science, ecological psychology and phenomenology. This is a considerable
agenda, and in the space of a single chapter I can do no more than touch on the many
questions raised.

SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY
In British social anthropology (as distinct from American cultural anthropology) thinking
about perception and cognition goes back to the classical work of Emile Durkheim, himself
one of the founding fathers of what was then the new science of sociology. In his manifesto for the new discipline, The rules of sociological method (ﬁrst published in 1895),
Durkheim adamantly opposed all attempts to explain social phenomena in terms of the
psychological properties of individuals. As he famously declared, ‘every time a social
phenomenon is directly explained by a psychological phenomenon, we may rest assured
that the explanation is false’ (1982[1895]: 129). If sociology is a kind of psychology,
Durkheim thought, its object of study must be the mind of society, not of the individual.
This mind, the consciousness of the collectivity, was supposed to have emergent properties of its own, in no way reducible to the given properties of individuals as inscribed in
human nature. But it was not until the concluding chapter of his greatest work, The
elementary forms of the religious life, that Durkheim explicitly spelled out the relation
between the consciousness of the individual and that of the collectivity – ‘the highest form
of the psychic life’ (1976[1915]: 444). He did so in terms of a thoroughgoing distinction between sensation and representation.
The distinction was made on two grounds. The ﬁrst lies in the contrast between the
ephemerality of sensations and the durability of representations. Every sensation, Durkheim

Dwelling
argued, is tied to a particular moment that will never recur, for even if – at a subsequent 1
point in time – the thing perceived has not changed, the perceiver will no longer be the 2
same. We are nevertheless able to represent our experience, and so to know what we have 3
perceived, by catching perceptual images that would otherwise ﬂoat by on the stream of 4
consciousness within the mesh of a system of concepts that remains somehow aloof from 5
this sensory agitation (in a ‘different portion of the mind’, Durkheim suggested, that is 6
more calm and serene). Like language, which is the medium in which concepts are 7
expressed (‘for every word translates a concept’), the conceptual system has a kind of 8
stability: it endures, whilst the stream of consciousness ﬂows on (Durkheim 1976[1915]: 9
433).
Secondly, whereas sensations are private and individual, representations are public and 1
social. Since sensations consist in the reactions of the organism to particular external 2
stimuli, there is no way in which a sensation can be made to pass directly from one indi- 3
vidual consciousness to another. If people are to share their experiences they must talk 4
about them, and to do that these experiences must be represented by means of concepts, 5
which in turn may be expressed in words whose meanings are established within a commu- 6
nity of speakers by verbal convention. Thus collective representations serve as a kind of 7
bridge between individual consciousnesses that are otherwise closed to each other, 8
furnishing them with a means of mutual understanding. ‘The concept is an essentially 9
impersonal representation; it is through it that human intelligences communicate’ 20
(Durkheim 1976[1915]: 433–4).
Following Durkheim’s lead, British social anthropologists carried on with the compar- 2
ative study of collective representations – otherwise known as ‘social structures’ – without 3
paying much attention to the psychological premises on which such study rested. Fifty 4
years later, two of the most inﬂuential social anthropologists of the day, Edmund Leach 5
and Mary Douglas, could still pose the problem of perception and cognition in very much 6
the same terms. Given that the world of our immediate, sensory experience is a formless 7
and continuous ﬂux in which nothing is the same from one moment to the next, how 8
can we know what we perceive? To recognise speciﬁc objects and events in the external 9
world, Leach claimed, the ﬂux has to be cut up into bounded chunks: thus thought frag- 30
ments the continuum of life as it is lived, and the diversity of culture lies precisely in the 1
manifold ways in which the continuum can be cut. Leach’s ﬁrst explicit statement of this 2
theory of perception and cognition was presented in an article on ‘Anthropological aspects 3
of language’, published in 1964. Here he argued that the categories of language provide 4
the ‘discriminating grid’ which, laid over the continuous substrate of raw experience, 5
enables the speaker to tell one thing from another, and so to see the world ‘as being 6
composed of a large number of separate things, each labelled with a name’ (1964: 34). 7
As the child learns its mother-tongue, thereby taking on board a conventional system of 8
named categories, so its environment literally takes shape before its very eyes.
Two years later, Mary Douglas published her seminal study, Purity and danger. Here, 40
too, we ﬁnd the same basic idea: that in perception the world is constructed to a certain 1
order, through the imposition of culturally transmitted form upon the ﬂux of experience. 2
As perceivers we select from all the stimuli falling on our senses only those that interest 4
us, and our interests are governed by a pattern-making tendency . . . In a chaos of 5
shifting impressions, each of us constructs a world in which objects have recognisable 6
shapes, are located in depth, and have permanence.
(1966: 36) 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 159 •

As with Leach, the roots of Douglas’s thinking lie in Durkheim’s theory of knowledge.
This theory, as we have seen, effectively divides the human subject into two mutually
exclusive parts. One part, fully immersed in the sensate, physical world, is continually
bombarded by stimuli which are registered in consciousness as a ‘chaos of shifting impressions’. The other part, however, stands aside from this engagement, and is untouched by
it. Here are located the conceptual categories that sort the sensory input, discarding or
suppressing some elements of it while ﬁtting the remainder into a pre-existing, socially
approved schema. Crucially, then, perception is a two-stage phenomenon: the ﬁrst involves
the receipt, by the individual human organism, of ephemeral and meaningless sense data;
the second consists in the organisation of these data into collectively held and enduring
representations.

CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
The rigid distinction between social and psychological phenomena that British social
anthropology took from Durkheim was not matched by the parallel, North American
tradition of cultural anthropology. The founder of this latter tradition, Franz Boas, consistently adopted the position that the patterned integration of culture, as a system of habits,
beliefs and dispositions, is achieved on the level of the individual rather than having its
source in some overarching collectivity, and is therefore essentially psychological in nature.
Accordingly, American cultural anthropologists of the mid-twentieth century paid a great
deal of attention to the way in which the individual personality is fashioned out of the
cultural materials available to it. In two respects, however, subsequent developments led
to the establishment of a view of perception and cognition more closely in line with that
espoused by British writers. The ﬁrst lay in the separation of culture, as a body of transmissible knowledge, from patterns of observable behaviour. Already in the writings of
Clyde Kluckhohn, and in the review of concepts of culture that Kluckhohn compiled in
collaboration with Alfred Kroeber, we ﬁnd a stress on culture as an internalised system
of rules and meanings as distinct from manifest behaviour patterns and their artefactual
products (Kluckhohn 1949: 32, Kroeber and Kluckhohn 1952: 114). And in 1957, Ward
Goodenough conﬁrmed this separation in his much cited deﬁnition of culture as ‘whatever it is one has to know or believe in order to operate in a manner acceptable to [a
society’s] members’ (cited in D’Andrade 1984: 89).
The distinction between culture and behaviour was once again reiterated, this time by
Clifford Geertz, in an inﬂuential article ﬁrst published in 1966, on ‘The impact of the
concept of culture on the concept of man’. Culture, Geertz argued, ‘is best seen not as
complexes of concrete behavior patterns – customs, usages, traditions, habit clusters –
. . . but as a set of control mechanisms – plans, recipes, rules, instructions (what computer
engineers call “programs”) – for the governing of behavior’ (Geertz 1973: 44). He nevertheless took strong exception to the view, attributed to Goodenough, that the place to
ﬁnd these control mechanisms is inside the heads of individuals.1 Herein, then, lay the
second development: having split culture from behaviour, the former was removed from
the minds of individuals and reinscribed on the level of the collectivity. In a move redolent of Durkheim’s earlier formulation, Geertz insisted that the domain of cultural symbols
is social rather than psychological, public rather than private. Their natural place of abode
is in the intersubjective space of social interaction – ‘the house yard, the marketplace, and
the town square’ – whence they are ‘used to impose meaning upon experience’ (1973:
44–5). For any one individual, the range of symbolic meanings which can be drawn upon

Dwelling
is more or less given by what is current in the community into which he or she is born. 1
But without the guidance provided by signiﬁcant symbols, human beings would be hope- 2
lessly lost, unable to establish their bearings in the world. For unlike other creatures whose 3
activities are more closely controlled by innate response mechanisms, humans depend on 4
a substantial input of additional information, learned rather than innate, in order to func- 5
tion adequately in their normal environments. ‘Undirected by culture patterns – organized 6
systems of signiﬁcant symbols – man’s behavior would be virtually ungovernable, a mere 7
chaos of pointless acts and exploding emotions, his experience virtually shapeless’ (Geertz 8
1973: 46).
Despite his different intellectual roots, in American cultural anthropology rather than 10
British social anthropology, Geertz came to conclusions remarkably similar to those that 1
were being drawn at the same time by Douglas, and that I have already touched upon. 2
Both Geertz and Douglas took culture to comprise a framework of symbolic meanings, 3
common to a community and relatively impervious to the passage of time and genera- 4
tions, which gives shape to the raw material of experience and direction to human feeling 5
and action. Thus to return to our original question: if two individuals from different back- 6
grounds, placed in the same environment, construe it in different ways, the reason would 7
be that each has brought a different symbolic system to bear in organising the same 8
material of sensory experience. Granted, then, that every community has its own partic- 9
ular system for the organisation of experience, anthropological attention naturally came 20
to focus on cultural variation in the organisational principles involved. Geertz, as we have 1
seen, claimed that such principles were to be found in the publicly accessible space of 2
social discourse, and not in the interiority of the mind. But others, taking their cue more 3
directly from Goodenough, insisted that cultural cognition can only take place by way of 4
shared conceptual schemata lodged in the minds of individuals. Their aim was to uncover 5
these schemata, and it gave rise, in the late 1960s, to a ﬁeld of inquiry known rather 6
generally as ‘cognitive anthropology’, though in a narrower and more restricted form as 7
‘ethnoscience’ (Tyler 1969).
COGNITIVE ANTHROPOLOGY
The problem for the cognitive anthropologist, Tyler explains, ‘is to discover how other 2
people create order out of what appears to him to be utter chaos’ (1969: 6). They do so, 3
it is supposed, by grouping the inﬁnitely variable phenomena of the experienced world 4
into a ﬁnite set of named, hierarchically ordered classes. This is done by attending only 5
to those perceptual cues that differentiate things as belonging to one class rather than 6
another, while ignoring those that would indicate the uniqueness of every member of a 7
class. But the ordering principles that govern this process of selective attention are given 8
in the mind, not in the world. ‘There is nothing’, Tyler asserts, ‘in the external world 9
which demands that certain things go together and others do not’ (1969: 7). In other 40
words, the principles of classiﬁcation are arbitrary and subjective with regard to the world 1
whose phenomena are to be classiﬁed. They are to be discovered through the formal 2
analysis of responses provided by native informants to a series of questions of the form 3
‘is this thing here a kind of X?’, ‘what other kinds of X are there?’, ‘is X a kind of Y?’, 4
and so on, all of which are designed by the investigator to elicit precisely the distinctions 5
he or she is looking for.
Despite early promise, the project of cognitive anthropology soon ran into difﬁculties. 7
An enormous amount of effort was put into mapping out rather limited semantic domains 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 161 •

– for example of kinship terms, plant and animal taxonomies or colour classiﬁcations –
without bringing any comparable advance in understanding how people actually negotiate
their relationships with one another, and with their non-human environments, in the usual
course of everyday life. It became apparent that the key to such negotiation lay in a certain
ﬂexibility in the use of concepts and a sensitivity to context that was disregarded by formal
semantic analysis. The neatly ordered paradigms and taxonomies yielded by this method
of analysis seemed to be artefacts of anthropologists’ techniques of controlled elicitation
rather than having any counterpart in the cognitive organisation of the people studied.
The specialised tasks of naming and discrimination that the latter were expected to perform
were not, after all, ones that they would have ordinarily encountered. Indeed the ability
to name things correctly is but a small and relatively insigniﬁcant part of what a person
needs to know in order to get by in the world, so that the greater part of cultural knowledge had still to be uncovered. Above all, cognitive anthropology was unable to grasp the
source of human motives: one learned no more from an analysis, say, of kinship terminology about people’s feelings for one another than one might learn from the grammar
of a language about why its speakers say the things they do.
In recent years, and partly in response to these objections, cognitive anthropology has
resurfaced in a new guise, as the investigation of what are now called ‘cultural models’.
Introducing a seminal volume of essays on Cultural models in language and thought, Naomi
Quinn and Dorothy Holland deﬁne such models as ‘presupposed, taken-for-granted models
of the world that are widely shared . . . by the members of a society and that play an
enormous role in their understanding of that world and their behaviour in it’ (1987: 4).
They differ from the classiﬁcatory schemas identiﬁed by earlier cognitive anthropologists
in three major ways. First, rather than dividing up the continuum of experience into
named categories, cultural models offer a description of the world framed in terms of
networks of interconnected images or propositions, in which objects, events and situations
take on regular, prototypical forms. Actual experience in the real world is then organised
by matching it to the prototypical scenarios built into the simpliﬁed worlds of the cultural
models, and these, in turn, furnish conventional guidelines for action. Secondly, although
linguistic data provide important clues to underlying cultural knowledge, it cannot be
assumed that word meanings stand to components of the cultural model in a simple relation of one-to-one correspondence. The relation is rather complex and indirect, and can
only be grasped through an analysis of the richly textured material of ordinary discourse.
Thirdly, cultural models – to the extent that they are fully internalised – do not merely
describe or represent the world, they also shape people’s feelings and desires. That is to
say, they can have ‘motivational force’ (D’Andrade 1992: 28). As Claudia Strauss argues,
in her introduction to a recent volume dedicated to the demonstration of this point, the
realm of cognition is inseparable from the realm of affect; thus cultural models should be
understood as ‘learned, internalised patterns of thought-feeling’ (Strauss 1992: 3).
Despite these fairly radical revisions, the programme of cognitive anthropology remains
basically unchanged. Starting from the premise that culture consists in a corpus of intergenerationally transmissible knowledge, as distinct from the ways in which it is put to use
in practical contexts of perception and action, the objective is to discover how this knowledge is organised. Moreover the assumptions on which the programme rests are much as
they were in Durkheim’s day. They are that cognition consists of a process of matching
sensory experience to stable conceptual schemata, that much if not all of the order that
people claim to perceive in the world – and especially the social world – is imposed by
the mind rather than given in experience, that people are able to understand one another

Dwelling
to the extent that their cultural orderings are founded on consensus (such that the limits 1
of consensus deﬁne the boundaries of society), and that the acquisition of such orderings 2
involves a process of internalisation. These assumptions have not, however, gone unchal- 3
lenged – indeed there is a powerful movement within contemporary anthropology that 4
would reject them altogether. One of the most inﬂuential ﬁgures in this movement has 5
been Pierre Bourdieu, who in a series of works has attempted to show how cultural know- 6
ledge, rather than being imported by the mind into contexts of experience, is itself 7
generated within these contexts in the course of people’s involvement with others in the 8
practical business of life. Through such involvement, people acquire the speciﬁc disposi- 9
tions and sensibilities that lead them to orient themselves in relation to their environment 10
and to attend to its features in the particular ways that they do. These dispositions and 1
sensibilities add up to what Bourdieu calls the habitus (1990: 52–65).2
THE THEORY OF PRACTICE
Like the ‘cultural model’ of cognitive anthropology, the habitus of Bourdieu’s theory of prac- 6
tice could be described as a pattern of thought-feeling. The similarity ends there, however. 7
For thinking and feeling, in Bourdieu’s account, do not go on in an interior subjective 8
(or intersubjective) space of images and representations but in the space of people’s actual 9
engagement in the settings of practical activity. Whereas cultural models are supposed to 20
exist independently of, and prior to, their application in particular situations of use – such 1
as in doing things or making things, or in the interpretation of experience – the habitus 2
exists only as it is instantiated in the activity itself. In other words, the habitus is not 3
expressed in practice, it rather subsists in it.3 What Bourdieu has in mind is the kind of 4
practical mastery that we associate with skill – a mastery that we carry in our bodies and 5
that is refractory to formulation in terms of any system of mental rules and representations. 6
Such skill is acquired not through formal instruction, but by routinely carrying out speciﬁc 7
tasks involving characteristic postures and gestures, or what Bourdieu calls a particular body 8
hexis. ‘A way of walking, a tilt of the head, facial expressions, ways of sitting and of using 9
implements’ – all of these, and more, comprise what it takes to be an accomplished prac- 30
titioner, and together they furnish a person with his or her bearings in the world (Bourdieu 1
1977: 87). And if people from different backgrounds orient themselves in different ways, 2
this is not because they are interpreting the same sensory experience in terms of alternative 3
cultural models or cognitive schemata, but because, due to their previous bodily training, 4
their senses are differentially attuned to the environment.
In the anthropological study of cognition this kind of approach is perhaps best repre- 6
sented in the work of Jean Lave. Her book Cognition in Practice (1988) is a manifesto 7
for an ‘outdoor psychology’ – that is, a psychology that would take as its unit of analysis 8
‘the whole person in action, acting within the settings of that activity’ (1988: 17). 9
Cognition, in Lave’s view, is not a process that goes on ‘inside the head’, whose products 40
are representations that bear some complex relation to the world outside, but rather a 1
social activity that is situated in the nexus of ongoing relations between persons and the 2
world, and that plays its part in their mutual constitution. It is a process wherein both 3
persons, as knowledgeable social agents, and the settings in which they act, continually 4
come into being, each in relation to the other. Thus thinking is inseparable from doing, 5
thought is ‘embodied and enacted’, and cognition is ‘seamlessly distributed across persons, 6
activity and setting’ (1988: 171). To study cognition is to focus on the modus operandi 7
not of the mind, in organising the bodily data of sense, but of the whole body-person in 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 163 •

the business of dwelling in the world. And if knowledge is shared it is because people
work together, through their joint immersion in the settings of activity, in the process of
its formation.
What, then, becomes of the models and schemata of the cognitive anthropologists? Are
they merely artefacts of analytic abstraction, products of attempts by anthropological
observers to represent manifest behaviour as the output of formal programmes? Or do
they, to the contrary, offer clues to basic truths about the way the human mind works?
The answers to these questions hinge on more fundamental differences of approach which
divide psychologists as much as anthropologists. Roughly speaking, the division is between
advocates of cognitive science on the one hand, and their critics on the other, who ﬁnd
inspiration in an ecological or phenomenological perspective on perception and cognition.
These differences of approach, and some of their implications for anthropology, are
reviewed in the next part of this chapter.

COGNITIVE SCIENCE
In the ﬁeld of psychology, cognitive science emerged as an alternative to behaviourism in
the 1950s, alongside the development of the digital computer. Its founding axioms are
that people come to know what is ‘out there’ in the world by representing it in the mind,
in the form of ‘mental models’, and that such representations are the result of a computational process working upon information received by the senses. The functioning of the
mind, then, can be compared to the operation of a computer program, and the relation
between mind and brain to that between the program and the ‘hardware’ in which it is
installed (Johnson-Laird 1988). But the computing analogy also found its way into cognitive anthropology – I have already referred to Geertz’s (1973: 44) likening of cultural
control mechanisms to computer software – where it was similarly supposed that the mind
is equipped with programmes that construct internal representations of the environment
from the data of sensation, and deliver appropriate plans for action (D’Andrade 1984:
88–9). Whereas cognitive scientists, however, have by and large been concerned to discover
universals of human cognition, which are attributed to innate structures established in the
course of evolution under natural selection, cognitive anthropologists have sought to
account for human perception and action in terms of acquired schemata or programmes
that differ from one culture to another.
How, then, should we view the relation between these two projects? Are they contradictory or mutually compatible? D’Andrade (1981: 181–2) tackles this issue by considering
the ﬁt between programmes and processors. By programmes he means the informational
content of transmitted culture – what is ‘passed along’ from generation to generation. By
processors he means the apparatus of acquisition that makes such transmission possible,
an apparatus that is assumed to be common to all human minds. According to this
division, cognitive anthropology is concerned with the diversity of cultural content, and
with the way in which its organisation is constrained by invariant properties of the
processing devices that govern its acquisition, while cognitive psychology is concerned with
the structure and functioning of the devices themselves, and the way in which they work
on all kinds of information (including cultural information). This formulation, however,
begs a critical question. Granted that mental representations are the products of a

Dwelling
processing of information by acquired cultural programmes, what is the source of the 1
processing apparatus of which these programmes are themselves products? This apparatus, 2
it seems, must already be in place prior to the acquisition of culture; hence its design and 3
operation must be innately speciﬁed. In short, the theory that all human cognition is 4
grounded in culturally speciﬁc schemata can hold only on condition that human beings 5
come universally pre-equipped with the structures necessary to enable these schemata to 6
be acquired in the ﬁrst place.
This is precisely the conclusion reached by Dan Sperber (1985), in the context of his 8
critique of cultural relativism – the doctrine, long ascendant in anthropology, that people 9
in different cultures inhabit different cognitive (or rather, cognisable) worlds, each with 10
its own criteria of rationality and judgement. Relativists argue that just as every non- 1
human animal species, depending on its evolved cognitive organisation, can only know 2
the world in its own particular way, so also every human culture is locked into the cogni- 3
tive framework of a unique worldview. But whereas species differences supposedly have a 4
genetic basis, cultural differences are assumed to be entirely independent of genetic 5
constraint. Thus cultural relativists tend to imagine that theirs is a position opposed to 6
an innatist view of the human mind, and that evidence for the diversity of incommen- 7
surate worldviews only goes to prove that the underlying structures of human cognition 8
are genetically underdetermined and malleable to the effects of experience.
Yet in this, Sperber shows, they are mistaken. Relativists, he contends, have failed to 20
attend to the psychological implications of their assumption that human behaviour is 1
rooted in tradition rather than heredity. Had they done so, they would have realised that 2
a creature capable of taking on not just one form of life but any one of a very large number 3
of possible alternative forms would require more rather than less by way of innate program- 4
ming. On the basis of a formal logical argument, Sperber concludes that ‘the greater the 5
diversity of the cultures that humans are capable of acquiring, the greater the complexity 6
of the innate learning abilities involved’ (1985: 43). Thus the relativists’ appeal to human 7
cultural diversity is not at all contrary to the universalist claims of cognitive science; rather 8
it depends upon them.
Though the logic of Sperber’s argument may be impeccable, it rests on a foundation 30
that is far from secure – namely, that cultural knowledge takes the propositional (or semi- 1
propositional) form of beliefs, ‘representations acquired through social communication and 2
accepted on the ground of social afﬁliation’ (1985: 59). Underlying the commonsense 3
understanding of the culturally competent actor is supposed to lie a huge database of such 4
representations, which provide all the information necessary to generate appropriate 5
responses under any given environmental circumstances. Yet as many critics of cognitive 6
science have pointed out, and as the failure of attempts to replicate human skills in the 7
design of expert systems has amply demonstrated (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1987), even the 8
simplest and most routine of everyday tasks are refractory to codiﬁcation in propositional 9
form. By and large, these tasks are not represented (save in the notebooks of observers), 40
nor are such representations communicated in learning situations. Most cultural learning 1
takes place through trial-and-error and practice, albeit in socially structured situations, and 2
although beginners may need to follow rules, these rules structure the situation of learning 3
and do not themselves form any part of the content of what is learned. For the skilled 4
practitioner consults the world, rather than representations (rules, propositions, beliefs) 5
inside his or her head, for guidance on what to do next.4 As Andy Clark puts it, why 6
should we go to the trouble of modelling the world when ‘we can use the world as its 7
own best model’ (Clark 1997: 29–30, see also Chapman 1991: 20)?

Culture, perception and cognition • 165 •

Faced with the evident artiﬁciality of depicting cultural knowledge in algorithmised
form as a set of programmes, acquired by means of a processing device that is somehow
constituted in advance of ontogenetic development, cognitive science has come up with
an alternative model of the way the mind works. Instead of positing one giant processor
with a massive capacity for information storage and retrieval, it is suggested that the mind
consists of a very large number of small, simple processors, massively interconnected, all
operating in parallel, and receiving inputs and delivering outputs to each other along the
countless pathways linking them. Crucially, a system so constituted can learn from experience, not by taking on new informational content, but by adjustments to the differential
strengths of the connections among processing units. In other words, knowledge is acquired
through the establishment of particular patterns of connection: any processor may therefore be involved in the representation of diverse experiences; conversely the representation
of any experience may be distributed across many processors (Johnson-Laird 1988: 174).
This so-called ‘connectionist’ model of the mind has a certain anthropological appeal –
thus cognitive anthropologists such as D’Andrade (1990: 98–9) have noted that the properties of cultural models are precisely what would be expected from the operation of
parallel processing networks, while Bloch (1991) has suggested that the acquisition of practical skills may best be understood in terms of the development of tightly connected
networks dedicated to particular domains of cognition (for a more extended review, see
D’Andrade 1995: 143–9).
Despite its greater realism, connectionism remains open to much the same criticisms
that have been levelled against earlier versions of artiﬁcial intelligence (Dreyfus 1992). For
ultimately, it is still grounded in the Cartesian ontology that is basic to the entire project
of cognitive science – an ontology that divorces the activity of the mind from that of the
body in the world. Thus the body continues to be regarded as nothing more than an
input device whose role is to receive information to be ‘processed’ by the mind, rather
than playing any part in cognition itself. And beyond that, the world is supposed to exist
as a domain of problems to be solved, or as a ﬁeld for the enactment of solutions reached,
rather than as a resource for problem solving (Clark 1997: 83–4). Connectionists, Clark
admits, ‘inherit a distressing tendency to study disembodied problem solving and to opt
for abstract, symbolically deﬁned input-output mappings’ (1997: 80). What they fail to
recognise is that the processing loops that yield intelligent action are not conﬁned to some
interior space of mind, conﬁned within the skull, but freely penetrate both the body and
its environment. This failure is deeply rooted in the history of twentieth-century
psychology. It lies, as Edward Reed (1987: 144–5) has shown, in the founding assumptions of the behaviourist theory that cognitive science claims to have overthrown: namely
that perception is based on discrete bodily sensations touched off by external stimuli, and
that action is based on the corresponding bodily responses.
The objection to behaviourism was that, as a theory, it was incomplete: the simple
linkage of stimulus and response was considered insufﬁcient to account for the knowledgeability of actors or the productivity of their actions. To complete the picture, cognitive
scientists posited a mental processing device that would convert the stimulus input into
knowledge, and generate plans for the delivery of meaningful responses. There is however
another way out of behaviourism, and this is to treat the perceiving organism not as a
passive recipient of stimuli but as an active agent who purposively seeks out information
that would specify the meaningful properties of his or her environment. This was the path
taken by James Gibson in his pioneering studies of visual perception, and in doing so he
laid the foundations for an approach, known as ‘ecological psychology’, which is radically

Dwelling
ECOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY
The point of departure for ecological psychology is the proposition that perceptual activity 5
consists not in the operation of the mind upon the bodily data of sense, but in the inten- 6
tional movement of the whole being (indissolubly body and mind) in its environment. 7
The emphasis on movement is critical. Cognitive science assumes a static perceiver who 8
has nothing to go on but transient patterns of sensory excitation that are, in themselves, 9
quite insufﬁcient to specify the objects and events that gave rise to them. Thus the problem 10
of perception, for the cognitive scientist, is to show how these ephemeral and fragmen- 1
tary sense data are reconstructed, in terms of pre-existing schemata or representations, into 2
a coherent picture of the world. But for Gibson, sensations do not, as such, constitute 3
the data for perception (Gibson 1979: 55). Rather, what the perceiver looks for are constan- 4
cies underlying the continuous modulations of the sensory array as one moves from place 5
to place. In visual perception, for example, we do not see patterns of light but objects in 6
our environment. We do so because, as we move about, the pattern of light reaching the 7
eyes from reﬂecting surfaces in the environment (that is, the ‘optic array’) undergoes a 8
gradual transformation. It is the invariants that underly this transformation, and not the 9
momentary patterns of stimulation themselves, that specify what we see. Indeed it is 20
Gibson’s contention that the invariant relations that structure the modulations of an optic 1
array for a moving observer contain all the information necessary to specify the environ- 2
ment. Perception, then, is a matter of extracting these invariants. The perceiver has no 3
need to reconstruct the world in the mind if it can be accessed directly in this way.
Certain implications follow. First, if perception entails movement, then it must be a 5
mode of action rather than a prerequisite for action. For Gibson, perception is an active 6
and exploratory process of information pickup; far from working on sensations already 7
received, it involves the continual movement, adjustment and reorientation of the receptor 8
organs themselves. What is important, he argues, ‘is the looking, listening, touching and 9
snifﬁng that goes on when the perceptual systems are at work’ (1982[1976]: 397–8). 30
Secondly, if perception is a mode of action, then what we perceive must be a direct func- 1
tion of how we act. Depending on the kind of activity in which we are engaged, we will 2
be attuned to picking up particular kinds of information. The knowledge obtained through 3
direct perception is thus practical, it is knowledge about what an environment offers for 4
the pursuance of the action in which the perceiver is currently engaged. In other words, 5
to perceive an object or event is to perceive what it affords. Perhaps the most fundamental 6
contribution of Gibson’s approach to perception lay in his insight that the information 7
picked up by an agent in the context of practical activity speciﬁes what are called the 8
‘affordances’ of objects and events in the environment (Gibson 1979: 127–43).
Thirdly, the information that is potentially available to an agent is inexhaustible: there 40
is no limit to what can be perceived. Throughout life one can keep on seeing new things 1
in an otherwise permanent world, not by constructing the same sense data according to 2
novel conceptual schemata, but by a sensitisation or ‘ﬁne-tuning’ of the perceptual system 3
to new kinds of information. Novel perceptions arise from creative acts of discovery rather 4
than imagining, and the information on which they are based is available to anyone attuned 5
to pick it up. Finally, and following from the above, one learns to perceive in the manner 6
appropriate to a culture, not by acquiring programmes or conceptual schemata for organ- 7
ising sensory data into higher-order representations, but by ‘hands-on’ training in everyday 118
opposed, in almost every respect, to the project of cognitive science.

Culture, perception and cognition • 167 •

tasks whose successful fulﬁlment requires a practised ability to notice and to respond
ﬂuently to salient aspects of the environment. In short, learning is not a transmission of
information but – in Gibson’s (1979: 254) words – an ‘education of attention’. As such,
it is inseparable from a person’s life in the world, and indeed continues for as long as he
or she lives.
There are clear parallels between the ecological critique, in the ﬁeld of psychology, of
cognitive science and the critique by practice theorists of cognitive anthropology, which
I reviewed in the ﬁrst part of this chapter. Both Gibson’s ecological psychology and
Bourdieu’s theory of practice set out to re-embed perception and cognition within the
practical contexts of people’s ongoing engagement with their environments in the ordinary course of life. And both seek to escape from the sterile Cartesian dualisms of mind
and nature, subject and object, intellection and sensation, and so on. Yet while the impact
of Bourdieu’s work in social and cultural anthropology has been immense, the relevance
of Gibsonian ecological psychology to anthropological theory has been little explored. An
obvious reason for the discrepancy lies in the fact that Gibson himself devoted scant attention to the speciﬁcally social and cultural dimensions of human life, preferring – if anything
– to downplay the signiﬁcance of the distinction between human beings and other animals.
In developing his theory of affordances, Gibson did devote a brief section to ‘other persons
and animals’ in the environment of the perceiver, noting that they have the peculiar
capacity to ‘act back’ or, literally, to interact with the perceiver. Thus ‘behavior affords
behavior, and the whole subject matter of psychology and of the social sciences can be
thought of as an elaboration of this basic fact’ (Gibson 1979: 135). But beyond suggesting
that the perception of mutual affordances in social life involves the same principles of
information pickup as are involved in the perception of inanimate objects, Gibson did
not pursue further the implications of this rather sweeping statement.
A recent attempt to develop this neglected aspect of the Gibsonian programme has been
made by Edward Reed (1988a). The crux of his argument is that social agents can not
only directly perceive their mutual affordances for one another, but also share their direct
perception of other constituents of the environment. Attuned through prior training and
experience to attending to similar invariants, and moving in the same environment in the
pursuit of joint activities, they will pick up the same information (Reed 1988a: 119–20,
see Gibson 1982[1967]: 412). Thus, contrary to the axioms of cognitive anthropology,
the communion of experience that lies at the heart of sociality does not depend upon the
organisation of sensory data, initially private to each perceiver, in terms of an objective
system of collective representations. Rather, sociality is given from the start, prior to the
objectiﬁcation of experience in cultural categories, in the direct, perceptual involvement
of fellow participants in a shared environment (Ingold 1993a: 222–3). This, indeed, is
what makes anthropological ﬁeldwork possible, for it allows the ﬁeldworker and local
people to inhabit a common ground of experience, even though each may bring to bear
a radically different conceptual frame to the task of its interpretation. As Michael Jackson
notes, ‘by using one’s body in the same way as others in the same environment one ﬁnds
oneself informed by an understanding which may then be interpreted according to one’s
own custom or bent, yet which remains grounded in a ﬁeld of practical activity and
thereby remains consonant with the experience of those among whom one has lived’ (1989:
135).
The environment of joint practical activity should not, however, be confused with the
physical world of ‘nature’ (Gibson 1979: 8). For the world can appear in this latter guise
only to a creature that can disengage itself – or imagine itself to be disengaged – from

Dwelling
the processes of its own material life. But the world we inhabit does not confront us, 1
it surrounds us. This does not mean that it is any less real; the environment, however, is 2
reality constituted in relation to the beings whose environment it is. As I have argued else- 3
where (Ingold 1992a), Gibsonian psychology offers a way of thinking about human- 4
environmental relations that dispenses with the conventional dichotomy between naturally 5
given and culturally constructed worlds. According to convention, it is necessary to distin- 6
guish between the ‘real’ environment, as it is presented to detached, scientiﬁc observation, 7
and the ‘perceived’ environment as it is built up through a selective response to stimuli 8
(Brookﬁeld 1969: 53). In anthropology, the distinction is commonly expressed by means 9
of a contrast between the ‘etic’ level of objective description and the ‘emic’ level on which 10
the environment is made meaningful by cultural subjects.5 Yet from a Gibsonian perspec- 1
tive, it is apparent that the world becomes a meaningful place for people through being 2
lived in, rather than through having been constructed along the lines of some formal 3
design. Meanings are not attached by the mind to objects in the world, rather these objects 4
take on their signiﬁcance – or in Gibson’s terms, they afford what they do – by virtue 5
of their incorporation into a characteristic pattern of day-to-day activities. In short, far 6
from being inscribed upon the bedrock of physical reality, meaning is immanent in the 7
relational contexts of people’s practical engagement with their lived-in environments.
PHENOMENOLOGY
It is at this point that ecological psychology makes contact with an older, Continental 2
European tradition of philosophical inquiry, broadly characterised as phenomenological, 3
and represented above all in the works of Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. 4
Just as the point of departure, for Gibson, had been the perceiver-in-his/her-environment, 5
so likewise these philosophers set out from the premise that every person is, before all 6
else, a being-in-the-world. And their intellectual agenda, like that of Gibson, was funda- 7
mentally antagonistic to the kind of rationalism whose contemporary manifestation, in 8
the ﬁeld of psychology, is cognitive science. Yet in some ways they went even further. For 9
all his emphasis on perception as a process that is continually going on, Gibson assumed 30
that the world which the perceiver moves around in and explores is relatively ﬁxed and 1
permanent, somehow pre-prepared with all its affordances ready and waiting to be taken 2
up by whatever creatures arrive to inhabit it.6 From a phenomenological standpoint, by 3
contrast, the world emerges with its properties alongside the emergence of the perceiver 4
in person, against the background of involved activity. Since the person is a being-in- 5
the-world, the coming-into-being of the person is part and parcel of the process of coming- 6
into-being of the world.
Consider, for example, Heidegger’s critique of Cartesianism (reviewed in Dreyfus 1991: 8
109–27). Heidegger begins by distinguishing two ways in which the world may ‘show up’ 9
to a being who is active within it: availableness and occurrentness. The former is evident 40
in our everyday use of the most familiar things around us, which, absorbed into the current 1
of our activity (as indeed, we are ourselves), become in a sense transparent, wholly subor- 2
dinate to the ‘in-order-to’ of the task at hand. The latter refers to the way in which things 3
are revealed in their essential nature to an observer who self-consciously stands back from 4
the action, assuming a stance of contemplative detachment or disinterested reﬂection. Now 5
Cartesian ontology, which takes as its starting point the self-contained subject confronting 6
a domain of isolable objects, assumes that things are initially encountered in their pure 7
occurrentness, or brute facticity. The perceiver has ﬁrst to make sense of these occurrent 118

Culture, perception and cognition • 169 •

entities – to render them intelligible – by categorising them, and assigning to them meanings or functions, before they can be made available for use. Heidegger, however, reverses
this order of priority. For a being whose primary condition of existence is that of dwelling
in the world, things are initially encountered in their availableness, as already integrated
into a set of practices for ‘coping’ or getting by. To reveal their occurrent properties,
things have to be rendered unintelligible by stripping away the signiﬁcance they derive
from contexts of ordinary use. This, of course, is the explicit project of natural science,
which seeks to describe and explain a world which the rest of us are preoccupied with
living in. Yet the scientist, like everyone else, is a being-in-the-world, and scientiﬁc practice, as any other skilled activity, draws unselfconsciously upon the available. Thus even
science, however detached and theoretical it may be, takes place against a background of
involved activity. The total disengagement of the subject from the world, from which
Cartesianism charts a process of building up from the occurrent to the available, is therefore a pure ﬁction which can only be reached by extrapolating to the point of absurdity
a progressive reduction from the available to the occurrent.
If, as Heidegger seems to suggest, self and world merge in the activity of dwelling, so
that one cannot say where one ends and the other begins, it surely follows that the intentional presence of the perceiving agent, as a being-in-the-world, must also be an embodied
presence. This was the principal contention of Merleau-Ponty in his massive treatise, dating
from 1945 [ trans. 1962], on the Phenomenology of perception. ‘The body’, Merleau-Ponty
wrote, ‘is the vehicle of being in the world, and having a body is, for a living creature,
to be involved in a deﬁnite environment, to identify oneself with certain projects and be
continually committed to them’ (1962: 82). Like Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty was concerned
to reverse the ontological priorities of Cartesian rationalism. Just as for Heidegger, the
available is the ground upon which we may seek to reveal the properties of the occurrent,
so for Merleau-Ponty our knowledge of the body as a physical thing – as a mere conduit
or target of the mind’s attention – is grounded in a more fundamental awareness, preobjective and pre-conscious, which is given by the existential condition of our total bodily
immersion, from the start, in an environment. Only because we are thus immersed in the
world can we imagine ourselves as existing separately from it. The problem of perception
lies in understanding the nature of this immediate pre-objective experience, itself a precondition for objective thought. Accordingly, Merleau-Ponty sought to uncover ‘underneath
the objective and detached knowledge of the body that other knowledge which we have
of it by virtue of its always being with us and of the fact that we are our body’ (1962:
206, my emphasis). In this latter sense, the body is neither object nor instrument, it is
rather the subject of perception.
In recent years, albeit somewhat belatedly, many anthropologists have begun to read
Merleau-Ponty with renewed interest. Though there is nothing particularly novel about
anthropological concerns with the body and its symbolism, much work in this ﬁeld is
marked by a tendency to treat body praxis as a mere vehicle for the outward expression of
meanings emanating from a higher source in culture or society. This is true, for example,
of the writings of Mary Douglas. In line with her general thesis, reviewed in the ﬁrst
part of this chapter, of the cultural construction of experience, Douglas holds that the body
is a medium whose forms – whether adopted in movement or repose – ‘express social pressures in manifold ways’ (1970: 93). As Jackson has eloquently shown, this ‘subjugation of
the bodily to the semantic’ diminishes the body and its experience in two ways. First, body
movements – postures and gestures – are reduced to the status of signs which direct the
analyst in search of what they stand for, namely extra-somatic cultural meanings. Secondly,

Dwelling
the body is rendered passive and inert, while the active role of mobilising it, putting it to 1
use and charging it with signiﬁcance is delegated to a knowing subject which is both 2
detached from the body and reiﬁed as ‘society’ (Jackson 1989: 122–3). The ﬁrst reduction 3
fails to recognise that gestures, whatever they might be held to symbolise, delineate their 4
own meanings through their embeddedness in social and material contexts of action. The 5
second reduction ignores a consideration pivotal to Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology: that 6
the body is given in movement, and that bodily movement carries its own immanent 7
intentionality. Indeed it is because of this intentionality that the subject’s action is, at one 8
and the same time, a movement of perception (1962: 110–11).7
Drawing inspiration from Merleau-Ponty, Jackson (1989) calls for studies that would 10
take as their focus the ‘body subject’ in its dealings with the world. In similar vein, and 1
linking Merleau-Ponty’s concerns with perception to Bourdieu’s with practice, Thomas 2
Csordas (1990) puts the case for the establishment of a ‘paradigm of embodiment’ in 3
anthropological inquiry. Far from treating the body as an object of study, this paradigm 4
would be launched from the postulate that ‘the body is to be considered as the subject of 5
culture, or in other words as the existential [as opposed to the cognitive] ground of culture’ 6
(1990: 5). In its promise to collapse the Cartesian dualities between mind and body, 7
subject and object, the paradigm holds a certain appeal for many anthropologists whose 8
familiarity with indigenous, non-Western understandings – which are not generally concor- 9
dant with such dualities – predisposes them to adopt a critical attitude towards the 20
foundational assumptions of Western thought and science. Not everyone has been won 1
over, however, as is evident from the continuing strength of cognitive anthropology, and 2
from the pronouncements of anthropologists such as Bloch (1991), D’Andrade (1995) 3
and Sperber (1996) who see a role for anthropology in an interdisciplinary alliance with 4
cognitive science. Moreover, as I shall show by way of conclusion, there remain three 5
major obstacles to the further development of the phenomenological approach.
CONCLUSION
The ﬁrst obstacle has to do with the problematic status of biology. Even anthropologists 30
who would readily accept the idea of embodiment as a paradigm for the study of culture, 1
and who denounce the mind/body distinction, tend to balk at attempts to soften the 2
conventional dichotomy between culture and biology (for example, Csordas 1990: 36). 3
In effect, the dichotomy remains as strong as it always was; only the body has been repo- 4
