Cause and Effect
There is a final concreteness to be discarded in approaching Melanesian societies from the viewpoint of
Western/European ones. To concentrate on the objectifications of Melanesian cultures appears to eliminate
subjectivity. The acting agent is seemingly not required in my explanation of how people manage their
affairsand I write as though cultures proceed independently with their reifications, persons appearing only as
the reflex of relationships. In fact, the individual subject has been present in my account all along; she/he
just does not take the shape we are used to seeing.

Locating The Agent
Leenhardt (1979 [1947]) faced this problem in New Caledonia. With brilliance he charts the extent to which
persons appear through their relationships. But then at their center all he sees is emptiness.
As he analyzes local symbolization, the body is simply a support for the living being ('personage'); it has an
individuating effect, but it is not otherwise a source of identity. He discovered that bodies were
interchangeable; they act as replicas of one another, by which he meant I think both that like persons are
replicated and that those differentiated from a particular ego elicit its different roles. A living entity (kamo)
''knows himself only by the relationships he maintains with others. He exists only insofar as he acts his role in
the course of his relationships"
                                                   page_268

                                                                                                      Page 269
(1979:153, my emphasis). Figure 3A is a diagram drawn by Leenhardt of the kamo as the center of a fan of
such relationships, every other kamo being replicas of his own body. "In the midst of these rays, an empty
space is circumscribed by ... the points of departure for relationships" (Leenhardt 1979:153). We cannot call
this space a self, he argues:
   Their social reality is not in their body but in this empty place where they have their names and
   which corresponds to a relationship. ... But no name can cover the whole person. The Canaque
   [Caledonian] is obliged to have a different name for every domain which involves his person in
   various relationships and participations. In all this, he is unaware of himself; he is the empty space
   enclosed by the circle of a's [Fig. 3A]. (1979:154, 156)
One relationship is always, as he adduced, a metamorphosis of another. Yet his mistake was to conceive of a
center at all. The center is where the twentieth-century Western imagination puts the self, the personality,
the ego. For the 'person' in this latter day Western view is an agent, a subject, the author of thought and
action, and thus 'at the center' of relationships. Some of the conceptual dilemmas into which this
configuration leads were rehearsed in part 1. It has shaped our cultural obsession with the extent to which
human subjects are actors who create relationships or act rather as the precipitation of relationships; this
obsession fuels the individual/society dichotomy with which I began.
The image of the active agent at the creative or created center of relations is missing from my explanations.
In the Western view an explanation consists of bringing social facts and events into relationship with one
another. Explanation models the organization it describes. And such a resultant 'structure' or 'system' in being
authored by its inventor must also show, we suppose, its effects upon the living subject in the world. The
inventor then demonstrates the reality of the hypothesized structure or system through people's living
participation in it as subjects. And because we can abstract subjects as individuals, the explanation often
appears concrete enough, despite its having to cede all the infinities of 'levels' of consciousness or 'domains'
of action and the cumbersome imagery of structuration. Social science never settles in fact on any single
metaphor. Whether systems and structures are like buildings, maps, engines, bodies themselves, or even like
minds that drown in their own thresholds of awareness, Leenhardt's star shaped configuration carries the one
and same presumption: living within, guided by, driving, functioning as, or knowing through these structures
of relation-

                                                   page_269

                                                                                                      Page 270
                                                   Fig. 3.
                                                Two Diagrams

                                                   page_270

                                                                                                      Page 271
ships must be the individual subject. In honesty, Leenhardt could not find a corresponding entity on New
Caledonia. I suggest that this upside down conclusion be turned right side uphis diagram was wrong. 1
Possibly it is fortuitous that Leenhardt's translator used the term 'support' for the way the Melanesians in his
analysis think of the body; the term recalls Battaglia's discussion of Sabarl ideas about the interconnection of
relations. Sabarl imagine that it is relationships that 'support' a person (see pp. 172173). But only certain
relationships are so described; others are held to 'complete' a person. Consequently, any one type of
relationship is to be contrasted with and thus seen from the viewpoint of another. The same is true for the
internal construction of social relations themselves. People's positioning with respect to one another entails
each party perceiving the relationship simultaneously from its own and the other's point of view. This
perception is construed as a specific capacity that the person has within. For these, in turn, are metaphors,
with their own cumbersome reifications. They underlie, for instance, the so-called dualism of Melanesian
cultures. Imagining that the world is divided into 'two kinds of' things, relations, times, or whatever (p. 188),
is to imagine the person from two different vantage points. The clan that divides its members into two types
of agnatesmales and femalesis also perceiving itself with respect to what its marriage partners will extract
from it. The woman who berates a child for taking sweet potatoes from her growing garden perceives her
care of the plants in relation to the claims she must satisfy at a later point; time is sliced into before and after.
From our point of view, these are symbolic constructs; from the Melanesian point of view they are recipes
for social action. They supply motivation. Perceiving another's viewpoint is also an anticipation of it; and
people forever regard themselves as moving from one position to another. A wife does not, of course,
become the husband whose claims she has in mind; but she anticipates the moment at which she will harvest
the tubers, and that what grew because of her exclusive nurture of them will be consumed as the products of
their joint work. This transformation in view, we might say that she grew the sweet potatoes 'for' her
husband, since his work in fact completes hers.
Sabarl give us a diagram (in fig. 3B), a picture of relationships like joints or elbows, graphically conceived as
the angle that an ax blade makes to its shaft (Battaglia 1983a:296). The ax, and particularly the direction in
which the blade points, is compared to the prestations (segaiya) that culminate at mortuary ceremonies in
acknowledgment

                                                     page_271

                                                                                                           Page 272
of the support given to a person over his or her life by his or her 'father' (a son or daughter of the father's
sister). The person who benefits and consumes the food and other gifts given by the father is the pivot for
these exchanges: in his or her name food and valuables are returned to the father's side. The return is finally
celebrated at the person's death, when life is completed. From the point of view of his/her father's kin, the
'child' is called an 'elbow', the turning point at which valuable objects that have moved away from the village
come back again (Battaglia 1983:297; 1985:430). 2 The child acts as an agent on their behalf; its shape is an
angle encompassing two directions.
The acting subject or agent is construed in these systems as a pivot of relationships. I do not mean one who
is an assemblage of or the locus of relationshipsthat is the 'person', the form of their objectification. By
agent, I mean one who from his or her own vantage point acts with another's in mind. An agent appears as
the turning point of relations, able to metamorphose one kind of person into another, a transformer. Thus
from the Sabarl 'father's' viewpoint it is the 'child' who in relation to him or her is the turning point whereby
transactions with affines become transformed into benefit for kin. By his or her own gifts the 'father' does, of
course, compel the child to bring the transformation about.
An agent is one who acts with another in mind, and that other may in fact coerce the agent into so acting. A
Hagen woman is compelled to harvest her tubers for her husband. But it would be a misconstruction to read
this as the husband's superior powers, an aggrandized subjectivity overriding that of the wife's. In the
commodity view, it is true, one subject acts upon another as its object. Here, I suggest, in the corresponding
relation one subject acts with another subject in mind. One always acts so to speak 'on behalf of' another
(compare p. 164), though the English phrase has misleadingly positive overtones. The object or outcome is
their relationship, the effect of their interaction. But the two subjects are not isomorphic. If the wife is an
agent, the one who acts, then her husband in this instance is the cause of her acting, though not himself
active. It is simply in reference to him that the wife acts. That is the coercion.
While this will serve as a general description of Melanesian agency, I have derived it from those exaggerated
forms of activity made visible in the course of public ceremonial and ritual, as with the Sabarl mortuary
exchanges. Many such agents have appeared in my account: the Gimi wife who from the husband's point of
view must turn her relation-

                                                     page_272

                                                                                                           Page 273
ship with her father into one with her child's father; the Trobriand father who from his wife's brother's point
of view releases parallel flows of male and female wealth; the Sambia sister's husband who activates both his
wife and his wife's brother; the Hagen mother who from the viewpoint of her natal clan turns her relationship
with her husband into wealth for it. What deceives us perhaps (see chap. 5) is the very fact that agents do
not cause their own actions; they are not the authors of their own acts. They simply do them. Agency and
cause are split.
There is a distinction then between a cause and an agent: a cause exists as a single reference point for the
agent, in the same way as the effect of a relationship exists as a single outcome. The cause is the 'person'
with whom the agent's relationship is to be transformed, a unitary reference point for her or his acts. The one
who is regarded as acting, however, is the one who in taking account of the causethe reason for actingalso
acts for him or herself. The agent's position is intrinsically multiple. The tubers may be for the husband, but it
is quite emphatically the wife who should and does harvest them. The outcome is the food he will consume,
but the activity she does of and for herself. The action remains hers.
To expound upon this point, I return to material that has already been presented. The term person, which I
have used so freely in my account, must now be uncovered and differentiated into its own two types. I
therefore introduce a distinction between 'person' and 'agent'.
The person is construed from the vantage points of the relations that constitute him or her; she or he
objectifies and is thus revealed in those relations. The agent is construed as the one who acts because of
those relationships and is revealed in his or her actions. If a person is an agent seen from the point of view of
her or his relations with others, the agent is the person who has taken action with those relations in view. In
this, the agent constitutes a 'self'. A corollary is that causing another to act is not to be understood simply as
the manifestation of a power that some have over others in particular contexts. There is nothing contingent
about it. The separation between agent and the person who is the cause of his or her acts is systemic, and
governs the Melanesian perception of action. To act as one's own cause becomes an innovation on this
convention. Given that persons are reified as two kinds, through the aesthetics of gender women
consequently appear as the cause of men's actions, and men as the cause of women's.
Persons and agents thus occupy positions defined by different vantage points. The one and the same figure is
both an object of the regard of

                                                    page_273

                                                                                                        Page 274
others (a person) and one who takes action as him or herself on behalf of these others (an agent). The person
objectifies a multiple relationship but from the viewpoint of the agent is the 'one' reference point with respect
to whom action is taken, for the other reference point is her or himself. The agent's social position is thus a
multiple one, constituted in the different directions in which he or she is faced, but his or her consequent acts
are singular. Each act is 'one' act. 3 This last perception is the single most significant metaphysical basis for
the understanding of Melanesian relations.

The Particular And The Collective
The elbow image is suggestive in another regard. From the view of the agent, the persons/relations with
reference to whom she or he acts have a taken-for-granted status. They are already there, one might say. As
I have construed Melanesian ideas, the person is revealed in the context of relationships, for the person
reveals the relationships that compose him or her as an inherently multiple construct. The plural or
composite nature of the relations that make up people's interactions is thus assumed. But in chapter 1 I
suggested that plurality takes two forms. In truth, one of these is assumed, and the other is not.
It is consonant with my argument about the concealed conventions of reification that the plurality taken for
granted is that of the duothe dyadic structure of the relationship between agent and the cause of the agent's
acting. The externalizing duality of direction in which people's minds are turned, toward themselves and
toward others, is an axiomatic context for action. As we have seen this precipitates not a dialectic between
'self' and 'other' but a self who in acting with respect to another alters the relations within which she or he is
embedded. Consequently the effects of her or his actions may be seen in the bodies of two other persons.
Two relationships are involved, with the agent as pivot; they form, we might say, an analogous pair. This
follows from the fact that as a person the agent is always socially distinct from the cause; and in acting for or
because of the cause also acts with reference to other causes. The wife who grows food for her husband
does so 'herself' because she is separated from him by her own ties with her natal kin. Thus she acts with
reference to 'two kinds of' menher spouse and her siblings. In short, an agent who acts with one person in
mind is also acting with another in mind. One might call the resultant angle of perspective a recursive duality.
The point is that it is taken for

                                                   page_274

                                                                                                       Page 275
granted that actions proceed within a dually constructed external context of this kind.
The plurality which is not taken for granted is that I have called 'collective', homomorphic, the plurality that
may evince itself homologously in singular form. This is the condition of unity, and it has to be achieved.
Only under the condition of unity can the person or group then appear as a composite microcosm of social
relations. Unity in turn hinges on agency: the agent reveals the unity for (as I shall argue) it is acts which
unify.
The singular must also be seen with respect to the two forms out of which unity is composedthe multiple or
composite person and the dividual. Here what is taken for granted are the multiple external relations in
which a person is embedded, for the focus of attention is their internal manifestation in a dual form. What
has to be staged is the ability to shed half the dual form: to be concrete, unity is achieved by detaching or
eliminating an opposite sex part.
The propositions about plurality and singularity can be drawn as external and internal analogues of one
another [fig. 4]. But like Leenhardt's, this too is the wrong diagram. In chapter 1 I used the terms singular
and plural to retain contact with Western metaphors of society and individual. Finally, however, they are
misleading, for the diagram creates the wrong dimensions, the nominalizing qualifiers suggesting that at issue
are a collection of attributes. One has to move to the further position, that there is no intrinsic difference
between 'the singular' and 'the plural'. There is, however, a crucial difference between the viewpoints of the
'one' agent and the 'two' directions in which he or she faces.
Rather than lines and arrows between attributes we should instead be thinking of the relationship between
acts and the contexts of action. It is acts which take a singular form, and they produce this against a taken-
for-granted background of relationships. The corollary is that the agent acts in the knowledge of his or her
own constitution as a person in the regard of others and indeed fabricates that regard (objectifying her or
himself) in activating the relationship. An agent may know her or himself as a person in the form of a
dividual, potentially one of a pair, or may know him or herself as a composite microcosm, potentially
bounded as a unit. The outcome of her or his singular action is in the one case sociality of a particular and in
the other of a collective nature. Over time, particular relations must always substitute for one another,
whereas collective relations replicate one another. The one action is so

                                                   page_275

                                                                                                       Page 276
                                                     Fig. 4.
                                               Singular and Plural
   Expanded:
   1. Multiple internal relations among the members of the body (a 'group').
   2. Encounter with a specific social other: another group, as partner, ally, etc. The context for (5).
   3. The whole spectrum of relations which the person objectifies and also in that sense contains
   within. The context for (6) in that the other of a pair must already be external.
   4. The reduction of the multiplicity of external relations to an image of internal duality, e.g., relations
   with mother's kin, father's kin.
   The one schema can be superimposed upon the other. When we do this (conflating plural and
   singular), the motivating opposition emerges as that between unity and duality.
contextualized as to lead to the creation of what I call kinship; the other is not.
The unifying act. Causes are single points of reference for the agent who is a pivot, an elbow combining
within him or herself multiple perspectives. But the agent reduces that multiplicity to a unity in the actions
she or he takes. Thus the agent is revealed as a single conduit,

                                                    page_276

                                                                                                         Page 277
the one of a pair to whom action is credited. This singleness of action in turn establishes its reference points,
for he or she then elicits the actions of others in reference to his or her single self and gives those causes
('persons') their other, multiple character. It is the one figure of the Trobriand father who releases the dual
flow of male and female valuables and the one figure of the Gimi mother in which many men meet.
The elbow of relationships is single, I argue, because he or she is the one who takes action. Action has a
unity, as Biersack describes for Paiela observations on people's behavior. She writes that Paiela social
transitions require
   the operation of two principles: a principle of binary opposition whereby a set of alternatives is
   created, but also a principle of selection that permits one or the other alternative to become current,
   thereby creating temporal discontinuities. (1982:255)
Doing an act is such a selective process. Whether imagined as choosing from a pair of alternatives or
choosing a single path out of many, 4 the suppression of multiple possibilities in favor of one makes
relationships visible through the capacity of the self to activate them. At any point, action appears directed
towards one specific relationship (the eliciting partner), which becomes the cause of the action itself. And it
can only be done in one kind of way. It is done either well or badly (Biersack 1984). The criteria that I have
been calling aesthetic with regard to form can also be called moral: the self is judged by the way it activates
its relationships.
An action implies an agent. Conversely, for the agent to 'appear' action must take a singular form. Thus a
collectivity of men wishing to act to common purpose must appear as 'one man'. Only thus do they declare
themselves agents. The cause for their having to act may lie in the minds of their exchange partners or in the
necessity for marriage, but the action is theirs. Unity is communicated, displayed, contrived, as it is in a
performance. We may also take performance as a unified set of events, motivated by singleness of purpose
and body. Oriented as participants are to others, they celebrate their own actions, and thus also their
capacity for action.
Events, acts, performances are, then, presented in the singular; they both define and are defined by a single
point in time. Each event thus has a historical specificity to it. Each event freshly transforms the multiple
causes for it taking place into the single occasion of it having done

                                                   page_277

                                                                                                       Page 278
so. The occasion is fixed by the irreversibility of its momentary aesthetic impact. 5 LeRoy (1979:206)
describes this vividly for a Kewa pig-kill.
   Let us suppose, along with the Kewa, that someone comes and observes from the sidelines. He is
   perhaps a visitor from another village who has come to receive a shell or some pork. Now, however,
   he scrutinizes the pig killers as they make their ceremonial gifts of shells and pork. His glance unifies
   them, and in his view they constitute a whole. This is his value: each pig killer can, by putting himself
   in the spectator's place, see himself as a member of a unified group. Long before the visitor arrives
   on the scene, therefore, local pig killers anticipate his reactions. What will he think if he sees them
   make a bad job of it?
In these terms we have to understand the Melanesian significance given to maternity: women give evidence
of their own agency, as well as those of others, through the event of childbirth and the constitutive singleness
of their own bodies. The diverse composition of these bodies, the gender of the substances or who coerced
them to give birth are all irrelevant to the act itself. Indeed, in many Melanesian societies, its unity is
exaggerated by the mother's isolation and seclusion at the time. The act of birth is regarded as a particular
historical event. Relations merely appear as the causes of such events. For the relations are always there;
what gives the event its unique character is how well or in what manner a particular relationship is made 'to
appear' on that occasion. That evaluation defines the occasion. The event thus submits the self, the agent, to
scrutiny in its capacity as a person from the vantage of another and thus subjects it to aesthetic judgement.
This is another way of putting the process Wagner calls analogic kinship (1977a). Relations (persons) are
analogues of one anotherLeenhardt's replication of bodies. But people's actions turn them into unique events
so that one relation may also displace another. They become particularized.
From the agent's point of view, her or his unity is evinced in action taken. This is a generalized condition,
encountered in chapter 5 as (indivisible) 'power'. It is the power to act that is indivisible. Furthermore, the
agent can, so to speak, recall this generalized capacity on future occasions: it is his or her own capacity that
has been revealed. But from the point of view of what caused the agent to act, the performance at that
moment was a particular and irreversible event. The agent acted in relation to a specific other. The character
of the other provides the context that determines whether the agent perceives her or himself as effective in a
dividual or multiple mode.

                                                   page_278
                                                                                                        Page 279
Where the other already exists in prior form, its differentiation from the agent is taken for granted in the
duality of an agent's orientation. As a woman, a mother knows she has the capacity to give birth; but as a
wife, the woman knows she gave birth on this occasion because of the particular actions of her husband. The
activation of specific relations on each occasion means that the agent's capacity is thereby particularized.
Not in this sense replicated, it is elicited only with respect to a particular other, and the ensuing relationship
thus takes a dual or cross-sex form. I use a kinship example, for it is such relations I would define as
kin-based. The agent acts to differentiate and make these relations 'appear', but the form which the
differentiation takes is already given. As a wife a woman can only act as a wife; otherwise she ceases to 'be'
one. There is a prioritization to the relations that the agent can in this sense only reenact. It goes without
saying that such prior differentiation is not 'innate' but is always regarded as the result of earlier, specific
differentiating acts (Wagner 1977a:627). Their effect is at once cumulative and substitutivea constant
displacement of particular relations by further particular relations ('more kinship'). For a person's capacity is
particularized or individualized (Gillison in press), revealed as agency, by the particularity of previous acts.
Prioritization may also have contingent rather than cumulative effect. The agent's capacity remains
generalized and appears replicable; it creates same-sex relations, elicited by similar or like others. However
the exercise of the capacity itself particularizes and makes relationships. In doing so, the constitutive
differentiation is rendered unpredictable. There is (paradoxically for us) no determinate prioritization to the
histories of intergroup relations, for instance. The instruments of their historical differentiationwarfare,
competitive exchange, business enterprises, intriguesare multiple and diverse, and are not given in advance.
Consequently, anything may happen. This is the character of collective performances that occur in political
contexts, creating the unique renown of clans, canoes, or leaders in relation to others like them. 6 It is in
their particular historicized form (all with their own histories) that such entities are analogues of one another.
Indeed, to be an analogue could be said to be their aimgroups compete, as anthropologists have long noted
(e.g., Reay 1959; Forge 1972) to be equal with one another.
In other words, one must disaggregate the impact of people's interactions with reference to temporality,
whether particular relations are taken as prior to an act or as a consequence of it. I remind the reader,

                                                    page_279

                                                                                                        Page 280
however, that the problem of the anticipated outcome is the collapse of cause and effect sequencing itself,
and I shall return to the point.
Meanwhile, note that the verbal inversions through which my description has proceeded derive both from
the interrelationship between English and Melanesian, so to speak, and from the conclusion of the last
chapter about the manner in which forms participate in one another; it is after all in English no paradox to
talk about the kinship aspect of politics or the politicization of domestic relations. That my argument pivots
on these two concepts derives in turn partly from the Hagen-centric nature of the original problematic but
also from the discussion in part 1 about the two types of sociality.
The two times of sociality. I have emphasized the substitutive effect of the cross-sex claims by which one
agent extracts what is owed him or her, that is, belongs to her or his relation with the person in question.
Substitution, unlike replication, can only take place once. Consequently, extraction (or production) is always
a particular event. An extraction once effected fixes the parties in an asymmetric relation with one another.
However many times it is reenacted in gift exchange or in further extractions, that historic shift can only be
reenacted in the context of having happened.
It was argued earlier that the mother's social identity causes things in her care to grow. That identity is made
overt by the events of gift exchanges and by the relationship between her work and her husband's. Under
patrilineal regimes, a woman may be growing within her a fetus that comes in part from her husband's clan
and be nourishing it, as she will when the child is born, with food produced by her work on the husband's
land. Matrilineal regimes emphasize different constellations of significant social others. But in either case,
these particularizing, cross-sex relations lie beyond her body which can thus be conceived, like a collectivity,
as 'one'. Growth, therefore, has a retrospective character to it. It is in anticipation of the separation of grown
thing from grower that the thing so grows, for it is only known to have done so after the event. This recursive
view of time is highly relevant to my general argument.
The condition that remains hidden and enclosed, whether within a single or plural collectivity, is atemporal.
It is the inert outcome of a previous sequence of events. It exists in turn in contrast to the anticipated
revelation which must, in mobilizing external relations, itself always take the form of a single, temporalized
event. Agents stage events,

                                                    page_280

                                                                                                        Page 281
bringing about an irreversible sequence, thereby making their relations with particular others appear. Thus a
husband appears as the cause of a wife giving birth. Thus the individuating effect of Melanesian kinship: it is
the act that individuates. From the viewpoint of the one who causes another to act, he or she has elicited a
general capacity. But the general capacity is manifested in a particular way: from the viewpoint of the one
who acts, the act is something only he or she can do. Moreover, each act appears in a unique form because it
is differentiated from any other by its aesthetic effect. The quality of the performance, the child born alive
and well, the things it produces, mark the point in time at which it occurred. What gives kinship relations
their 'particular' cast, then, is time.
The way in which metaphors participate in one another might suggest that every such equation exists
simultaneously; but that is merely the vertigo of a narrative form that has to lay out the interconnections
between images. For the observer, everything seems implicated in everything else. But for the performers the
whole point about performative sequence is the sequence. Actors move from one position to another. More
than that, their energies and efforts are required to effect transition. Thus an anticipated effect is only
realized as a result of action; wealth objects will only flow between exchange partners if each man takes
action in relation to the other; and the children contained in the transmission of semen will only be born
when the right action is taken with the right sexual partner.
Indeed, in the Sambia case we are told how important sequencing is: an older male must always play the part
of inseminator (in relation to both boys and women), and no temporal reversal of the roles is permissible
(Herdt 1984b:188). Age keeps apart the sister's husband and wife's brother; under the rubric of sister
exchange these might otherwise be categorically fused (direct-sister exchange is always a possibility, see
Herdt 1981:43). It is important that for the particular performer, for the individual agent, the sequencing is
right, that his or her own inseminator is unambiguously defined. It is thus incumbent upon agents to keep the
timing of their performances in order.
We might regard kinship relations as the distillation of individual acts in a necessary rather than contingent
sequence. It is those acts that have produced this child of these parents, from this affinal tie, and so on. They
have a particular nature to them because in kin terms each person is a microcosm of relations as they have
been historically activated through individual agents. The evidence for this lies in the shape

                                                    page_281

                                                                                                        Page 282
that persons assume: their minds and bodies are thoroughly particular registers of the agents' successes and
failures and of the degree to which others have properly activated their own relations. Health, stature,
inclinations, feelingsall document specific action. The person as a kins-man or -woman, then, is the outcome
of event and performance. Dependency in kin relations could thus be described as a priority of form: one
relationship (person) must exist before another can (e.g., p. 250). 'Parents' are a prior form of 'children'. As
we have seen, differentiations can be taken for granted only as the outcomes of the particularizing actions of
others. Those actions in turn lay the irreversible basis for the future acts that will substitute for them. 7
The problem of time posed by the gift's anticipated outcome, that is, by the objectification of relations, is
solved by kinship, that is, by the individualization of the subject or agent. Through the singularity of his or
her action, an agent keeps cause and effect apart.
An anticipated outcome means that relations must exist before they can be realized. Kinship places events in
sequence, organizing the appearance of one specific form out of another, recording these sequences in the
bodies of particular persons. The individual is created in the fact that these sequencesin the order they
occurred, and in the success with which they occurredare attributed to his or her motive in acting in one way
rather than another. One behaves either as a senior or junior, either as a mother or a daughter. The
'individual' is thus temporalized in the image of body-time. Birth, maturation, death, decay record the history
of the agent's own motives and the motives of others. The processes become highly particularized by virtue
of appearing as a consequence of prior actions and thus as a consequence of people's cumulative dealings
with one another.
Disaggregating the domestic domain. The Melanesian division of labor between husband and wife, seen
from the point of view of one party acting for the other, inaugurates a set of particular relations focused on
the household. The household appears heterogeneously based. It is constituted on dependency relations
between nonequals, by contrast with those constructions of clanship where members are seen as replicating
one another, a possibility that allows enumeration and the measurement of respective strengths. Relations
within the household pattern the whole field of individuated kinship connections established through
marriage and the maintenance of ties with affines and patrilateral/matrilateral others: they can never achieve
such homogeneity. It seems

                                                      page_282

                                                                                                             Page 283
helpful to continue to refer, as in previous chapters, to 'domestic kinship', meaning this whole configuration
of 'particular' relations. But if I do so at this juncture, it is to introduce a distinction between activities often
taken together as axiomatically domestic in nature and axiomatically the province of women.
There are contexts in which the acts of feeding are separated from the acts of growing (chap. 9). There are
also contexts in which it is analytically illuminating to separate nurture, under which we might include both
feeding and growing, from the act of giving birth. (One could, of course, disaggregate further, for every 'act'
is itself composed of a sequence of acts, in the same way as one can continually disaggregate the gender
symbolism of any specific gender symbol.) I take the latter separation as a summarizing contrast of some
salience in the way I think Melanesians assemble their ideas of women and men. In anthropological analysis,
these two activities are often merged under the umbrella rubric of domesticity. To do so in the case of
Melanesian constructs of maternity and paternity is to obscure the nonkinship character of certain relations
Westerners might otherwise put at the heart of the 'domestic domain'.
Childbirth is certainly constituted as a unique, nonreplicable event. It is a singular and historical act, making
a specific relationship (between her and others, and not least the child) out of the mother's general
capacities. For she becomes an agent activated by a particular cause seen to lie prior and external to her (the
father's exchanges, enveloping clan land, or a brother compelling her husband to prepare her). Childbirth
activates kinship. However, it is by contrast that the mother's nurturing of her child, or her crops, may be
construed to evince instead a general capacity in relation to a like other (plants, the unborn child) that she
thereby internalizes as 'part' of herself. Her capacity inheres as a general condition in that other. And these
are the same-sex acts of growth that were described in chapters 8 and 9hence what is in English the paradox
that until it is born or harvested the growing thing within her in effect grows her. Grower and grown are
unified in what could be called a 'collective' manner: like political relations, their relations are of a different
order from those of domestic kinship.
Into this context I would put Highlanders' remarks on the apparent spontaneity of female growth. Our
mistake is to see this as a comment on a natural property that women like plants or animals have within
themselves. 8 The early ethnographers claimed that it was because women were seen to grow naturally, men
had to imitate them. But in

                                                      page_283

                                                                                                             Page 284
stressing the apparently unassisted character of such growth, the claims mistakenly suppose Highlanders see
the process as beyond rather than constituted by human effort. Female or maternal growth is as contrived or
as uncontrived as the propagation of subclans or the enlargement of men's names. Spontaneity presents an
image of potential agency, of the ability to take unassisted action, precisely because the cause appears
particular and external to the generalized capacities of the person/body. The actor becomes constituted as
her own reference point; the woman qua woman acting with another in mind also acts from a position of her
own.
At the center of women's activities, therefore, within the 'domestic domain' so-called, women's replication of
same-sex relations is analogous to men's collective politics. (I write men and women here by convention.
The same holds, of course, for the nurturant father in the matrilineal Massim: at the heart of lineage relations
is the father-child bond.) Women's capacities for growth are replicable, generalized; their care of crops and
their growing of the child within are nonspecific activities. The exercise of that capacity, as in the case of
men's political interactions, is to make the resultant relationship (between grower and grown) a particular
one. But that is not visible until it appears in the form of its effect: only the productive 'event' of harvesting
or childbirth will reveal the relationship.
The one process leads into the other. But it is exactly time that separates them, and we should take notice of
this temporality. Rather than conflating the different times of maternal growth and parturition, it is helpful in
understanding the Melanesian view to consider women's bodies as evincing in themselves an alternation
between the two types of sociality, the collective and the particular. The implication is that we must
therefore stop thinking of women's caretaking roles as axiomatically indicative of domestic kinship: they also
evince a collective and generalized capacity. Women, like men, subsequently engage in particular (kinship)
relations with others through their own cross-sex ties.
It becomes unnecessary to conclude, as Ortner and Whitehead (1981: 78) do in gender terms ''that the
sphere of social activity predominantly associated with males encompasses the sphere predominantly
associated with females and is, for that reason, culturally accorded higher value. ... [Men] control the larger
social operation ... while women's social horizons are narrowed to the small range of closely related kin and
their immediate needs." I appear to have been party to the conclusion (M. Strathern 1981a). But as I would
formulate it now, it is not

                                                    page_284

                                                                                                         Page 285
that a male sphere permanently encloses a female one. There are no spheres in that sense: encompassment is
relative. There are positions from which people act. And women as much as men are able to construct
themselves as reference points for their own acts. They are not subsumed under kinship relations; rather,
they equally create and enter into kinship relations at particular moments.
It also becomes absurd to think diagrammatically of the political and domestic domains as the internal and
external aspects of a structure. Melanesian clanship, for instance, does not represent an exteriorization of
domestic kinship, a jural order, a higher sociality. It is not a validating externalization of domestic authority,
which becomes thereby sanctioned, as Fortes (1969) would have it (see chap. 4, n. 10). On the contrary, the
sphere of relations I have called collective, with their contingent character, may be considered amoral by
comparison with the necessary morality of domestic kinship. I would, of course, include the fact of women's
generalized capacities as equally amoral.
In the context of domestic kinship, constraints on action come from the extent to which persons are
construed as immediately vulnerable to and immediately able to benefit from one another's exploits and
intentions, and this is partly a result of the cumulative prioritization of people's acts. The constraints are
invested in the particularity of the relations themselves and their cause and effect sequencing. The resultant
asymmetries may, as we have seen, be metaphorically captured in the interests of collective relations.
Initiation cults blow up unmediated effectiveness to collective proportions, participants' bodies becoming the
individual sites of alteration, with specific acts between particular seniors and juniors creating relations of
dependency between them. Ceremonial exchange appropriates emotional states as attributes of whole social
units, so that clans collectively impinge upon one another, their mutual dependency contrasting with the
independence each also claims. But all this is, so to speak, a borrowed morality. Basically, men's
impingement on like others celebrates a homogeneous identity which works by overcoming or resisting the
moral basis of heterogeneous domestic dependencies. Hence the organization of clan events becomes an
achievement and, in Lederman's (in press) observation for Mendi, "represents a hegemonic moment." Pari
passu the same may be said of the act of nurture.
From the point of view of men's activities, neither politics nor ritual constitute a normative domain that
abstracts and adjudicates values existing elsewhere; in transforming domestic kinship, collective rela-

                                                    page_285

                                                                                                         Page 286
tions are also oriented towards its reproduction. But they deploy an aesthetic mode that necessarily promotes
not a congruent but an alternative set of values.
Harrison makes this point in relation to religion: representations in myth and ritual promote an 'ajural'
sociality (1984:401). 9 His observations were prompted by a study of Avatip, in the Sepik River area, and by
Tuzin's work on Ilahita Arapesh to the north. Tuzin's concern with ritual violence led him to note that the
"felicity of domestic relations must constantly contend with ritual prescriptions designed specifically to
undermine marital and filial attachment." Actors have "to pay the emotional cost of living by two
contradictory, affectively loaded codes of conduct": "domestic ethos ... radically contradicts its ritual
counterpart'' (1982:351, 352). One may compare Young's (1983:262) account of the antinomy in values that
leads to "competing visions" of Kalauna society on Goodenough Island in the Massim. Harrison suggests
rather that at Avatip "the dilemma is not between irreconcilable moral codes, but lies in the fact that religion
and morality are distinct and embody values of a different order" (1985:117).
Avatip people, Harrison argues, see themselves as composed of both 'understanding' and 'spirit'.
Understanding appears akin to the Hagen nurturing of the mind which chapter 4 suggested typified the
dependencies created in the domestic domain. These dependencies certainly have a moral force: that is,
persons so related (by 'kinship') define themselves through identifying with the concerns of others. Spirit in
Avatip, however, is life-force to be augmented through self-assertion and intensification, akin perhaps to
'prestige' in Hagen or what Gillison also calls 'life force' in Gimi (1980:148). The ritual system allows men to
attain degrees of 'spirit' through a male initiatory cult, giving them access to a domain of life in which moral
values are replaced by aesthetic ones. "I call these values aesthetic because they are concerned above all
with the power of signification. This is viewed as a capacity, inherent in [male] individuality, to produce
admiration, fear, desire or other types of affect in others" (Harrison 1985a:117, original emphasis). Avatip
men gain influence over others in their self-enhancement of spirit. "Avatip religion does not celebrate moral
consensus or the submission of the ego to the conscience collective" (1985a:117).
The specific aesthetic impact that Harrison describes can be understood as the glimpsing of people's
capacities in a generalized shape at the moment of their being exposed by the particularizing relations

                                                    page_286

                                                                                                           Page 287
which summon them. I have been using the term aesthetic in a wider sense, to refer to all constraints of
form.
The two types of sociality (the particular and the nonparticular or collective) exist as alternative forms to
each other because each anticipates the other. We might say that in the same way as an agent and a cause
stand in respective active/passive relationship, so each sociality is suspended in its own time. The
relationship has to be one of alternation or anticipation because neither can occupy the time of the other.
The one can only 'appear' as the other in a transformed state. Whether through the political devices of
ceremonial exchange and clanship of the Hagen type, or through life-long exchanges that focus on kin, in
neither case is the collective dimension merely a kinship 'domain' aggrandized. The particular relations of
kinship are transformed into the display of a generalized capacity. Conversely, nurture and growth is not
kinship condensed or miniaturized. Rather, they are generalized capacities made visible in the context of
particular relations. These alternities become reified in the aesthetic of same-sex and cross-sex relations.
We now see why gender constitutes an oscillation or alternation between same-sex and cross-sex states.
These give shape to a double alternation: on the one hand between sociality in a collective mode and a
particular one; on the other hand between being the incomplete agent who is activated in relation to another
and the complete person, a product of others' interactions. I repeat the teaching given to Sambia boys: an
individual cannot be in both an active and a passive state at the same time, but must behave as one or the
other. The alternations are not isomorphicthey do not 'map' on to each other. They merely, but powerfully,
draw on the one common aesthetic. And this presents alternation itself as a movement between states, a
sequence of events.
Events (acts) entail relations. That is, relations (persons) are both the cause and outcome of acts (not the
doing of them). Take the prescription that patrilateral and matrilateral kin have to be kept separate. This can
be achieved in so far as they have their focus on a specific person. For that person is potentially an agent.
Their impact is seen to take different forms, in so far as the individual agent acts upon the fact that her/his
body and mind register the effects of these relationships. The relationships become differentiated from one
another in the one person who internally displays the difference they make. We could put it that the kin
around him or her are not innately differentiated from one an-

                                                    page_287

                                                                                                           Page 288
other. It is the person/agent in her or his internal composition (via her or his internal relations) who
differentiates them.
I now turn to the phenomenon of re-enactment, to the manner in which these internal relations are
commemorated. People are also able to substitute themselves for the relationship they have with their senior
kin. By their own decomposition they at once reify and individuate their persons. They do this through
eating.

Knowledge In A Consumptive Production Economy
Metaphors of deconstitution have run through my account: detachment, elimination, division. They do so in
response to the fiction of convention/invention introduced in chapter 7, and Wagner's (1978) theoretical
propositions about the practices of Melanesian knowledge. 10 Knowledge is not 'built up' into a form; forms
are taken apart to reveal their composition. Melanesian analysis, if one may so call it, leads to individuals
testing their effects on others, trying out their capabilities, improvising and innovating, for capacities can
only be known by the manner in which they are revealed. But what agents thereby reveal is their
constitution as persons. Such processes of deconstitution result not as we might suppose in an array of
fragments; they result in a singularity conceived as an internal unity. As I have been describing it, the unity
may be derived from the dividual through the halving of a pair or may be the dissolution of a composite,
multiple condition into a bounded, homogeneous state. That unity itself reveals the effects of the individual
agent's acts.
Many of the social practices that a Westerner might take as ordering or aggregating activities have to be
understood as deconstitutions of this kind. This should be apparent from the analysis of initiation rituals: the
Sambia boy or the Gimi girl is not 'socialized' into some role or other through 'acquiring' attributes. Rather, an
already existing composite entity is taken apart and produced (by their own actions as well as the actions of
others) in a unitary formthe potent father, the receptive mother. The detachment of spouses from their kin
through bride-wealth or affinal prestations and the mortuary ceremonies that restore a singular identity to a
set of kin are as much decompositions as men's differentiating acts in bleeding their bodies or women
secluding themselves when they menstruate. There may well be an energizing or activating outcome, for the
person is bestowed with a unity that generalizes

                                                    page_288

                                                                                                        Page 289
his or her own capacities as an agent and provides her/him with the single position from which to act in the
future.
But the individual also has to get the original composition right. The logic of the anticipated outcome is quite
as much one of uncertainty as of certainty. In an activated state (as agents), persons must identify the proper
causes of their acts, namely the relations of which they are composed, in hoping to achieve the desired
outcomes. Thus in anticipation of a child's birth, parents must secure its origin in the mediation of relations
between paternal and maternal kin or between the internal elements of the parturient mother's body. The act
of detachment cannot take place if differentiation has not been properly accomplished.
Possibly this explains a prevalent Melanesian attitude to human agencyat once anxious and agnostic. People
say they do not know what the outcome of certain acts will be: they cannot tell. This can be institutionalized
as anxiety. 11 It is encountered in the individual susceptibility of initiands displaying themselves to an
audience's gaze (Biersack 1982); in the vulnerability of donors on a ceremonial ground who have brought
out their wealth (A. Strathern 1975); in voiced uncertainty as to whether an event will even occur or not, as
MacLean (1985) reports for Maring bridewealth ceremonies. Hence events appear both as divinations of
previous states of affairs and omens of affairs to come. Such uncertainty does not arise simply from the
hazard of daily interactions but is built into expectations (MacLean 1985:121). As in many dispute
settlement processes (e.g., Counts and Counts 1974; Tuzin 1974), it is assumed that what is happening can
only be known from the vantage point of some future event that will evince its effects. Uncertainty means
that knowledge itself has to be established as having happened, as an event of sorts.
Feeding provides an image for this recursive process. For I would make a general equation between
consumption and knowledge. (The equation is mine, but I offer it as a way of imagining Melanesian
imagery.) The previous section dwelt on the temporal sequencing between the growing of things and their
being brought out for all to see; there is a further temporal sequencing between such display and its
consumption. The fact that products are 'consumed' or taken in by others creates the particular relationship
between the agent and those thus affected by her or his acts. In turn, those who consume privilege for the
moment that relationship over multiple others, which become suppressed or eclipsed. It may be literally
momentary, as when a guest observes the canons of hospitality, or it may mark out a period of life, as a child
is
                                                   page_289

                                                                                                        Page 290
fed by its parent, or recur on a daily basis, as one spouse feeds the other. The fed person is put into a passive
condition. Feeding establishes the 'claim' of the agent on him or her who will register the act. What I say
about food could also be said about knowledge as such.
Making effects known. In the description of wok meri activities presented in chapters 4 and 9, a connection
was suggested between women's all-female activities and men's all-male cults. It seemed a detraction that at
the juncture at which women's accumulated savings were brought out in public, men stepped in as public
orators and bookkeepers. Yet male initiation sequences also end with display to a mixed audience, even with
marriage for the participants; and the items that circulate in ceremonial exchange are in the long run
returned to the household. Not only are pigs eaten, but Hagen husbands secrete their shells in their wives'
houses with care. Production entails consumption. Production in its form as growth or flow rests on a
same-sex construct: the activity is envisaged as the all-male encompassment of female or vice versa. But
production is not known, not 'produced' as it were, until the point of consumption by another. The point at
which items are consumed is the point at which their multiple (cross-sex) constitution is revealed to those
who elicit it.
Time and again we encounter the idiomatic expression that a produced thing (Daulo women's money/the
Gimi child/Hagen pigs and shells) is at some climactic moment 'brought outside'. The moment of release is at
once the moment of knowledgewhat was inside is made apparentand the moment of consumption. Women's
money is put to uses that also involve men, as a child is claimed as the father's work, or an exchange partner
claims his debt. Hagen wives demand from their husbands pork to eat, while the exclusive control a woman
has over crops in the ground is turned into multiple claims the moment they are harvested. It is through such
display that a person 'knows' what she or he is made of. It becomes an event, with the characteristics of an
event. It 'takes place' in time and is individuated by its aesthetic effect. Knowledge is communicated through
the impact that the agent's acts have on the recipient/audience/consumer, that is, through their knowledge.
To put it in Schieffelin's (1985) terms, it is they who complete its reality.
If action draws out of persons what they are capable of, that capacity is revealed as the ability of an agent to
mobilize a constellation of relations. The agent's (generalized) capacity to make relations and the

                                                   page_290

                                                                                                        Page 291
particular relations of which a person is already made are both made known. Intent is retrospective as well
as prospective. An audience may be created by the display itself, as a recipient is created by ceremonial
exchange, but a recipient also exists before the event at which his preexisting claims are revealed. The
recipient/consumer thus consumes what already belongs to him or her.
Hageners, for instance, speak generally of 'eating' wealth. But there is a specific connotation to this phrase in
relations of domestic kinship. As far as women are concerned, the significant point at which they 'eat' wealth
is on the occasion of a kinswoman's marriage. The multiply constructed child is claimed by both her paternal
and maternal kin, who make apparent their relationships through eating the bridewealth. We may thus equate
both consumption and knowledge with making apparent the constitution of persons and the things agents
circulate. The moment at which persons and things are brought into the open is the very moment before they
are taken back into a body.
Herein lies the difference between the prospective body of a general audience who is made receptive by the
display and the retrospective body of those with prior claims. Ceremonial exchange proceeds with the
former in view, kin-based exchanges with the latter. In kin-based exchanges, there is no expansion or
multiplication of relationships: the consumer/recipient consumes an item that substitutes for his or her own
previous acts. It is the bride's mother who above all must eat pork at her daughter's marriage, in recognition
of the prior act of childbirth, and her nurture. Diverse metaphors for 'the mother's pig' (M. Strathern
1972:106) are explicit on this point.
In this ethnographic case, the process of substitution is final, and the whole bridewealth event is likened to
death compensation. 12 But I suspect the comparison between birth and death is a general one; what is
revealed, detached, brought out is a person (a child, a bride, the deceased) reified as the end product of a
constellation of relationships, and hence a 'finished' or completed thing. Knowledge takes place at a moment
of 'birth' or a moment of 'death' with equal effect. The wok meri rituals draw on the symbolism of birth, and
women's growing of a fetus within the womb. In many Massim societies, growth occurs within the 'womb' of
the matrilineal subclan; it is at death that the multiple constitution of the socially active person during his or
her lifetime is displayed, then deconstituted and taken apart, the affinal ties shed so that the matrilineal body
can absorb back the deceased as

                                                    page_291

                                                                                                         Page 292
clan member. The claims of a Sabarl father on the child he has fed are extinguished when he 'eats' at the
child's mortuary feast (Battaglia 1985:432433). It is the relationship that has 'died'.
Eating is an image for the substitution of one act for another. Much of the earlier discussion about
substitution (see chap. 9) dealt with the displacement of cross-sex relationships. But here we encounter a
different sequence. Within the single cross-sex relationshipthe affines linked by bridewealth or mortuary
exchangesa difference is created between two acts. One act substitutes for another, in the reverse flow of
food, both a reenactment and a transformation. A prior act of feeding, on the part of a Hagen mother or a
Sabarl father, is displaced by a subsequent act in which the feeder is fed. This effective termination of the
cross-sex relationship may be thought of as a reduction of ambiguity, as forming the relationship into its final
mode. In the same way as a Hagen bride's agnates become known as 'maternal kin' to her children, the
matrilineal kin of a deceased's Sabarl father are unambiguously placed on the 'paternal' side. Each is
composed by the new claims of the groom's agnates or the deceased's own matrilineal subclan.
A composition from one point of view is a decomposition from another: relationships reduced to a single
strand. Perhaps there is a sense in which all consumption involves decomposition of this kindwhat is 'seen' at
any one moment, the privileging of one relationship over othersand that eating is always at once energizing
and debilitating. It creates an agent by making the person incomplete, depriving her or him of a support base
of a multiple nature. Eating is idiomatically often equated with sexual intercourse, and sexual intercourse in
turn is idiomatically often imagined in these societies as a 'little death' (compare Gillison 1983:40). Although,
and strikingly in the Gimi case, we may imagine that it is the object devoured which is killed thereby, I
wonder if there is not sometimes the idea that the devourer, the consumer, also dieslosing that prior part
within him or her which the new food displaces. 13 More prosaically, the consumer as a container is reduced
to a single identity in encompassing an object produced by another.
While the capacity for action can be replicated, acts can only substitute for one another. This is as true of
what an outsider might regard as the everyday activity of eating as it is of staged performances. Indeed,
every act contains its own performative hazard: it risks its effects, so to speak. The reenactment or
commemoration of other actsone's own

                                                    page_292

                                                                                                         Page 293
or other people'sis thus simultaneously an innovation and improvization upon them. And 'kills' or completes
them (Wagner 1978:24).
Consumption and coercion. Gregory (1982:33) comments on the Melanesian idioms in broad terms. A link
between eating and sexual intercourse "can be seen", he argues (1982:33), "as empirical support for Marx's
conception of consumption as the production of human beings." If 'production' is making the capacities of
persons (relations) manifest, then it is quite appropriately termed consumptive production for these systems,
in that what is being produced is knowledge, and knowledge is only 'known' by being consumed.
One connotation of the Western notion of 'domesticity' is that consumption is an entirely passive process, a
taking into the self of what has been produced with activity and energy elsewhere. Feminist arguments about
the nonvaluation of domestic labor are likely to equate the self-evident use-value of an item with its equally
self-evident consumption. Consumption seems to be a nonproblematic realization of attributes, a nonevent.
Melanesian ideas, however, may make the process very problematic and at the least an event. In Hagen, the
point at which food is consumed is the point at which work is recognized: what is significant is that
recognition is a specific act. The consumer may be passive, in the sense that he or she is witness of another's
agency, but becomes thereby a vital 'person' or reference point for that agent. The eating that activates that
relation is also a kind of reenactment and, as we have seen, very much a performance.
In its original formulation, consumptive production involves the personification of things that promotes the
survival of persons. Inspired by Lévi-Strauss, Gregory expands on Marx's account of reproduction, taking
consumption to refer not only to people's need for nourishment but also to reproduction through sexual
relationships and parenthood. Consumption, in this expanded view, becomes more than simply the "using up
of materials and labour energies" (1982:30, my emphasis).
In commodity economies, consumption might be productive in a weak sense: by taking in food, the human
being 'produces' his own body (Gregory 1982:31). But in gift economies, it should be regarded as productive
in a strong sensethe process by which things are transformed into persons is an innovative and incremental
one. This becomes apparent with the realization that one is not dealing with individuals who aim at
self-replacement. It is not as an 'individual' that someone

                                                    page_293

                                                                                                        Page 294
consumes another's products but as a 'person' in that other's eyes. Persons are the objectified form of
relationships, and it is not survival of the self that is at issue but the survival or termination of relations.
Eating does not necessarily imply nurture; it is not an intrinsically beneficiary act, as it is taken to be in the
Western commodity view that regards the self as thereby perpetuating its own existence. Rather, eating
exposes the Melanesian person to all the hazards of the relationships of which he/she is composed. I recall
again that one may wish to disagreegate the activities of feeding and growing. Growth in social terms is not a
reflex of nourishment; rather, in being a proper receptacle for nourishment, the nourished person bears
witness to the effectiveness of a relationship with the mother, father, sister's husband or whoever is doing the
feeding. The recipient of nourishment is as specifically defined as the provider of it. Consumption is no
simple matter of self-replacement, then, but the recognition and monitoring of relationships.
Indeed, I would argue that in these systems, people cannot be concerned with self-replacement at all. The
whole burden of analyzing the objectifications of a gift economy (chaps. 8 and 9) has been that, if we use the
shorthand at all, it is persons (relations) who replace persons (relations). These may appear as bodies, but
then the body is an objectified form: the self so to speak from another's point of view.
The self as individual subject exists rather in his or her capacity to transform relations, an embodied power
which reveals itself in its effects. The self is activated in so far as such relations (persons) are summoned by
the agent and are revealed as the agent's supports. In effect, then, while eating is an act that only the agent
can undertake for him or herself, its result is to make the agent into a person (an object) from another's
viewpoint. The agent's acts consequently appear in a final and thus different form from the activity itself: the
parent produces a child as the gardener produces yams. A parent does not produce a parent: the child in turn
must be made to reveal parental capacity from within. An agent only ever 'reproduces' him or herself in
another form.
The recipient (beneficiary or victim) of another's acts is also their effect or product; she or he is thus an
object of that agent's regard. One agent does not so to speak 'produce' another. But an agent may expect that
the original act be commemorated. This is certainly the voiced expectation of the Hagen bride's mother. The
person (bride) that an agent (mother) created reenacts that act of creation. It is the bride who is regarded as
bringing pork to her kin and her mother, carrying it, as

                                                    page_294

                                                                                                        Page 295
she does for part of the ceremony, on her back. In so doing, she (the bride) becomes an agent in turn,
reconstituting in her own regard the person (mother) who is manifestly one of the causes of her existence.
The conditions that enable the mother to give birth to a daughter with her own separate social identity
include a lifetime's history of affinal exchanges, but maternal agency is manifest in the form of the unique
event of birth. A child him or herself can then become his or her own agent by commemorating that
eventacknowledging the exchange relations that were the particularizing precondition of the mother's
capacity. Persons may thus make overt the original relations or causes that produced them through their own
transactions. They can also do again what their mothers or fathers, or mother's brothers or sister's husbands
did in feeding them: they eat. Food may be of multiple origin, but it is eaten by oneself, and these relations
acquire a singular site in the individual body. Throughout their lifetime, then, agents continue to
commemorate themselves as persons (composed of the relationships which focus on them) through the food
they consume. In so far as they attend to the social sources of their own constitutionpayments to maternal
kin, sacrifice to paternal kinagents thereby activate themselves and sustain their own individuality.
However many times it is done, each act of eating is also a single event, oriented toward a single source. This
has the consequence already noted. To reconstitute oneself in the regard of a particular other is also to
deconstitute the multiplicity of relations that might have been commemorated. That other is privileged as a
reference point (a cause) for the acts. Hence a woman is known simply as the 'mother' of the bride when she
eats the pig that substitutes for her own agency towards her daughter. The particularity of that relationship
eclipses or suppresses all other aspects of the woman's identity. At the same time, the substitution is
anticipated: the mother acts so to speak in order to become a cause, to be the occasion for a reenactment,
and thus a personto become the object of the acts of others, as Munn (1983) describes is an aim of kula
partners. To be a cause is to have been an agent. This passivity is coercive.
It is with respect to acts, then, that one may properly talk of a cause and an agent. Taking action individuates
the agent as a subject, and in his/her view the cause of the action exists as an external reference point. But to
be a reference point, a person to another in virtue of the relationship thereby established, is the precondition
for one's own agency. In

                                                   page_295

                                                                                                       Page 296
directing an agent's attention, so to speak, one becomes an agent oneself, in the way that a solicitory gift
opens an exchange sequence, or betrothal gifts elicit bride bestowal. Indeed, we have already encountered
this anticipation in reciprocal form, when two persons are conceptualized as a pair, each of whom elicits a
reaction from the other.
It is always one of a pair who takes action: the act of elicitation is the coming out or making known of the
other's internal condition. The event is often elaborately contrived as a performance, and there is a reason
for this. The physical staging of a performance is an attempt to overcome the recursiveness of time. As I
described it earlier, the uncertainty of the anticipated outcome inheres in the status of an event itself, in
doubt as to whether or not an act has taken place. For anticipation is also regression. The precondition for
something to happen must be part of the happening. An event is known by both prior and ensuing events. So
production is only 'produced' at the moment of consumption; knowledge is only 'known' through the
knowledge others acquire; for an effect to emerge, the cause must be properly in place; there are
preconditions for conditions, in short a perpetual regression from outcome to cause that is summed up in that
remarkable Sambia conventionthough by no means confined to themthat food must be fed. 14
Nonetheless, as a performance, 'coming out' can be staged as a particular moment with a time of its own (p.
281). A common image is the visual emergence from an enclosure. The event is simultaneously prestaged,
because the enclosure has established as a precondition the unity of the agent(s). As we have seen in earlier
chapters, enclosure may take the form of an envelopment by a single body, or of a homogeneous action that
creates a collectivity. When men build fences around cult areas they create a unity both between themselves
and in relation to the spirits with whom they are joined: at the point of bursting forth, they both detach
themselves from that enveloping relationship and reveal the association in their enhanced form. As through
transactions associated with 'transformed kinship' (p. 264), the beneficiaries grow until the moment when
they detach themselves in 'birth' (or 'death') from the encircling relationships. In so far as men's activity is
thereby seen as the deliberate binding together of persons whose social orientations are otherwise diffuse
and variously directed, the unifying nature of the collective action is inherently energizing in making the
participants other than what they were.
But the new state must be communicated in order to be known,

                                                   page_296

                                                                                                       Page 297
hence Schwimmer's observation about the couple as the basic unit for the transmission of messages. In his
example, messages are passed between men and the spirit world. A couple is formed of two moieties or two
equals or by a senior/junior pair; they are alike in that each plays a flute or wears a mask, thus representing
the spirits. Each is the other's source of revelation: ''each knows himself to be man, but when he looks at his
partner he can see a spirit" (1984:253).
The moment of bursting forth out of an enclosure is the moment at which the actors display what I have
called the generalized capacity they have within before it is particularized as food or knowledge consumed
by the external audience or partner who, having elicited it, is also the coercive cause of the act. The energy
which agents display may be taken as a reflex of this coercion. Indeed the activation of relations seems to
require energy and force precisely for the reason that persons bear evidence within themselves of what has
happened to them. Whether interaction produces a relationship that in mediating between two parties 'adds
to' their identities, or else an unmediated impingement by one on the other becomes registered in an
alteration to the latter's body, there is a forcefulness in the way these interactions are conducted. 15
Transformation requires and is thus evidence of effort. Gifts are pressed on others; plants are compelled to
grow; work is a matter of mind, will, intention: there would be nothing to know otherwise.
The visible energy is, one suspects, a result of the aesthetic requirement that acts must appear in a form other
than the agent's intention, and to that extent are 'separated' from the agent. Furthermore, the subsequent
outcome of actions, their effect, is always embodied in another (relation, person). If force is applied to an
external object it is to display the imprint of one's own effectiveness, and in this sense to make the object
part of oneself. Indeed, violence may have an assimilative effect in general; a Hagen woman beaten by her
husband wears the blood or bruises as a sign of his acts; the remedy she seeks is the intervention of her kin
who will restore the dignity of her separate status. Exchange partners are assimilated to the gifts that they
exchange and circulate in coercing the recipient to accept them; parents implicate themselves in the
plants/children they nurture and produce, violently during initiation sequences, and in reciprocal pain during
childbirth. These gifts and children must register their acts, and the possibility of registration has its own
precondition. Things must appear so as to elicit recognition from

                                                   page_297

                                                                                                      Page 298
others. The difference between the agent and the produced yams, shell valuables, brides, sons is only known
if these things assume a proper shape. Here we return to the significance of gender.

Analogic Gender
In summary, I have suggested that ideas about gender provide the aesthetic convention through which forms
are seen to appear. Relations, the overt object of people's attentions, are thereby reified in the manner in
which they are differentiated from one another. In our view, what is concealed is precisely this conventional
basis. That 'difference' is what we would call a symbolic or classificatory construct, contrived as we would
see it either through the contrast between male and female or through the contrast between same-sex and
cross-sex relations. In Melanesian systems of knowledge, however, difference is presented as an axiomatic
consequence of people ensuring that recognizable forms of action occur.
Gender provides, then, the medium through which differentiation as such is apprehended. It gives a form to
relations, which thereby become directed in one of two ways, as either replicating or else substituting for one
another. The 'difference' between replication and substitution in turn appears in that between same-sex and
cross-sex interactions. People know which kind of event or performance they witness through the gender
relations it mobilizes. By the same token, they also know when one event has become another. But that puts
the sequence back to front; rather, they also know that events are caused and have their outcomes, and that
one kind of event must inevitably lead to another. This regression/anticipation/alternation is contained within
the possibilities of a procreative gender imagery predicated on the capacity of one form to emerge from
another form.
An androgyne is composed of, and can be decomposed into, male and female elements. Either element may
also be construed to exist as an independent body. These constructions define a male body as having the
capacity to contain within itself what it can also detach from itself, namely female body; while a female
body contains and detaches from itself male body.
The imagery may so evoke the condition of 'physical' bodies or of 'social' bodies alike (and I remind the
reader that one also means 'mind' in the Melanesian context). Since persons appear in male, female, or
androgynous form, the possibility of one form appearing out of another

                                                   page_298

                                                                                                      Page 299
is seen to be a possibility that lies within the body. We must remember that persons objectify relations:
bodies and minds are consequently their reified manifestation. And they must always take a manifest shape,
that is, display a differentiated condition. On the one hand, the difference between a same-sex and a
cross-sex state is that the one is a transformation of the other; on the other hand, male and female are
analogic versions of each other, each acting in its own distinctive way. People's behavior necessarily reveals
both their own and the condition of others: behavior is gendered. I suggested that acts individuate persons; it
is thus people's acts that establish the gender of the behavior, in making apparent the condition of their own
and others' bodies/minds.
Here one encounters an interesting constraint. An androgyne does not act; that is, persons are activated,
become agents, only in a same-sex condition, as male or female. The gender aesthetic discriminates between
the very possibility of one taking action as an individual subject and being the inert outcome of other
people's acts. This has implications for the way in which people imagine the relationship between cause and
effect.
An agent appears as either 'male' or 'female' in relation to the objects of his or her acts: they must appear as
reciprocally 'female' or 'male'. The illusion is that coercion seems to lie in gender itself: the Paiela husbands
who have to compel their wives to grow them; the Gimi fathers who force the mother to extrude the child
born of paternal spirit; the Trobriand brother who induces his sister's husband to at once make and yield
back the child that belongs to him; the Sambia males who impose cooperation on their younger partners.
And on the other side are the Paiela wives who observe the effects of their own intentions in the bodies of
men; the collectivity of Gimi mothers who consume male corpses; Trobriand sisters who create brother's
sons; and the at once strengthened and humiliated bodies of 'female' Sambia novices who contain men's
replenishment in themselves. These are not 'subjects' acting upon 'objects'. The intent of the actcoercionis to
establish the very relationship itself. In gender idiom, each sex elicits the acts of the other, for those
counteracts are the evidence of its own efficacy. But in so far as each is also the cause of the other's acts,
there is nothing automatic about elicitation; it is effected under the conditions of uncertainty and anxiety
noted earlier.
It is no paradox that males are essential to maternal agency. Men assist birth; their own social productivity
must be made visible in an-

                                                    page_299

                                                                                                        Page 300
other's body. Consequently they do more, in the Gimi case for instance, than just making themselves fathers
of the newborn child. Evidence of paternity is established by the fact that their acts enable the woman to
give birth and herself become a mother. The early Highlands ethnographers were right: the necessity for men
to act comes from what happens to women. But they were right for the wrong reason. The reason is not
because of women's self-evident nature, but because of how they evince the capacities of men. And it is the
women who have to do it. Hence we should also pay attention to the converse; that it is women who enable
men to produce as fathers. The Melanesian child is no paternal or maternal product by simple contiguity with
a parental body. On the contrary, its assimilation to a source conceived of as male or as an enveloping
maternity or as the transactions of a brother-sister pair must be the specific outcome of particular acts. The
gender of the activity depends on the way social relations are construed and their cause and effect
sequencing. Events do not happen if people do not make them happen; 'things' do not appear on their own.
Action consists of compelling, exerting, impressing oneself on others. For before an agent's acts can have
effect, the agent must in turn have been caused to act and must coerce another into being just such a reason
for her or his activity.
Indeed, people's 'causes' seem a widespread ritual preoccupation. Melanesian knowledge practices deal with
categories that are imagined as subject neither to discovery (in the enlightenment sense of revealing and
laying bare their true nature) nor to cultural elaboration (in the empiricist sense of rendering the natural
artificial), but rather to transformation. The outcome of a relation must also be the reason for it. As we have
seen, what is simultaneously thrown into doubt is not simply whether any set of interactions will achieve
anything (have an outcome), but whether its reasons, its origins, still hold good. An effect is contingent on
the correct identification of the cause, health on the good favor of ancestors. Actions are oriented to
establishing the reasons for relations in order to gauge their outcome. Hence the endless search for 'origins'
(e.g., Gell 1975; Barth 1975) is part of the uncertainty of all actsthe way in which past achievements and
effects are also anxious omens for the future. At the same time, of course, to be or to evince an effect 'is' to
be or evince a cause, the source of it, in another form.
Yet because of the 'another form', assimilation to an origin is bound, as I have indicated, to contain a
measure of violence. The ancestors are dead. Identity with a source can only be realized (known, pro-

                                                    page_300
                                                                                                             Page 301
duced) through detachment from it. The dependency of product on source is violent, so to speak, because
agency, the possibility of entering into further productive relationships, requires the person to extract him or
herself from prior ones. Or to displace one set of acts by their commemoration.
In the context of kin relations, certain persons (such as mother's brothers in agnatic systems) may be
required to accept their place as an empowering 'cause' of say (their sister's son's) growth. But a cause is no
longer active: it is superseded. The action has already taken place. The burden is on the agent to force others
into being a cause for his/her extractive acts. A Hagen woman coerces her husband into making those
exchanges with her kin of which his marriage to her is the cause. A kula partner seduces his overseas
counterpart to give in order that he himself will have cause to give. Older men inflict pain on the Sambia
initiates as the cause of their having to grow thema relation of reciprocal elicitation also enacted with
tenderness between the boy and his individual inseminator.
Such conceptualizations of agency find no ultimate expression in self-expression. The individual subject can
only act, and in doing so, indicate its state of relations with others. Consequently, he or she is vulnerable to
the premise that agency can only show evidence of itself in its impact on these others, and failure is always
possible. Causes do not appear as causes should; people's minds may be diverted; it is necessary that women
show that growth can be transformed into external social objects, that they do actually give birth; it is also
necessary that men should complete their exchanges properly. Evidence lies in aesthetic propriety, in the
gender of the act. Highlands women circulate in marriage as the objects (causes) of men's active
transactions; conversely, when women actively tend children, men's transactions become the causes of that
nurturing relationship. Perceived together, the sexes appear in a relation of mutual elicitation, either the
cause of the other's agency.
A subject's anticipation of another's viewpoint means that a relation can always appear to be something else,
that the persons or wealth items which appear to be the object of one relationship (such as between a Hagen
husband and wife) can then appear to be the object of another (as between a man and his affines).
Sequencing is involved: one of the parties to the original relation is required also to instigate the new one.
Thus one relationship may 'turn into' another. But since that capacity has been anticipated, we can also say
that one relation 'stands for'

                                                      page_301

                                                                                                             Page 302
another. That between a man and his male affines also anticipates and in this sense substitutes for his
relationship with his wife. Since relations are seen to have an outcome (effect), transformed in turn into
persons, outcomes also present themselves as the reason (cause) for relations. Yet this process is to be
distinguished from the simultaneous or timeless encompassment of another's point of view: if male semen is
'the same as' female milk, it is already in this sense the other's view. As mutual causes of one another's acts,
male and female neither turn into nor stand for each other. They are simply two kinds of, two versions of, the
capacity to act and cause action. Yet paradoxically, the very activity of temporal transformation leads to this
atemporal state of affairs.
As a social microcosm, the Melanesian person is a living commemoration of the actions which produced it. I
have argued that a person must therefore always be a particular person, the product of specific, irreversible
interactions, in gender terms an androgyne. Agents, on the other hand, individual subjects, act by virtue of
their generalized capacities, that is, by the capacity for action itself, to be 'one', to act as 'one'. If it is indeed
acts which individuate, they consequently make the subject (agent) appear in one of two forms, unique in
gender terms. This is the same as saying the individual always acts in one of two such ways, as a male or as a
female. It is only their gender that differentiates agents. Qua agents, individuals are in themselves
nonspecific entities.
Maleness and femaleness indicate a difference in the agents' capacities, then, but in so far as they refer only
to this differencethey distinguish what kind of agent an individual isremain analogues of each other. This
construction collapses the relationship between cause and effect. It turns a sequence of events into the
context for them. Let me show how this contradiction might be imagined. It can only be done, as has been
necessary all along, through rearranging the elements of the narrative.
We have seen how integral to the staging of Melanesian performances and events is the reification of the
difference between cause and agent and between agent and effect; either can be presented as the difference
between male and female. The one form thereby appears to elicit the other, for male and female always
require the other for completion. An agent acts with respect to a cause separate from him or her and
produces her or his action in a form (its effect) other than the action itself. In relation to either cause or
effect (imagined as relations or persons), the agent engages in cross-sex interaction. The agent thereby 'acts'
in the

                                                   page_302

                                                                                                      Page 303
context of this relationship and produces this relationship by so acting. Seen from his or her viewpoint, the
causes and effects of her or his actions are other persons. But an agent may also perceive the person in
reference to whom action is taken as an agent like her or himself. What makes them alike is their capacity
for action, hence the reciprocal form of the pair.
Performer and audience, sexual partners, parent and child are all envisaged in reciprocal terms; each agent
appears as capable of drawing forth the internal capacities of the other. While every act remains asymmetric
(the one partner an agent, the other the microcosm of relations or person which is deconstituted), what
makes the agents themselves symmetric is, as we have seen, their potential for action. And in terms of that
potential, each remains alike: the one does not become the other. Consequently, when they are in a position
for either to realize this potential with respect to the other, a pair becomes matched in a relationship of
mutual elicitation. For what each encompasses within its own form is the capacity to elicit the acts of the
other. This is an analogical relationship that has no time to it.
In his expatiation on types of knowledge, Bourdieu discusses Lévi-Strauss's treatment of the gift.
Lévi-Strauss broke with 'native theory': it was not the irreversible sequencing of individual exchange
transactions as people experienced them which was the principal phenomenon but the reversibility of the
cycle of reciprocity. Bourdieu's point is that the covering mechanism that defines the agents' practice is as
important an object of anthropological knowledge as what it covers. People only apparently hide from
themselves the other side of that experience.
   If the system is to work, the agents must not be entirely unaware of the truth of their exchanges,
   which is made explicit in the anthropologist's model, while at the same time they must refuse to know
   and above all to recognize it. In short, everything takes place as if agents' practice, and in particular
   their manipulation of time, were organized exclusively with a view to concealing from themselves
   and from others the truth of their practice, which the anthropologist and his models bring to light
   simply by substituting the timeless model for a scheme which works itself out only in and through
   time. (1977:6, emphasis and note omitted)
He therefore somewhat misleadingly recommends
   [t]he difference and delay which the monothetic model obliterates must be brought into the model
   not, as Lévi-Strauss suggests, out of a 'phenomenological' desire to restore the subjective experience
   of the practice of the exchange, but because the operation of gift exchange presupposes (individual

                                                   page_303

                                                                                                      Page 304
   and collective) misrecognition (méconnaissance) of the reality of the objective 'mechanism' of the
   exchange .... the interval between gift and countergift is what allows a pattern of exchange that is
   always liable to strike the observer and also the participants as reversible, i.e. both forced and
   interested, to be experienced as irreversible. (1977:56, emphasis removed)
We may ask how the difference between reversible and irreversible sequences are so experienced. The 'as if'
practices to which Bourdieu draws attention could be considered in the nature of an indigenous
transformation. But beyond the misrecognition involved in turning one kind of relationship into another is
the misrecognition of the basis of differentiation itself, viz., between the one experience and the other. This
is where I refer to convention. The anthropologist does not here reveal what the participants also know but
creates a different kind of knowledge for him or herself.
It will be recalled (chap. 6) that it was Josephides's interest in the mechanism of misrecognition that led her
to question the rhetoric of reciprocity in Highlands gift exchange. 'Reciprocity', she argues, covers up
inequalities between men and women. But it is the other side of this Melanesian construction that interests
me. Only the taking of irreversible 'unequal' action will cover up the analogic and potentially reversible
concepts of maleness and femaleness on which convention rests. Melanesians presumably 'know' when they
conceal this analogy, because they also 'know' when they reveal it. They seek to uncover the gender of
things. What they do not know they do not conceal! If their practices further conceal things from the
observer, then these conceal the very different kind of knowledge that the observer desires, as when she or
he seeks to uncover the convention itself.
Observers of ceremonial exchange transactions have long recognized the poignancy of the completed debt.
Citing Sahlins, Munn observes of Gawan kula: "[o]nce a shell is matched, it is necessary to create a new
imbalance in order to keep shells moving along a path" (1983:282). Damon (1983:323) makes the same
observation of transformations in kin exchanges. A completed relationship dies with the closing gift: it has
been made apparent, reciprocally visible to both sides. Its benefits need to be hidden again in the body of
either one or the other partner for there to be any cause for a future, any reason for further events to take
place. The observer can see that it is the analogic conventions of gender (the matching) which subvert the
temporalizing and individuating possibilities of particular events and sequences.
Imagined as reciprocal agents, as a pair, 'male' and 'female' stand in

                                                    page_304

                                                                                                         Page 305
contrast to the relationship between them, to the completed result of their interaction. Relationships
('persons') are merely the condition for action, not themselves acts. But this itself is a reason for taking
action. The very gender symbolism that separates an agent from the cause and effect of her or his actions
also creates male and female as timeless analogues of one another. They become differentiated only from
their mutual relationship in its androgynous, nonactive form, which then appears as the simultaneous cause
and effect of their interactions. Cause and effect become in turn conflated as the single context or condition
for action. It is the aesthetic of gender, then, which reveals to the observer the Melanesian gift in its cultural
form: the anticipated outcome. The aesthetic collapses time. Against it, and through their particular and
temporalized transactions, Melanesians appear to be constantly inventing supports for themselves.

                                                    page_305

                                                                                                         Page 307



CONCLUSION

                                                    page_307

                                                                                                         Page 309



11
Domination
The as-if and so-to-speak hesitations in my account have been quite deliberate. I have not authored 'a
perspective' on Melanesian society and culture; I have hoped to show the difference that perspective makes,
as one might contrive an internal dissociation between the character of an author and the character of his/her
characters. Consequently, I have not presented Melanesian ideas but an analysis from the point of view of
Western anthropological and feminist preoccupations of what Melanesian ideas might look like if they were
to appear in the form of those preoccupations.
The account was therefore not phenomenological in the ordinary sense, since it did not pretend to elucidate
things as they seem to the actors. Rather, I have tried to convey Melanesian knowledge practices as though
they were a series of analyses which afford explanations for the way things seem. Nor did I offer an emic
interpretation of Melanesian culture(s) that would suppose etic were separate from emic, and so trail a
positivist premise about the inherent nature of each. Rather, I have tried to expand the metaphorical
possibilities of our own language of analysis. This has meant analyzing the metaphors themselves, here
derived from Western social science, as though they could be decomposed, taking them apart in order to
reutilize their components. It has also meant putting together a narrative of Melanesian life that is synthetic
and in that sense a fiction.
To consider one of my chief examples: the concepts 'male' and 'fe-
                                                    page_309

                                                                                                         Page 310
male' have been understood not as motivating or mystical principles at work in society, but as conventional
descriptions of the forms in which Melanesians make persons and things known. Nonetheless it may well
seem to the reader that such concepts have become too reified, too abstract, in the course of argument. Or
instead that they have become too personified, as though being credited with a life of their own. The
presentation of abstract concepts as though they could 'do' things is, as I shall discuss briefly in this chapter,
an adjunct of Western ideas about the role society plays in life.
There is a danger here, as Lewis (1980:221) observes. The anthropologist, he admonishes, is not free to
speculate at will, and write his or her speculations into other people's ideas as though they had meanings in
themselves. In people's lives, of course, ideas cannot possibly have a 'life' of their own. But in the context of
an effort to describe such other lives, it is legitimate literary artifice to give their ideas something of an
independent existence. If they are not autonomously constructed in the narrative, and thus credited as
having sources independent from the ethnographer's own culture, then other ideas derived from that culture
will inevitably take on that active role as unacknowledged animators of the plot. To be true to Western idiom
I have tried to make the animation (the conventions) of this account explicit.
To be true to the Melanesian idiom I have tried to be an elbow, to intervene between two sets of
objectificationsMelanesian and Western European ideasin order to turn one into the other. From my single
position, of course, I can only effect that in one direction, for to write about Melanesian culture as another
culture is already to imagine it as a version of or counterpart to Western culture.
An agent acts, in Melanesian imagery, looking two ways from a single vantage point. This means that the
agent acts from a position subsumed by neither. In this book, part 2 has been almost exclusively concerned
with an anthropologically conceived difference between Melanesian and Western cultures, in turning the
language of one to present the other. Yet there is more here than an exercise in dialectic; the exercise was
also with a purpose, its intention existing in another dimension. The position which I occupy is also defined
by exogenous feminist interests. In the same way, part 1 tried to 'turn' the relationship between feminist and
anthropological questions. There I was rendering feminist ideas into anthropological ones. The independent
axis for this elbowing exercise was Melanesian ethnography. But the job was left incomplete at that stage.

                                                    page_310

                                                                                                          Page 311
If I now recover at least some of the earlier feminist questions, it is to remain within the confines of Western
and Melanesian idiom. One culture is only to be seen, as Boon (1982) reminds us, from the perspective of
another. Indeed, no remark in this book can be construed as lying beyond them; any generalities have been
specific to this double context, and no universals are intended. This is relevant to conclusions we might wish
to draw.

Mothers Who Do Not Make Babies
Feminism and anthropology, observes Sacks (1979:10), grew up together over the course of the nineteenth
century. They were at once in collusion with and in critique of one another, alongside as she says, socialism,
working-class consciousness, and imperialism. Hence, ''to understand [nonfeminist] anthropological ideas
about women requires reference to the complex social changes entailed by the development of industrial
capitalism," where nature and biology became unconscious metaphors for social relations. She suggests that
much anthropology is consequently encumbered with the following reasoning: "1. Making babies and
shaping culture are incompatible. 2. Women make babies. 3. Therefore only men can make culture"
(1979:25). This is the basis for her criticism of anthropological treatments of the domestic domain which
persist in an innatist or essentialist equation between women and domesticity. In the company of other
feminist anthropologists, she seeks to restore culture to women"to refute the axiom that motherhood and
political power and economic and personal autonomy are incompatible" (1979:66). It is an important
argument, but I take a very different route to it. She is right about the reasoning. But what must also be noted
is the ethnocentricity of the middle proposition, the illusion that "Women make babies." 1
The attention of nonanthropological as well as anthropologically-minded feminists is held by the injustice of
the equation between men and culture. Lévi-Strauss's work in particular has attracted comment. Objections
are made to his classic disquisition on the exchange of women among men, and thus to his argument that the
"act of exchange holds a society together: the rules of kinship ... are the society." The words are Mitchell's
(1975:370, original emphasis). Feminist commentators seize on two intertwined points. First is the notion
that exchange is a ubiquitous means of social commerce, the threads of social discourse, the means by which
in the absence of government, societies are

                                                   page_311

                                                                                                        Page 312
held together. 2 Second is the specific emphasis that Lévi-Strauss lent to this theory of primitive reciprocity,
that marriage is the most basic form of gift exchange, and women the most precious gift (Rubin 1975:173;
see Lévi-Strauss 1969:chap. 5). It is this 'exchange of women' syndrome that has attracted feminist
commentary outside anthropology.3
There certainly seems an equivocation in Lévi-Strauss's account. On the one hand, women are signs for
relations that men create between themselves and thus stand for parts men dispose of in dealing with other
men; on the other hand, it would seem that they are utilizable as signs because they also stand for
themselves, that is, they have a self-evident value. One has to agree with Leacock (1981:chaps. 11, 12) that
on the latter point Lévi-Strauss lays himself open to the charge of equating women with commodities. She
cites his observation that women are "the most precious possession" because they are not only a "sign of
social value, but a natural stimulant" (1969:62).4 Indeed, he justifies the plausibility of marriage exchange in
the actors' eyes through the fact that women are regarded as an essential source of life, and thus like that
"vital commodity", food (1969:32). In Leacock's reading (1981:231)5 "he posits a unitary principle to
explain the origin of incest and of society itself, as well as of succeeding types of kin-based structures. This
principle is the allocation, by males, of the services, sexual and otherwise, of females.'' She protests, as does
Elshtain, that such a formula takes away women's subjectivity. But this apparently simple and
straightforward criticism brings us back to the issue of cultural complexity raised in chapter 1.
The anthropologist's efforts at communication are hampered by his or her very subject matter; and indeed if
they are not, if there are no hesitations, then something is wrong. For the subject matter includes the need to
treat complexity and diversity in areas the Western reader takes for granted, above all, in how persons
impinge upon one another as subjects. Western metaphors of social discourse and domination take for
granted an interlocution between thinking, acting beings. The rest is 'objectified role-playing' or 'abstracted
structures'. What commodity logic promotes is a perceived diversity and complexity not in relationships but
in the attributes of persons as selves and agents.
Elshtain (1981:338339) makes an interesting protest over Rosaldo's (1974) comparison between Ilongot and
American culture. To her, the Ilongot are "a tribe which still practices head-hunting." Ignoring the
complexities of the relationship between male head-hunting and female nurture, she chides Rosaldo for
making an inappropriate comparison

                                                   page_312

                                                                                                        Page 313
between tribes and civilizations. Rosaldo was not comparing the two in holistic terms, where indeed
differences of scale would be relevant; she was comparing the manner in which separations are construed
between male and female spheres of activity. Elshtain, however, sees only that the Ilongot enjoy "a simpler
way of life." By contrast, what diversity there is in civilization! "Human social forms and the human mind
grow more complex, nuanced, and structured within civilization, filled with multiple identifications and
envisagements (mind), and multiple possibilities and roles (social forms)" (1981:339). Diverse as the social
forms may be, the central idea that "individuals must constitute themselves as subjects, as active agents of
their own destiny" (1981:344) is, in comparison with Melanesian constructions of relationships,
simpleminded indeed to say the least.
The general neglect of subjectivity is one of Elshtain's main complaints. From the perspective of a political
scientist, she scrutinizes the work of Mitchell and others who have drawn on Lévi-Strauss's communicational
model of culture. Indeed, she derives from Mitchell the supposition that Lévi-Strauss was referring to
women as "exchange commodities" (1981:283), 6 one of the bases upon which she objects to the equation of
culture with patriarchy. Yet what Elshtain offers herself is a prime example of commodity thinking. Her hope
for change, she says, rests on a particular understanding of the human subject, as well as of social realities:
   A person, after all, is not merely or exclusively (if at all) an objectified role-player or abstracted
   object of inexorable laws, but a thinking, acting being engaged in particular relations with others
   within a specific historic time and place. To assimilate the public and the private [the theme of her
   book] into universal laws and abstracted structures requires Abstract Man, Abstract Woman, and
   Abstract Child in turn. Within this rarified, undifferentiated [sic] realm one searches in vain for a
   recognizable person. (1981:284)
She seeks to restore "the female subject." This is a very proper politics for a commodity economy.
In Elshtain's account it would seem that a person is recognizable as a subject but not as an object. In my
description of the gift economies of Melanesia I have, of course, found it useful to regard 'the person' as an
objectification ('personification') of relationships. In so far as people turn one set of relationships into
another, they act (as individual subjects) to turn themselves into persons (objects) in the regard of others.
They objectify themselves, one might say. And this is indeed the point

                                                    page_313

                                                                                                         Page 314
of making themselves active agents; this is their destiny. Life is not imagined to be without supports: one acts
to create the supports.
Before dealing further with the issue of agency, however, it is necessary to comment on the related question
of women's apparent 'object' status in men's exchanges. At the heart both of the anthropological assumptions
mentioned at the beginning of chapter 5 and of these feminist questions lies an idiosyncratic Western
metaphor for procreation.
Making babies. Melanesian women cannot be analyzed as commodities in men's exchanges for the obvious
reason that these societies do not constitute commodity economies. The negative can take an alternative
form: Melanesian women do not make babies.
In commodity logic, value lies in the intrinsic attributes of things as well as in their 'exchange' in the sense of
market exchange. Both men and women may be seen as having intrinsic properties (men make culture,
women make babies); but men's property in this case also has communicational functions analogous to
exchange itself (men make culture because of/out of the fact that women make babies). It is thus because
persons are attributed with intrinsic qualities that exchanging them creates values, so that there is an
intimate, not an accidental, connection between the two parts of Lévi-Strauss's examination of women
exchange. Precisely in so far as items of use are being circulated, then gift exchange appears to have the
character of commodity market exchange, to have distributive and integrative functions, and thus hold
'society' together. Harris's (1981:63) critique is pertinent. She notes the ideological contrast contained in such
arguments, between 'natural' relations in consumption as opposed to 'social' relations created by the
circulation of commodities. It underlies the supposition that one can regard gift exchange as somehow a
version of commodity exchange.
This extrapolation is especially widespread in anthropological circles when it comes to the interpretation of
marriage transactions. 7 Typologies of kinship systems are based on what happens to women in marriage.
Lists of prescriptive and preferential marriage rules, the fascination with the claims of cross cousins, details
of the rights and debts encoded in classificatory kin terminologyin relation to the analysis of marriage
arrangements and the exchange of women, these concerns remain dominated by the assumption that there is
an intention to the system as a whole, namely to enable men to obtain women.
The market analogy presumably endures because it speaks so directly and strongly to Western constructions.
I mean those that regard sexual

                                                    page_314

                                                                                                         Page 315
attributes as inhering in persons and thus giving them value, above all in the capacity to reproduce. It seems
evident to us that other societies should be organizedeven though ours is notin terms of men having to gain
access to women's fertility. It seems evident that control of fertility, embodied in women, presents itself as a
problem. It seems evident that women embody fertility. When therefore people say that men exchange
women between themselvesas they do in much of Melanesiathe obvious deduction is that what is at stake is
such control. To regard these societies as attending to biology as we comprehend it thus reinforces the reality
of our own constructs. It leads only to one conclusion, which is also its premise: what differentiates men and
women is their physiology, and marriage arrangements across the world have as their purpose the
management of female fertility. And why do we imagine that female fertility presents itself as having to be
controlled? Because of something else we imagine, that women make babies.
Of course 'we' are all sophisticated enough to know that genetics requires coupling and that people do not in
that sense procreate alone. But the Western imagination plays with the idea that mothers make babies in the
same way as a worker makes a product, and that work is their value. 8 In spite of the input of enabling
technology, so to speak, the worker joins her labor with natural objects in order to create a thing, an activity
that is potentially self-expressive but whose embodiment is then, of course, extracted ('alienated') from her.
Industrial production provides a model of value conversions as stages in processes; any input of labor can be
revalued at the next stage. This is one source perhaps for parallel models of socialization: the child produced
by the mother must be separated from her, socialized, and remolded in order to enter the world as an entity
with its own value. Persons 'find themselves'. As an individual negotiating and managing interactions with
others, each also thus acquires an exchange (communicational) value. Theirdestiny is to become autonomous
agents, and this refashioning of their persons requires multiple stages, each one removing the person further
and further away from the original maker, who may also be seen, of course, as outside the sphere of
socialization altogether in her manifestation of biological processes.
This is the significant sense in which women appear to make babies. The baby is regarded as an extension of
the mother's tissue. Women thus both provide the basic raw material and are workers at the earliest stage of
society's reworking of persons. This earliest stage is forever outgrownhence our denigration of
domesticitybut at the same time

                                                   page_315

                                                                                                       Page 316
provides the basic material without which there can be no development. In other words, women's fertility in
its form of maternal work presents itself to Western industrial and market minds in terms of its natural status,
as the prime source from which all else comes and as a resource to be valued. It seems reasonable that
elsewhere men should stake out claims to raw materials and compete to possess them. But it is this very
reasoning that must be scrutinized. For a comparative question now arises. Given that traditional Melanesian
reasoning does not follow these lines, then how do we account for the prevalent practice of men exchanging
women between themselves? Do Melanesians not imagine that women make babies?
The second question may be answered briefly. Women do not replicate raw material, babies in the form of
unfashioned natural resources, but produce entities which stand in a social relation to themselves. The
Western image of part of the mother's nature being evident in the infant as also a part of nature, a theory of
contiguity, hardly applies. Instead, the Melanesian mother brings forth a being already in a social connection
with her and thus different from her. 9 Minimally, no child replicates the mother's kinship status. Moreover,
Melanesian women are not seen as the sole agents of childbirth. If mothers produce entities already in a
social relation with themselves, this is because of the prior conjugal and marital exchanges which embody
the acts that other agents have also taken. Children are the outcome of the interactions of multiple others.
This is what we would call a cultural construct. The objectifications of Melanesian culture(s) can only
present them as the objects of relationships. And the aesthetics of reification mean that children, far from
being corporeally continuous with their parents' bodies, embody their parents' acts in another (their own)
form. This may or may not be imagined as sharing substance. As I have argued, the act of birth is taken as
the point at which the multiple constitution of the child is made known. Knowledge is a process of analysis
or revelation.
Concomitantly, the commodity view of women as 'naturally' objects of men's schemes because of their
power to reproduce becomes understandable from certain assumptions inherent in practices of Western
knowledge. Thus Western culture takes it as a human fact that since mothers are 'seen' to give birth then they
own or claim the offspring as theirs, or the children are assigned to them as a matter of course. Barnes
(1973:72) can extrapolate as a universal "that the mother-child relation in nature is plain to see" [my
emphasis]! The maternal origin of the child is not at issue because it is 'visible', in the mother's giving

                                                   page_316

                                                                                                       Page 317
birth and her feeding of the newborn. The maternal relation is a patent biological fact, so that socialization
must take place subsequent to it.
In the imaginings of these Melanesian societies, relations do not have such an autonomic existence. One
relation is produced out of others. This has to be the 'knowledge' that a mother's acts convey. In yielding the
child, the Melanesian mother has yielded what is already anticipated as a social object. Because it is in
relation to the mother that the father has to act, the mother in turn is a social agent with respect to the child.
Here reproduction becomes/evinces sociality. As was evident on Malo (chap. 5), to see something is not to
make patent the attributes of the object of sight, but to register or consume the effects of a performanceto
see is a specific act in itself. So too is revelation. What is made visible must be carefully managed. What a
mother appears to produce will depend on her relation to it. She may or may not be construed as a recipient
of the father's implantation of substance; the child may or may not be a recipient of the mother's nurture. But
in either case if maternity is revelation, then as far as men are concerned this is accomplished not through
taking away something by force that belongs to women (controlling an innate fertility), but through ensuring
that the woman produces something other than herself. That something other than herself than reveals the
relation between them (husband and wife; brother and sister). It also constitutes it: because the child exists
in a specific social relation with the mother, the husband/brother is sustained as conceptually distinct from
the wife/sister. However, Melanesians are in the end culturally agnostic: such relations cannot be seen. All
that can be 'seen' (consumed) are their effects.
Yet there remains something very seductive about the Western illusion. It takes the persuasive form of a fact,
of a human certainty. From an earlier vantage point, I would have concurred with the Hays's interpretation
of complementarity and assertion in male-female relations. They write apropos Ndumba, a tiny Highlands
community to the north of Sambia:
   [I]n recognition of their biological limitations, men must leave to women the task of bearing a child,
   just as they can only but acknowledge women's vital contribution to the child's physical being
   through the provision of the child's red, 'soft' parts and through the milk with which children are
   nourished. So too, men depend on women throughout their lives as provisioners. ... Men themselves
   contribute the white, 'hard' parts of the fetus; they also safeguard and maintain institutions that make
   social life possible. Women produce children, as men cannot; it remains for men to create society,
   and

                                                    page_317

                                                                                                        Page 318
   to make of children the adults that society needs. (Hays and Hays 1982:230-231, my emphasis)
But we need to hold the thought that if women do indeed produce children, it is not because they can 'make'
them while men cannot. Women produce as a social act, and thus also because of men's exertions in the
matter. And it cannot be on behalf of a conceptualized 'society' that men exert themselves.

Societies Which Do Not Name Themselves
The first question still hangs in the air. Whatever one might argue about the production of children, it
nonetheless appears from an outsider's point of view that men control society at large. This seems
quantitatively apparent in the Highlands, with their elaboration of an often exclusive public and collective
life. I have suggested various ways in which we might regard this activity. The point to reiterate here is that it
is not men's collective activity that 'creates society' or 'makes culture', the premise upon which social values
or ideologies are assumed to work to their interests at the expense of women's.
Yet while this is one premise of feminist inquiry, feminist anthropologists have also insisted that it is as much
their project to address constructions of maleness as of femaleness, and that analysis must assume neither. I
have consequently tried to break with the long legacy of Simone de Beauvoir's insights into Western gender
relationsthe assumption that femaleness is somehow always to be understood as derivative from or produced
by what is established as the socially dominant form, namely maleness. The Melanesian material at least
does not present us with an image of men promoting male values that also become the values of society at
large, and thereby simply using female values in counterpoint to their endeavors. But this is a complex issue
to argue.
I begin here with the fact that many of their endeavors are directed towards the same production of domestic
kinship, growth, and fertility as concern women. In no simple sense is it the case that men and women 'have'
separate models of their lives. Nor is it the case that there is a simple dualistic split between the stereotypes
and images of 'men' as opposed to those of 'women'. The one is not always passive in relation to the active
other, as de Beauvoir's insights imply. Men's collective life
                                                    page_318

                                                                                                         Page 319
is not to be understood therefore as a heightened or enhanced sociality that is the source of hegemonic
values at once male and social.
It is precisely in the field of domestic kinship that one cannot talk of men in the abstract; they are divided by
their interests and relations. Consequently, there are good anthropological reasons as well as feminist ones
for not taking men's collective activities for granted. The unthinking conflation between 'their' collectivity
and 'our' society leads to the wrong questions. For it is when men's collective life is interpreted as a kind of
sanctioning or authoritative commentary on life in general that it is assimilated to our organizing metaphor,
'society'. It is this metaphor which prompts questions about why men should be in the privileged position of
determining ideology or creating the very foundation of social order to their advantage. 10 I have suggested
that the forms of Melanesian collective life are not adequately described through the Western model of a
society, and that however men are depicted it cannot be as authors of such an entity. Rather, collective
actions should be seen as one type of sociality, and as one type it therefore coexists with another, namely
that sociality evinced in particular, domestic relations. The relation between the two is that of alternation,
not hierarchy. The values of one are constantly pitted against the values of the other.
Yet what perhaps confuses us is that the one is only knowable as a transformation of the other. A further
aspect of Western knowledge practices must be recalled in this context. Western views of knowledge rest on
ideas of organization and accumulation (see chap. 4); we 'know' things by bringing them into relation with
more things. Knowledge thus inheres in the display of a relationship between things and is convincing by its
systematics. The more things that can be so correlated, the 'better' the knowledge. Indeed, we even have an
economic measure of knowledge in the idea that the most efficient theory is the one which explains the most
facts with the least expenditure of energy. Its power is experienced as a function of its consistency, which
may be displayed as revealing an internal logic or some such. I have drawn on the metaphor myself in
referring to the logic of the commodity or gift economy.
Of course, the 'logic' should be understood as a contrivance of the analytical task, of the activity of
organizing. We should not mistake the productive insight that is gained for us from bringing things into
relation for the manner in which Highlanders, say, juxtapose and bring into relation certain themes and
values in the course of their ritual or political life. These are not arenas of reflection and discourse in which,

                                                    page_319

                                                                                                         Page 320
as it is so often assumed in anthropological accounts, people achieve a heightened awareness of their own
social life and values in general. New relations may certainly be made manifest. But the participants do not
simply gain further knowledge on the character of the elements so related; knowledge is recursive and
cannot be accumulated. Hence may we appreciate the contingent nature of the information which initiands
receive during the course of ritualthe paradoxical or upside down quality of the revelations. This is not
knowledge in the sense of penetrating and uncovering truths about the attributes of things which then
become classificatory schema for organizing those attributes. What has been opened out is simply what
already existed, but at the exacting cost of opening it out (Wagner 1978:chap. 1). Consequently, participants
do not gain privileged knowledge 'about' the essential nature of male and female, say, or the constitution of
clan ancestry. Rather, they acquire another position from which to act. Each position is a particular position
held with respect to specific others.
In Western terms, it would be a semantic paradox to say that relationships are not in themselves evidence of
collectivity. The Western concept of society entails the proposition that relationships are inevitably plural in
themselves: any single instance contributes to the wider regulating sociality of all arrangements of
interactions between persons. 11 All relationships, including dyadic ones, can thus be regarded as collective
in this view, in that they involve communication between separate, autonomous persons (as 'individuals').12
It is the Western person as an individual who thus stands in contradistinction to a society perceived as
axiomatically collective, for it organizes the interactions that take place between numerous such individuals.
At the same time, communicational possibilities are held to be intrinsic to all social life; indeed social life
may be understood as a collective act of communication.
Melanesian sociality, however, distinguishes between two types of relationship, collective and particular. The
second class of relationships is noncollective. Moreover, where interactions are characterized by unmediated
rather than mediated transactions, there need be no overt 'communication' between the actors. Thus when
mothers are credited with an autonomous potential for growth, or through his thoughts a mother's brother
curses a sister's child or a father impresses his face upon a fetus, these are noncollective and in a sense
noncommunicatory situations. There is always an outcome or effect to these interactions. But
communicating them is to produce them in another (mediated) form. This is the corollary of the point that
revelation constitutes a

                                                    page_320

                                                                                                          Page 321
performance, is itself an act. Communication is, then, always a contrivance between particular agents, and
thus has its own character. Hence, any 'unitary' condition of the person has to be simultaneously
communicated as a 'multiple' one, because that is what communication does to it. The multiple, partible
nature of persons' constitutions is revealed in its internal relations. In the mother's case, this is made explicit
in (say) the further contextualization of herself within enveloping male exchanges. It is only in retrospect
that identification with the mother can be revealed as having had an effect on the life of the nurtured object
of her regard. But conflation is not an absence of relationship. And at no point are the products of
relationships not conceived as themselves embodying relationships. Children are not born as natural, asocial
beings. This returns us to the original point: social relationships are not constructed after the event, so to
speak, through posterior socialization.
Only at highly specialized symbolic moments can the unitary identity between mother and child be
apprehended. The same general supposition is true of maleness and femaleness. Initiation rituals that men
stage to detach boys from the company of women are not usefully conceptualized as steps in a socialization
process or as steps in the acquisition of full uniform sexual identity. On the contrary, men's contrivances
appear closer to the attainment of political prestige or clan identity elsewhere in the Highlands activities. The
rites do not 'make men' and do not 'make society'.
Western postulates about the gender identity of whole persons rest on a prioritization of unity by contrast to
the plural or multiple composition of persons as Melanesians depict them in their kin transactions. When
Westerners regard persons as having to overcome polymorphous states, this is taken as evidence of a proper
(human) drive towards internal consistency; in commodity logic, the 'separate' person is also the 'whole'
person. But Melanesian social creativity is not predicated upon a hierarchical view of a world of objects
created by natural process upon which social relationships are built. Social relations are imagined as a
precondition for action, not simply a result of it. Sociality is thus not to be visualized as a superstructural
elaboration of other forces, and collective life does not evince sociality in an enhanced, hegemonic form.
My purpose in repeating some of these ethnographic points is simple. It is to reiterate the observation that
Melanesian political and ritual activities do not constitute a privileged vantage point of commentary on the
'rest of society', and that the values they promote cannot be

                                                    page_321

                                                                                                          Page 322
understood as extendible beyond them simply by virtue of their collective character. There is an
epistemological dimension to this. Collective action does not signify a superior systematization, and this is
true both of social relationships and of relationships between different values or items of knowledge.
In the Western world people imagine that there exists a system or an organization of relationships that is a
dominant source of values, and 'imposes' its values on individuals. The constructionist view of gender
relations implies just such. The source may be seen equally as society or as culture.
This abstract entity is invested with a life of its own; its conventions are animated. Thus we conceive
abstract ideas 'doing things' or 'having' a force or effect on people; indeed, I have drawn on this as a literary
device in my presentation of Melanesian ideas. One can name them (e.g., 'commodity logic'). And systems
can then be credited with intention, a notion from which functionalist arguments forever have to extricate
themselves. We may recognize the root metaphor (chap. 6): the Western person is a microcosm not of social
relations (other persons) but of social conventions. However, the further idea that persons own themselves
also presents this entity in proprietary terms. For the idiom of microcosm we might substitute the more
culturally appropriate idiom that persons possess social conventions, and social conventions possess them.
Western people imagine themselves as double proprietors. On the one hand they naturally own themselves,
and their personal attributes, including their gender. On the other hand, their capacity for communication
with one another is based on their common ownership of a culture. But if they own culture, culture also
owns them. Proprietorship thus introduces a subject-object relation, in which either may become a thing in
the hands of the other. Hence the social contract view of culture as the collective, superstructural values of
social life to which individuals willingly subordinate themselves, in order to communicate with one another,
implies that the culture is presented to them in specific, reified form. It stands as a thing over and beyond
them. This is contained in the idea of common ownership. As commonly shared among its members, culture
(or society) must also have a holistic character. The notion of values held in common mediates between the
view of culture as the collective organization of plural relationships and as the product of homogeneous,
'shared' understandings. Thus Westerners can speak of 'a culture', 'a society'. As a singular entity that is
owned,

                                                   page_322

                                                                                                        Page 323
culture or society can consequently be conceived as a thing that the owners have made or authored.
This gives rise to the further supposition that what appears as common ownership may instead disguise the
fact that it was created by some and not others; on the others it is merely imposed. The illusion that culture,
like society, is somehow authored does not stop at recognizing the outcomes of human action; it may lead to
attributing those outcomes to a singular agent. Since quite sensibly this cannot be credited to one individual,
it may well be credited to a singular category, as in the supposition that it is 'men' who make culture.
Such Western ideas yield their own double critique of other systems. First, who is the author who produces
the culture and thus owns it? This is a source of feminist questions about patriarchy, the rule of the father, for
he who owns culture displays that ownership as a superior regulating or organizing force. Second, what is
produced is also consumed, and this is the manner in which we imagine culture to be consumed by the
individual, transmuted as that individual's 'experience of' values and relations. The question becomes how it
is consumed; to what extent are those who do not own it nevertheless forced to acknowledge ideas and
values created by another? Thus persons' experience of culture, in this view, may be at odds with their
subjective ownership of themselves and particularly of their bodies (a powerful source of feminist critique
and countercritique over whether or not 'bodies' are held to lie outside culture). In the search for change,
radical adjustment may seem possible either through altering the relations of production, that is, creating
different owners and authors, or through using the dissonance of experience (consumption) to show the
injustice of the impositions. These critiques arise from the same project that attempts to explain by bringing
into relation, to systematize by showing interaction, to reveal the inherent logic of social arrangements, since
that very consistency can appear suspiciously uniform, suggesting it could be the outcome of singular and
specific interests. They are equally the grounds for our knowing that we live in a society and practice
culture. We both name the owners ('the culture of the X or Y') and name what it is that they own (their
'culture' or 'society').
If Melanesian systems of knowledge do not lead to this conclusion, then they can have no name for the
conventional ordering of humankind. They have no name for the origin of what we would regard as cultural
constraints on the way people behave, in that they do not (cannot) personify that origin as this or that
category of persons 'making

                                                   page_323

                                                                                                        Page 324
culture'. A person as a cause (in the sense in which I used the term in chap. 10) is only a cause of another
person's acts, and cannot be conceptualized as the cause of convention as such. These ideas do not allow the
possibility that men are envisaged as the authors of society/culture at women's expense.
This does not mean that there are no conventions or constraints. It does mean that convention is not seen as
authored and thus perceived as a system working in the interests of some rather than others. There is neither
an abstract author nor a concrete author. In abstract terms, gender is not construed as a role 'imposed' on
individuals 'by culture'. Conversely, there is no problem about membership 'in society' or one's fitness to
participate in the social contract. There is no anxiety, pace Mead, about whether or not one's attributes will
qualify one for this or that role. Anxiety, so to speak, is not so much about the control of behavior (people's
'freedom') but about how their behavior will appear to others (their 'performance'). And in concrete terms, it
is not thought that privileged roles are conferred by superior individuals upon themselves while, from their
position of power, they confer inferior roles on others. In the Western view, what appears a freedom for the
former is subjugation for the latter, so that men may be seen as imposing their definitions of gender on
women. The constraints, as I have described them for Melanesia, must be understood instead as the aesthetic
constraints of form.
People cannot help evincing gender in what they do. This means that they axiomatically succumb to the
evaluations and judgments that a specific form entails. An agent can choose to act, but in acting can only act
in a particular way. It is impossible in these systems to take action in a general or nonspecific manner: all
acts are particular acts. By the same token, in the Melanesian view to be an agent is to deploy one's
generalized capacity to a particular end.
Gender differentiates types of sociality such that the structure of same-sex bonds has a separate productive
outcome from that of cross-sex bonds. Since the one is an alternative to the other, I have argued that the
generalized potential for the unitary, homogeneous construction of persons exists only in relation to their
multiple construction. Moreover, any one contrast can be revealed as a refraction of prior contrasts and
combinations. The condition of multiple constitution, the person composed of diverse relations, also makes
the person a partible entity: an agent can dispose of parts, or act as a part. Thus 'women' move in marriage as
parts of clans; thus 'men' circulate objectified parts

                                                    page_324

                                                                                                        Page 325
of themselves among themselves. In the end, men's and women's domains are not socially distinct. 13 Rather,
each may act in a same-sex or cross-sex way, in contexts that are always conceptually transient. Time,
duration, and sequence are as important to form as they are to the gift.
Yet there seems to be a difference in men's and women's scope for action. Often men appear to derive a
double benefit. In the Highlands, for example, men enjoy both a collective life and the relations of domestic
kinship, whereas women appear confined to the latter. But this dualism is misleading. Chapter 10 indicated
that women's counterpart to male collective life, men's unity as a body of men, was their own female unity.
The generalized capacities that they evince could not be subsumed under the rubric of domestic relations.
The difference between men and women conceived in these terms is that women are held to evince such
capacity within the unity of their singular bodies, whereas men as often manifest it in the replication of like
bodies.
We are dealing with what looks like a switch in scale then, and indeed men's replication of same-sex
relations among themselves has a runaway character to it. But I have not simply returned to the idea that
men's social activity imitates (appropriates) women's bodily capacity to make babies within themselves. We
must get the mathematics right. Women do not 'naturally' present themselves as intrinsically single or unitary
entities; we have seen that that condition involves an internal alignment of relations and is also something to
be achieved. Perhaps women's bodies are perceived as unitary and singular because they metaphorize those
replicated relations of male growth.14 In the phraseology of appropriation one would say that their social
activity in production and reproduction equally imitates, appropriates, and defines men's.

Domination
How then are we to understand all those contexts, especially marked in the ethnographies of Highlands
societies (e.g., Reay 1959; Berndt 1962; Meggitt 1965; and see Josephides 1982), in which men are reported
as asserting dominance over women? They demand obedience, roughride women's concerns, strike and beat
their bodies. Frequently this is quite explicit as to gender: it is by virtue of men being men that women must
listen to them. Yet everything that has been argued to this point suggests that domination cannot rest on the
familiar (to Western eyes) structures of hierarchy, control, the organization of relations, or on the idea that at
stake is the creation of society or the exploitation

                                                    page_325

                                                                                                        Page 326
of a natural realm, and that in the process certain persons lose their right to self-expression. More accurately,
men's acts of domination cannot symbolize such a structure, for it is not an object of Melanesian attention. In
short, hegemony is not to be visualized in these terms.
Of course, 'we' may still wish to make up our own minds. We could argue, for instance, that alternation in
fact conceals hierarchy, or that the representation of knowledge as noncumulative and recursive conceals its
authoritative aspects, as indeed canons of reciprocity have been interpreted as concealing exploitation. We
may still wish to regard men as creating their own lives at women's expense. Making up our own minds
always remains an option; the only observation would be that one has to understand the Melanesian
constructs first before taking them apart. And we would have to square men's assertions of dominance with
the equally salient impression that many Highlands ethnographers have received that ''while men hold higher
status, and women may in fact be convinced of their inferiority, women command a power that belies the
tenets of ideology. In those contexts which involve the coordination of male and female interests, there is, to
all intents and purposes, an equality between the sexes" (Lipuma 1979:53). Yet a disjunction between the
ideal and the real or between ideology and practice is in the first place a disjunction between different types
of data within the anthropological narrative. This differentiation is taken as evidence for what might be
judged as concealed or revealed in the culture. But again we have to be clear that we are talking about what
the outsider would regard as concealed, and not about the relationships and structures that the actors
deliberately conceal from themselves. To repeat an observation made earlier, people cannot conceal from
themselves what they do not know.
The end of chapter 6 suggested that in a gift economy those who dominate are those who determine the
manner of relations created by the circulation of objects. I now wish to divest that statement of its
inappropriate personification, as though the issue were the authoring of those relations. I want to suggest a
way in which we might both take into account Melanesian assumptions about the nature of social life and
unpack those assumptions to indicate a form of domination that people do 'know'. There are indeed
situations in which men qua men dominate women qua women, though there is great variation across
Melanesia, and the grounds of domination apply to both sexes. For the moment, I observe that acts of
dominance consist in taking advantage

                                                   page_326

                                                                                                        Page 327
of those relations created in the circulation of objects and overriding the exchange of perspectives on which
exchange as such rests.
This is not a return to the assumption discarded in the scrutiny of the gift, that relations are somehow neutral,
and that individuals merely play them off against one another in pursuit of their own exogenously defined
ends. We do not have to resurrect the strategist with choice and self-interest, who simply uses 'the system' to
his or her advantage. On the contrary, it seems that there is a systemic inevitability about domination and a
particular advantage afforded men. But, by the same token, acts of domination are tantamount to no more
than taking advantage of this advantage.
The inevitability lies in the conventions governing the form which social action takes. Acts are innovative,
for they are always constituted in the capacity of the agent to act 'for oneself'. It is only in acting thus as
oneself that others are in turn constituted in one's regard. This is a technicality not a sentiment: it is not
altruism. Indeed, the agent is also the object of another's coercion in so acting, and an act is only evident in
being impressed upon further persons. On this cultural premise, action is inherently forceful in its effects, for
every act is a usurpation of a kind, substituting one relationship for another. To act from a vantage point is
thus also in a sense to take advantage. This entails a behavioral ethos of assertiveness and one which applies
equally well to women as men. But beyond this, men often find themselves having an advantage women
lack. To show this advantage it will be necessary to dismantle certain Melanesian concepts. Since I have
been concerned to despatch Western assumptions about society as an object of thought in Melanesian life,
perhaps a starting place would be the counterpart arithmetic that I have been at such pains to contrive.
It will be recalled that the duo or pair is opposed to its single antithesis, the one or the many. As male and
female, men and women form a pair, each capable of eliciting action from the other. I have also argued that
one body is by contrast conceptually unitary, whether in a singular or a plural form, and encompasses future
relations within itself. But the conceptual equation between one and many hides a crucial sociological
difference. The factor that is hidden is one of its terms, namely plurality itself. Single men can take refuge in
the body of men; a man sees his acts replicated and multiplied in the acts of like others. This is the basis of
those situations in which men appear to dominate women. But the domination does not stand for anything
elsefor

                                                   page_327
                                                                                                       Page 328
culture over nature or whateverand does not have to engage our sympathy on that score. It is itself. It
inheres in all the small personal encounters in which one man finds himself at an advantage because of other
men at his back. Among the substitutions available to him, as it were, is the replication of all-male relations
in the plural form which enlarges the capacity of each individual. This becomes its own reason for
forcefulness. In a sense, the forcefulness always has to appear larger than the persons who register its effect.
Such asymmetry turns rules into penalties, the enclosure of domestic life into confinement, and the cause of
men's own activity into the wounds of someone who is beaten and given pain for it.
To put it this way keeps faith with the Melanesian postulate that it is agents, not systems, who act. The
hidden sociological dimension is that collective relations aggrandize individual acts. This is a very different
proposition from suggesting that men are thereby somehow acting on behalf of cultural conventions or that
society accords them dominance.
However, at this juncture, I feel that I really am writing against the grain of the language in which I write;
consequently what follows is offered with hesitation. But let me remind the reader that I have not avoided
the question of oppression and constraint per se. The rules, the form of domestic life, the having to inflict
pain: these constraints are part of an oppressive aesthetic. They lie in the cultural form in which people
recognize the character of events and relations. If the aesthetic discriminates between the sexes it is not
because one or other sex authored them. That we might think so is an artifact of the conventionally
substitutive nature of action itself, such that one sex often appears to be substituting its own interests for
those of another.
Active and passive. Men's advantage does not of itself lie in the constitution of action; men and women may
act with equal assertion. At once I encounter the literary problem. Going against the grain of a language is
going against its own aesthetic conventions: how one makes certain forms appear. I have claimed that
Melanesian men and women do not stand in an irreducibly active and passive relation to one another.
Indeed, as the analysis of cause and effect relations indicated, since being a (passive) cause is to have been
at an earlier stage an (active) agent, the positions are reversible. But when it comes to writing about concrete
instances, the symmetry seems to disappear.
It was argued earlier in this chapter that there is a sense in which

                                                    page_328

                                                                                                       Page 329
men's collective endeavors are directed towards the same reproduction of relations of domestic kinship as
concern women. And here lies the intractable Western aesthetic. It conjures a quite inappropriate gender
symbolism. If I say that men's exchanges are oriented towards their wives' domestic concerns, then the
statement will be read as men appropriating those concerns and turning them to their own use. If I say that
women's domestic work is oriented towards their husbands' exchanges, then this will be read conversely, not
as their appropriating men's activities but as being subservient to them. I know of no narrative device that
will overcome this skewing, because it inheres in the very form of the ideas in which we imagine men's and
women's powers.
On the one hand it is important to appreciate just how Melanesian men and women may be seen to be the
causes of one another's acts. On the other hand, in order to scrutinize the relationship between these ideas
and domination as such, the one move to avoid is working into the analysis of these ideas any assumption
about domination. Yet the active/passive (subject/object) skewing of Western gender symbolism makes this
separation hard to sustain. I repeat the point. If I say Highlands men are regarded as the cause of their wives'
giving birth, then this will imply in the mind of the Western reader that they exercise a superior agency. If I
say that Highlands women are regarded as the cause of men's transactions with one another, then this will
imply their inferior, object-like status, as instruments of men's exchanges or as provisioners of them.
This aesthetic impasse derives from the Western proclivity to personify convention, to seek the authors of
rules, and to reduce images to dogma. Take the specific example of Eastern Highlands beliefs about
procreation: indigenously women are said to be vessels for men who implant the fetus. A woman's act of
giving birth is thus an act 'for' her husband; this can be read by the outsider as male dogma. Indeed, it gives
rise to anthropological interpretations that are paradoxical from a Melanesian point of view, namely that the
woman is acting in a passive way. Concomitantly, male dogma is also read into the way in which men imitate
the act of birth in the course of initiating boys. Outsiders do not consider this female dogma or men as
passive in this context; it may even be reported as a kind of afterthought that the purpose of the rites was to
make the boys into husbands 'for' the women.
The Melanesian connection between cause and effect splits the inactive cause/effect from the active agent,
who may be male or female. But

                                                   page_329

                                                                                                       Page 330
Westerners find it almost impossible not to regard the sexes in a permanent relation of asymmetry. And this
is by virtue of the privilege they accord collective action that they can 'see' (men's transactions and cult
activities) by contrast with that they cannot (women's internal capacity for growth). To the observer, the one
appears active and the other passive. Coupled with this evident activity by men is the indigenously coercive
nature of all cause/effect relations, that others have to be caused to be a cause of one's own activity.
Coercion, asymmetry, and collective action all come together in the potent image with which this chapter
opened: the energy that Melanesian men put into the exercise of exchanging women between themselves in
marriage, and one might add all their exertions to ensure that childbirth is effected properly. 15 We find it
next to inconceivable to imagine this as male vulnerability or helplessness. And if we did cede the point, it
would be to regard men as made helpless by 'the system' in which they are trapped, not by the individual
women for whom they do these things. Whatever is done, the Western gender difference between men and
women compels the reading that the one (female) is passive to the other's (male) activity.
Van Baal courageously attempts to break out of this impasse with an optimistic generalization on the
exchange of women: "All the evidence we have tends to confirm that they are exchanged because they
agree to be exchanged" (1975:76). Unfortunately he reduces this to an argument about women needing
protection and thus lays himself open to the charge that he is simply describing the connivance of the
dominated. Nonetheless, he observes,
   [B]y the simple act of agreeing to be given away in marriage to a man of another group the woman,
   wife to one and sister to the other, has manoeuvered herself into an intermediary position allowing
   her to manipulate. Two men protect her. The one owes a debt to the other and the other owes one to
   her. (1975:77)
The protection is in her interests as a future mother; although he refers later to women's self-selected role of
care-giving, he regards this as rooted in women's natural procreative function.16 But he has here
inadvertently depicted the conditions under which women, like men, indeed act as agents, as the pivot of
relationships.
Rubin pointed out how narrow it is to focus only on the exchange of women: "sexual access, genealogical
statuses, lineage names and ancestors, rights and peoplemen, women and children[are exchanged] in
concrete systems of social relationships" (1975:177, original empha-

                                                   page_330

                                                                                                       Page 331
sis). Thus we should properly set the exchange of women in marriage alongside other circulations of items,
including men and aspects of their relationships. An asymmetric skewing between transactors and
transacted, however, remains. It continues to appear that men are still the principal transactors, even if they
transact with parts of themselves. But this is back to front. Rather, as is true of much of the Highlands, it is
clear that in all transactions men are in fact transacting with parts of themselves. When women objectify this
partibility, they stand for a component of clanship or for assets which a body of men possesses: in short it is
when they are exchanged that women are seen as aspects of men's social identities. Here is Rubin's
conclusion:
   [I]f it is women who are being transacted, then it is the men who give and take them who are linked,
   the woman being a conduit of a relationship rather than a partner to it. The exchange of women does
   not necessarily imply that women are objectified, in the modern sense, since objects ... are imbued
   with highly personal qualities. But it does imply a distinction between gift and giver. (1975:174)
I do not further labor the point that women are not being objectified 'in the modern sense', that is, being
rendered as things alienable from persons. Women's value as wealth, so evident in Hagen for instance, does
not denigrate their subjectivity. Chapter 4 showed how Hagen 'persons' (i.e., agents: moral entities, thinking,
responsible, socially oriented and autonomous) learn the reciprocities of particular interactions within the
household and do not have to prove themselves in a public sphere. Women being the 'objects' of exchange
relationships are not deprived of such autonomy. Moreover, Hagen men's transformation of themselves into
prestige-bearing name-carriers is not ultimately about fulfilling themselves as subjects. Ceremonial exchange
works to make them objects in the regard of others. And men are also construed as aspects of women's social
identities. In other words, it would be an error to see certain people as always the objects of others'
transactions and equally an error to assume their natural, 'free' form is as subjects or agents. One might put it
that people do not exist in a permanent state of either subjectivity or objectivity. The agent is a conduit.
One problem with the Western view of cultures or societies that would regard these entities epitomized in
collective action is that a kind of permanent subjectivity or agency becomes ascribed to certain actions
rather than others. Thus certain forms of activity appear as 'institutions' where others do not. Certain
institutions in turn appear salient or

                                                   page_331

                                                                                                       Page 332
prevalent, the prevalence of men exchanging women between themselves being a notable example. Yet from
the Melanesian view this is no more nor less prevalent an activity than women feeding children or working in
the gardens. These actions all require exertions of agency in Melanesian eyes. Where the agent is defined by
gender, then it is the one sex that 'causes' the other to act. The cause is always technically inert or passive
but with respect to that agent or that occasion and not as a general condition. The asymmetry is always
there, but men's and women's occupation of these respective positions is always transient.
At the heart of the asymmetry is the fact that an agent is not conceived as capable of appropriating another's
acts. One can only make another person act, and thus become oneself a (passive) cause for that acting.
Women's giving birth, as an act, cannot be taken over by men: men can only intervene as causing the action.
As we saw earlier, a mother is coerced into becoming a mother, for herself. The antecedent condition for
such interactions as they concern the sexes must be the ever open possibility that the one is receptive to the
other, each able to register the other's effects, 'to be made' into an agent. Each must as it were be
constitutionally vulnerable to the opposite sex.
The dependency of male ritual on a female presence, of male health on female caretakers, can thus be
interpreted as part of a deliberate vulnerability or openness. One sex is regarded as having a direct effect on
the body of the other: what is held permanent is the possibility of encompassment, and this may be presented
in images of either maleness or femaleness. Thus what is enacted in the initiation sequences of the Eastern
Highlands societies described in earlier chapters is a strictly momentary capacity; the equations involved
may be effective only for the course of the ritual itself (compare Lewis 1980). They do not necessarily
'express' values to be found outside this context but are enactments of a specific agency. At the same time,
by virtue of the fact that the acts are secluded, juniors grow and seniors are strengthened. Enclosure here is
crucial, the entire body of men being in a sense 'contained', an entity distinct from yet encompassed or
enclosed by something that is not itself. This distinctiveness is established by those female elements
positioned as exterior and as enveloping them. 17 The absent females encompass the (present) male body.
Their potential presence is evoked by the men's actions.
It is pertinent that there can be no mediated exchange between the enveloping and the enveloped entities:
the one only ejects or yields the other, or the other grows. Either process establishes the distinctiveness

                                                   page_332

                                                                                                       Page 333
of what is contained from the enveloping container. But the former does not derive its social identity from
that exterior source: the contained entity has a separate identity, precisely because it is not a part of the
container within which it lies. The independent life of the enveloped entity is evinced in the way it swells
and alters the shape of the outer container. The contained element thus also appears to grow 'autonomously',
as is true of the growth induced inside a cult house. Individually the participants are supposed to display a
process that will have altered the appearance of their bodies; collectively, there is a swelling of the body of
men; they have become more numerous as a single body, grown by what they grow. The difference in size
could not be registered without a unitary construct to reveal increase as an internal fact. And an enabling
condition for the unitary identity of the male participants is their categorical exclusion from women, with
whom there can be no communication, no mediation. Women are in this sense a passive cause of men's
actions, as well as the persons on whom the effects of men's activities will eventually be displayed.
We should not mistake this unmediated relationship between men and women as anything more than
provisional. The positions can be reversed. Women's capacity for maternal growth is encompassed by the
men who are excluded from the moment of childbirth. Their exchanges are analogously enveloping or
enclosing. 18 And it is crucial that the exchanges remain between men. This provides a kind of outer
covering of social interaction: for it is also crucial that the women do not enter into a mediated exchange
with the men. Absence of mediation between the sexes creates the condition for women's agency as growers,
of themselves/their children. A productive separation is envisaged, then, between male and female activities
where male exchanges envelop women's internal capacity for growth.19 The grown product, the newborn
child, has in turn an effect on the status of those exchanges, often in Highlands societies compelling men to
take further action among themselves, in making child payments or being solicitous toward their affines.
Birth invariably 'causes' a fresh cycle of male transactions.
I repeat the ethnographic detail in order to emphasize that this is an asymmetry of form. The form delineates
the positioning of the agent with respect to both cause and outcome. It is not that agents 'create' the
asymmetry; they enact it. In summary: being active and passive are relative and momentary positions; in so
far as the relevant categories of actors are 'male' and 'female' then either sex may be held to be the cause of
the other's acts; and the condition is evinced in the perpetual

                                                   page_333

                                                                                                       Page 334
possibility of the one being vulnerable to the exploits of the other or able to encompass the other. The
conclusion must be that these constructions do not entail relations of permanent domination.
We can now delineate the advantage that men do indeed take up for themselves in an unbalanced way and
thus at women's expense. It will turn out to be created by this very alternation of vulnerability and is bound
up with the aesthetics of encompassment: with the fact that in a same-sex unitary condition one body
encompassed by another, which is also the other on whom its effects are registered, is held to grow thereby.
Interpersonal domination. In so far as they stand active and passive in relation to each other, the acts of
men and women do not in themselves evince permanent domination. That one agent behaves with another in
mind is what defines his/her agency. But a different way of putting this would be to suggest that every act is
an act of domination: what is momentary is merely the experience of being in a position to act. For an act
always works to substitutive effect.
As I have defined it, agents substitute one set of relations for another, and it was suggested that among the
substitutions particularly available to men is the possibility of displacing other relationships with an
orientation to same-sex activity itself. The possibility exists in the plural nature of their collective ties. We
might imagine women's comparable substitutions in terms of their retention of food or the objects of growth,
preserving their bodily integrity. But there is more to this in men's case than simply the quantity of bodies. As
is true of all same-sex capacities, the unitary condition of all-male activity must be a cause of growth, and
each participant male will evince that growth in himself. Men take advantage of the men at their back; but
the men at their back also compel them to do just so, because the individual also contains them as it were
within himself. I write with particular reference to the Highlands, but the point can be clarified from
Bateson's celebrated discussion of Sepik schismogenesis.
Bateson analyzes two types of schismogenesis in relationships, complementary behavior that reinforces
differentiation (as between partners playing male and female to one another) and symmetrical rivalry (as
between competing moieties who prompt each other to an excessive demonstration of their similar strengths)
(1958:178179). His initial terms were 'direct' and 'diagonal' (1958:271), which recalls the difference between
unmediated and mediated transactions. In direct dualism,

                                                   page_334

                                                                                                       Page 335
everything can be grouped into pairs, such as elder/younger or male/female; in diagonal dualism, one finds
the oppositeness of equals. For the Iatmul context in which he was writing, he stressed how diagonal
(symmetrical) relationships were imbued with aggressive display; the feature of direct (complementary)
relationships that held his attention was dominance and submissiveness in behavior. Either kind of behavior
could provoke schismogenic response. It is worth adding that Bateson discerned his two forms of
schismogenesis simultaneously at work within the one institution of initiation. Rival moieties competed with
one another in the bullying of novices, provoking each other further to similar brutalities; at the same time,
between novices and initiators, each drove the other to exaggerated forms of differentiated behavior, the one
'female' to the other's 'male'.
In effect, Bateson describes the two kinds of elicitatory interactions that gender difference createsin
same-sex (symmetrical) and cross-sex (complementary) modes. He postulates that in either case one
condition in a person excites a response in another, so that each partner draws apart in an exaggerated way.
Either similarity or difference may be provocative. But I have suggested that there is in addition a systemic
asymmetry to interactions, which leads to a third state of affairs. One could imagine it as the agent being
capable of auto-schismogenesis. That is, an act in itself is an exaggeration of a position which an agent
takes, for him or herself, in respect to others. Their passivity constitutes cause/excitation/outcome. One does
not need to be provoked by the outrageous actions of others in order to be outrageous in relation to them.
Their existence is sufficient provocation.
As far as relations between men and women are concerned, and especially in the Highlands, excess
provoked by the inherent asymmetry between an agent and the outcome registers the effects of that agency.
We must remember that a cause may be equated with an effect, that is, the same persons who compel an
agent to act may also be the registers of the action. Apart from the formal asymmetry of the agent and the
cause/effect of his/her acts, a quantitative inequality can arise. The person who registers those acts may be
too 'small.' There ceases to be a match between the agent and the aesthetic capacity of another to show the
effects of that agency. That is, the exchange of perspectives is thrown out of balance. Consequently, the
person/relationship that is the outcome of the acts is perceived as an insufficient medium. And that
perception of diminution is, of course, in turn a consequence of the exaggeration itself.

                                                    page_335

                                                                                                        Page 336
Such loss of balance may affect relations between men. In relations between men and women it may well be
perceived as inevitable and to be most acute under those very conditions of male growth which men perform
'for' women. Women appear insufficient by the very acts that make men's growth not only something they
accomplish for themselves but also for the women they have in mind. Their insufficiency is thus anticipated
in the enlarged sphere of all-male relations, where each individual man becomes in himself a register of the
replication of men: in this enlarged form, as a 'big' man, he is confronted by 'small' women and children who
carry the burden of registering his size. 20 He is dependent on them; his strength can only take the form of
their weakness. This I believe is a precondition for acts of male excess.
In a double sense, then, the plurality of men's collective life may lead to men dominating women. On the one
hand they react to the inadequacy of a situation in which the growth of their self-esteem must be registered
in the persons of women. They are as it were compelled to exaggerate their vantage point. On the other
hand, they can exploit the imbalance they perceive with some impunity, in so far as they can count on the
support of other men. The result, I would argue, are acts of domination that typically emerge in men's
day-to-day and one-to-one encounters. Occasions of group vindictiveness are not special to relations with
women. But characteristic of that cross-sex relationship in several societies is an assertiveness in
interpersonal relations that overrides what is otherwise normally an exchange of viewpoints. The justification
for men demanding submission from women is not that they are provoked by women's 'natural' or permanent
submissiveness into extremes of behavior, but it is women's temporary submissiveness that reveals the effect
that men, qua men, have upon them. All effects must be reinforced, because by their character effects are
inevitably transient.
It would be misleading, however, to conclude that men are driven by an identity need to become 'whole
persons'. It seems that Melanesian ideas pose for men not the existential problem of whether men are men
but rather the problem of the multiple personhow both to act and to be the cause of the actions of others,
and how thus to ensure that one's actions have indeed taken place.
The Hagen case can be taken up for the last time. What is a part of a multiple self that a man contributes to
an ongoing domestic relationship with his wife, in ceremonial exchange becomes his total identity

                                                    page_336

                                                                                                        Page 337
vis-à-vis other men. In the former, he sustains a relationship with a differentiated social other; in the latter,
with persons who are similar to himself, a replication that brings the possibility of a measure between them.
The value of collective events becomes rhetorically juxtaposed to the value of domestic production. Indeed,
that sphere may even be seen as destructive; too much time at home compromises a man's group
participation. It is from this, as Lederman (in press) has noted for Mendi, that inequality creeps into daily
interactions, that one spouse's interests seem more pressing than another's. The overriding nature of men's
claims, the urgency of their concerns, is established in their future claims, as men, to be part of a collectivity
of men.
Trivial as domestic disputes may appear to an outsider, they indicate the extent to which people suffer from
one another's excesses. Men much more so than women exert force in interpersonal relations, and above all
in the conjugal relationship. Men's exertions have a cost in terms of the chances of people's physical
survivalas true of politics as of ritual, although in transforming themselves into agents of special kinds, the
cost is borne by themselves also. The transformation is at the necessary expense of other relationships in
which they engage, since such a transformation of themselves is inevitably in a gift economy a
transformation of their relations with others. If we are to look for domination in interaction between the
sexes, it is in the manner in which individual men in their domestic and kinship relations can override the
particular interests of others by reference to categorical, collective imperatives. Women have no such
recourse. The single most effective sanction at the disposal of a Hagen woman is bodily removal of her
person.
Domination is found in particular acts of excess, then; in the Highlands these often involve what we would
regard as violent behavior. In stressing the individual and everyday context of such acts, I have wanted to
avoid making domination out to be anything more than it is. At the same time, there is a cultural reason why
it is specific acts on particular occasions that become out of balance. Domination is a consequence of taking
action, and in this sense I have suggested that all acts are excessive. Since in Melanesian metaphysics each
action is indivisibly 'one' event, it has to be in interpersonal situations that domination is exercised. When an
exchange of perspectives is denied between people who are also partners, when a 'big' man beats a 'small'
woman, it has to be in such situations because it is in his male form as an individual agent

                                                    page_337

                                                                                                         Page 338
that a man is forced to find an adequate aesthetic vehicle for the capacities that have grown within him.
Given the intention of feminist scholarship to analyze the nature of oppression and domination between the
sexes, and given especially the interest that feminist anthropologists promote in the cross-cultural
'construction' of personhood, one might wish to epitomize some of the argument of this book in a second root
metaphor. The first concerned the social form of persons and things in gift and commodity economies. The
second concerns the forms of action as Melanesian culture presents them. If relationships are known to have
been enacted by appearing in the form of persons, acts relate persons through the will of the individual
subject.
Western culture imagines people as persons existing in a permanently subjective state; this is their natural
and normal condition, and a person can dominate another by depriving him or her of the proper exercise of
that subjectivity. Expressed proprietorially, one's person properly belongs to oneself. But one may be made
to do things that override or ignore that property relation, being coerced against one's own nature thereby.
Thus a person may be made to act in such a way as to deny her or his subjectivity and personhood. A subject
can be turned into an object.
In Melanesian culture, people are imagined in contrasting modesmale and female, same-sex and cross-sex, a
person always one of a pair of interrelated forms. Anyone can register the difference between them as a
difference of perspective. As persons, women and men are equally the objects of the regard of others, and
thus objectify their relationships. Since persons are the objective form of relationships, the outcomes of their
acts are held to originate in and thus belong to those relationships. In a debt idiom, one might say that they
owe their persons to those relationships, and thus to other 'persons'. But as far as acting is concerned, an
agent's acts always belong to him or herself. No one else can act for one. However much she or he may be
compelled or coerced into taking action, the act is the point at which the agent exercises her or his
subjectivity. For as an agent, one also acts from the vantage point of oneself.
There is a paradox here in Western terms. Whereas Melanesian women and men are as objects celebrated as
persons in the eyes of others, claimed as the sources of activity and the productive outcome of

                                                    page_338
                                                                                                       Page 339
people's energies, it is as agents that they suffer domination. This does not involve deprivation of
subjectivity. It is that their action must reveal the demands of others as its cause. In expanding this paradox,
however, it becomes possible to see afresh the conundrum at the heart of much Western feminist inquiry:
why women submit to the rules that oppress them. It is clear how and why Western scholars pose the
question. But it has also become clear that the Melanesian material will not yield an answer in a familiar
form.
The Western observer can understand women as the victims of men's behavior, and the Melanesian 'person'
may be denigrated as well as celebrated, the inert object of activity taking place elsewhere, having to reveal
in herself simply the effect of another's intentions. But it is harder to understand women's apparent
willingness and their seeming connivance in situations that appear to go against their own interests. It is the
nature of the willingness that seems so puzzling. Perhaps we could imagine the situation this way. As I have
described Melanesian cultural conventions, an agent is made to act not to express another's dominant
subjectivity but because the supports and reasons for taking action, the others whom she takes into account,
are always held to lie beyond the moment of the act itself. These reasons thus appear as the acts of other
persons. But since these other persons cannot act for her, only she can take her own action. In that sense, it
is only her own will that she can exercise.

                                                   page_339

                                                                                                       Page 340



12
Comparison
This is in the nature of an epilogue rather than a chapter. In so far as I have been trying to make the
conventions of my account explicit, the strategy of comparison has been obvious throughout. Viewpoints
have been played off against one another. I do not intend to make the obvious more obvious. What possibly
remains of interest, however, are the questions that have in the course of this process disappeared.
One concern is laid to rest. It is not the dreary case that in society after society we encounter example after
example of men displaying dominance over women in their organization of transactions. Or even that in
example after example we can discern a sphere of female activity to which men's transactions are directed.
To put it bluntly, there is only one example.
In the end I did not offer any adjudication on the markedly different ways in which men and women take
advantage of their situation between the different societies of Melanesia; I have not accounted for the
distinctiveness of the Highlands, for instance, from which my problematic was initially drawn. What emerges
instead is the extent to which the apparently numerous social systems of Melanesia can be considered as
versions of one another. Some sense of the variety of social forms is sustained in the running distinction
between societies whose exchange systems do and those whose do not produce more kinship. Nevertheless,
this crude contrast, intended to stand for diverse contrasts within the region, in the end has collapsed.

                                                   page_340

                                                                                                       Page 341
I do not mean that the differences are not real, but that they are so to speak all the same difference: this is
what has made it possible to understand ceremonial exchange through the phenomenon of initiation and vice
versa. The manner in which male associations are formed, the relationship between mediated and
unmediated transactions, and the images gender gives to the sequencing of cause and effect in relations, all
appear as widely shared conceptualizations. Harrison has been able to describe the group organization of
Sepik societies in the form of Highlands ones; they are topological distortions of what he calls the same
structure. He concludes: ''a single, or similar, model may underlie the social organisation of some Melanesian
societies neither geographically close nor, on the surface, sociologically very similar" (1984:401). The similar
conceptualizations to which I refer concern the way in which people construe social action and make known
the outcomes of their relations with one another. Melanesian societies share a common aesthetic.
Such reductionism will not please everyone. For it also underlines the failure of a comparative method
whose persuasion rests in elucidating a repetition of instances. That arithmeticbased on the plurality of
unitshas disappeared. Here we have varieties of or versions of a 'single' instance. These societies hold their
conventions in common. I would draw an analogy. In the same way as one might wish to comprehend
capitalist organization as it developed historically in Europe, so one needs to inject a real history into our
comprehension of Melanesian gift economies. The history itself may be unrecoverable, but we surely know
enough about historical process to recognize a series of connected events. Whether one retains the idea of a
single formation, or breaks it down into two or three prototypical situations, is irrelevant. The point is that
we are not confronted with repetitive reinventions of male domination.
This should be of interest to those feminists who turn to anthropological material, such as that on Melanesia,
to explore the full range of alternative forms of gender relations, only to find the 'example after example'
syndrome. I have suggested the syndrome does not exist.
Two conclusions follow. On the one hand, there is no need to account for the universal dominance of men in
the Highlands; the facts of the case merely indicate the ramifications of a single (historical) set of social
arrangements. There is no proof of universality here, only the inference that we are dealing with
transformations at once as specific and as complex as the development of European societies over the last

                                                    page_341

                                                                                                         Page 342
two hundred years under commodity production. Indeed if one could undertake an anthropology of the
nation states of Europe, one might be in a better position to undertake the anthropology of Melanesia. On
the other hand, it is also the case that these people are enchained into acting out versions of their past.
Despite the extremities to which some go, or the mildness on the countenance of others, they are tied to
specific versions of their former selves. The sharing of aesthetic conventions is not the residue of some
generalized past life held in common. That life always took its own concrete form and must have been no
more nor less diverse than that of European societies before the industrial revolution.
This is the point at which to defend the fiction the reader may have found the most imprecisethe comparison
of Melanesia and Western society/culture. Far from being vague, the our/their divide of this narrative is its
most concrete aspect.
The notion that diverse cultural forms generate multitudinous different 'societies' belongs to a premise of
commodity logic, that what people make are 'things' (including abstract things such as cultures and societies).
'Cultural' activity is the diversification of as well as proliferation of things. This lays the trap for the doubly
snared perplexities of univeralism and relativity. It would seem either that elements are to be found
everywhere, or else that they are found somewhere, a quest at once instigated and defeated by regarding
societies as numerically multitudinous. Uniformly, so to speak, societies appear in this view to proliferate
across the world; and there is no end to perceptible proliferation.
Within Melanesia we are dealing with societies that cannot be counted separately because, despite the
contrasts between them, as versions of one another they are implicated in one another's histories. The
versions can be compared. But if they can be compared by reference to what they hold in common, it is
precisely for this reasonas outgrowths and developments of one another. Specific forms come not from
generalized ones but from other specific forms. It follows that these same internal contrasts cannot be
externalized to include 'our own' as a further version for comparison, a third party as it were (from the
Western anthropologist's perspective, Euro-American industrialism/capitalist formation/commodity
economy/bourgeois culture or whatever is claimed for the sake of argument). The people of Hagen or of
Enga do not compose entities that can be compared with 'Western society', nor indeed with Wales or North
America for that matter.
Comparative anthropology misleadingly assumes that all societies

                                                    page_342

                                                                                                         Page 343
struggle with the same givens of nature, so that all social formations appear equivalently and thus holistically
organized to the same ends. But if we were to compare Melanesian societies to those of Western Europe,
comparison would have to be directed to the overall Melanesian region as the site of diverse outgrowths of a
unique historical process and not to individual peoples. This is the sense in which I would agree with Elshtain
(pp. 312313). Comparison is inadmissible not because some people live simple lives and some do not. It is
inadmissible to juxtapose this or that particular historical form with what we in our imagination generalize as
the single 'society' of the West. There is no such society; there are only generalizations. But from a
Melanesian perspective, this means that there is a widespead sharing of established conventions. It is
revealed as soon as one attempts to talk about Melanesian sociality in Western terms: consequently what can
be compared with Western conventions are the cultural conventions that Hagen and Enga thus seem to
share.
Hence I have referred in a most general way to both 'Western' and 'Melanesian' ideas. And that generality
has been with specific intent. All I have done is make explicit such implicit cultural comparisons as are
entailed in the incidental juxtapositions of deploying one language as the medium in which to reveal the form
that another, were it comparable, might take.
Yet this also makes comparability disappear. Languages themselves are not generalized but specific
phenomena. In expanding the metaphorical possibilities of the specific language of Western analysis, it can
only be its own metaphors that I utilize. I have tried to make this asymmetry apparent. Taking apart the
image of the commodity (things produced for exchange) uncovers the gift (things produced by exchange);
but the formula rests on a Western dichotomy in the first place. The result is that the knowledge I produce
about Melanesian societies is not commensurate with the form that knowledge takes there. The fact that my
argument works through innumerable oppositions and contrasts, for example, is an inescapable residue of a
commodity logic concerned with the value or relations between things, including abstract concepts. Were
one to juxtapose Melanesian knowledge practices, one would instead be faced with the presentation of a
(single) synthetic image. Relations would be made apparent not through the classification of its attributes,
but through its decomposition into a series of other images. Men's body would be seen to contain the
children of women, and looking at the maternal body would be looking at the transactions of men.

                                                    page_343

                                                                                                        Page 344
In striving to convey this incommensurability, I reveal the most significant limitation of this account.
Practices in the West assume that things exist as information before they exist as knowledge. At the same
time, it is the accumulation of information that produces knowledgeknowing the reasons for which the
material was collectedand of itself thus yields the classificatory relations that make sense of it. The sense is
available to anyone; expertise lies in making the relations. Consequently the method is simple: enquiry into
the nature of the things. There is a timeless dimension to this Western exercise, for at issue is the
effectiveness through which inherent relationships are brought to light. Hence I have presented the
oppositions and analogies and encompassments described in this book as coexistent attributes of a 'system'
(my Melanesian aesthetic). From a Melanesian perspective, what is missing is real time.
As I would grasp that perspective, relations only appear as a consequence of other relations, forms out of
other forms. Consuming knowledge about one form means making another form appear. This requires human
effort. People tie the reason for knowing things to particular sequences of causes and their effects, for
knowledge only makes sense if it is consumed by the right person at the right place and time. Otherwise it is
mere surface phenomena, disembodied (unconsumed) things. Information does not exist in itself. I have tried
to imitate this timing in composing a narrative that depends on internal sequencing. But at the same time I
defeat the purpose of the imitation because the literary plot can only make things more obvious; it cannot do
what Melanesians constantly do, and subsequently conceal what has been revealed. One needs real time to
do that.
We have seen that the benefits of ceremonial gift exchange must be reabsorbed by one or the other partner
in order to create a premise for new action. The same could be said of Melanesian knowledge. Relationships
have to be hidden within particular formsminds, shells, persons, cult houses, gardensin order to be drawn out
of them. That is an inimitable process.

                                                    page_344

                                                                                                        Page 345


