6
Work: Exploitation At Issue
Feminist concerns with the ideology of sexual identity and feminist anthropologists' concern with the nature
of the political-domestic divide would not have quite their critical edge if it were not for what seems one
pervasive and near universal fact of life: the apparently persistent misrecognition of women's work as
somehow less than work. Either women's labors are hidden from sight or else, where they are visible, do not
give women the social scope that men's activities enjoy and may well be overshadowed by other criteria of
public importance. Such evaluations inhere in cultural arrangements and classifications. Since these are often
seen as working to the interests of men, the corollary is the supposition that in gaining more than women
from such arrangements, directly or indirectly, men exploit women's labor. This is certainly how the New
Guinea Highlands has appeared to outside observers. Thus Leacock (1981:294) can suggest that ''the
ritualization of sex hostility in highland New Guinea is the acting out on an ideological level of the reality
that men are competing with women for control of what women produce," and cites me as having made
clear for Hagen how "control of women's labor is enormously important to men."
In turning to the issue, I wish to accomplish a number of things. The first is to bring feminist critiques to bear
on the earlier discussion about power from their perception of the 'reality' of material conflict. This is
important, second, because these critiques contain a pluralist criticism of the anthropological propensity to
take culture for granted. A similar

                                                    page_133

                                                                                                         Page 134
criticism was apparent in the theorizing over the nature of the political-domestic divide. Here I consider this
divide in relation to indigenous classifications of activities that do not on the surface present themselves as
evaluations. For instance, the concepts of 'wealth' or 'gift' do not immediately appear discriminatory; what
appears potentially discriminatory is men's and women's access to them. However, for the New Guinea
Highlands, including Hagen, an important attack has been made on those culturalist formulations that fail to
grasp the ideological status of 'gift exchange' and its accompanying mechanism of 'reciprocity'.
Third, my interest in this debate stems from the use that I nonetheless wish to make of the concept of the
gift. It is one of my fictionsto be deployed in its relational definition vis-à-vis its counterpart, the commodity.
The pair of terms provide an axis for considering a range of contrasts between Melanesian societies and the
societies of the Western world from which the analytical constructs of social science in the first place derive.
One may suppose the axis as a difference between root metaphors: if in a commodity economy things and
persons assume the social form of things, then in a gift economy they assume the social form of persons
(adapted from Gregory 1982:41).
Fourth, this fictional divisionas though one could thereby characterize whole cultures and whole
societiesenables one to marshall together a number of disparate theoretical issues that have made their
appearance in the preceding three chapters. They have been loosely tied to a running commentary on
property assumptions. At the risk of repetition, I spell them out as the specific ramifications of a commodity
metaphor.
Thus, in a rather ad hoc manner, I have asserted that this or that set of concepts does not apply to the
Melanesian material. They include the following: the idea that persons can be less than social beings; nature
as a constraint and as a resource; the kind of unitary identity implied in sex-role theory; attributes
appropriated as though they were property owned; things being regarded as having intrinsic properties; the
purpose of domination being control, and so on. These can all be considered refractions of a specific
Western root metaphor. They belong to a culture that grasps the form of things through imagining that things
exist in themselves: the use to which they are put must always entail some kind of relation with their
(resistant) nature. Or, one that regards the work of society and culture as giving social or cultural value to
things and persons, much as the use value of goods and products

                                                    page_134

                                                                                                         Page 135
circulates only when this has also been turned into a market exchange value (Sahlins 1976). Or, one that
correspondingly construes persons as commodities, both having an intrinsic value and establishing values for
themselves in circulation among others. Barnett and Silverman's (1979:7980) exposition of Western notions
of personhood, after Schneider (1968), draws the contrast in terms of 'substance' and 'contract'.
The socialized, internally controlled Western person must emerge as a microcosm of the domesticating
process by which natural resources are put to cultural use. Hence the person is a homologue of society
thought of as a set of rules or conventions (chap. 2). The only internal relation here is the way a person's
parts 'belong' to him or herself. Other relationships bear in from the outside. A person's attributes are thus
modified through external pressure, as are the attributes of things, but they remain intrinsic to his or her
identity. A shoe is a shoe, to take a famous example, however much it costs, and whether or not it is even
marketable at all, because of the way it is worn. Extrinsic modification thus transforms or controls intrinsic
attributes but does not challenge their status as the definitive property of the entity in question. The
refractions of this commodity metaphor suggest an image of persons standing in respect of their own selves
as original proprietors of themselves.
Whereas properties 'belong' to a thing in a definitional sense, in the case of persons 'belonging' is imagined as
an active proprietorship. Persons own their minds as well as their bodies, and their minds turn the proprietor
of his or her own actions also into the author of them. This unitary potential demarcates the proper
singularity of such authorship, in parallel to the 'individual' as a real, concrete entity. Indeed, it becomes
possible to slide from conceptualizing a subject exercising control over objects at his or her disposal,
including personal capabilities such as sexualityoften taken as the property par excellence that in its outward
orientation should be deployed through the will of the possessor of itto a society or culture regarded as
turning the intrinsic properties of thingsconceived culturally as utilitiesinto objects of conventional worth.
Both the capabilities available to the person and the resources available to society are construed as 'things'
having a prior natural or utilitarian value in themselves. And persons in turn, as individuals, comprise just
such a resource for society. To control or exploit this intrinsic value is to raise questions about the authorship
or proprietorship of the social or extrinsic value thereby created.

                                                   page_135

                                                                                                        Page 136
As a derivation from the Western concept of the commodity, these refractions receive most explicit
anthropological discussion for the evidence they afford of a type of political economy. Thus it is in the
"capitalist mode of production," under the conditions of market exchange, that
   any commodity, once it plays the role of [an] equivalent [in exchange], seems to possess in itself the
   capacity to measure the value of other commodities. The 'equivalent form' of a commodity does not
   reveal the essential value (which is a social reality, human labour); it turns the value into a
   characteristic of things. (Godelier 1977:156, original emphasis)
Indeed, the contrast between these Western/Melanesian root metaphors is usefully conceived in terms of
different political-economy regimes. This brings us back to the feminist critiques.
The final observation to make, however, is that we are brought back in such a way as to realize how much
those critiques participate in the constructions they seek to undermine. They are branches themselves of the
commodity root metaphor, as they have to be. This is true whether they are, so to speak, extensions of the
roots or whether they adopt a specific nonpositivist, nonbourgeois stance, in which case they are like the
canopy of a tree apparently separated from but in fact feeding its root system below. I cannot, of course,
remove myself from this radix: I merely occupy another position.
This is a position from which the Western metaphor can be made visible and from which it appears as an
inverse of that attributed here to Melanesian cultures. I thus attempt a parallel inversion between 'Western'
and 'Melanesian' cultures through extending an internal contrast (commodity and gift being concepts derived
from a commodity economy) to two cultural forms external to one another. In my account, the concept of
the 'gift' is heavily dependent on its antonym, the 'commodity'. The opposition would not make sense in the
Hagen language. What I call gifts Hageners call by a term that we would otherwise happily translate as
'things'. But that opens rather than closes the analytical work: the question is what kinds of things are they,
and, from our perspective, what social form they take.

Discerning Equality
Feminist anthropologists who have extended the debate over political and domestic domains into considering
the economics of subordination

                                                   page_136
                                                                                                         Page 137
properly challenge the manner in which one adopts indigenous formulations as analytical ones. Yet at the
same time, it is important to maintain a critical distance on their arguments. This necessitates constructing a
position, as I have tried to do, from which their own assumptions are apparent. It is significant to the overall
concerns of this book that from among the diverse refractions of the commodity metaphor many such
arguments ultimately turn on certain conceptualizations of property.
The same observation was made in the previous chapter with respect to power. It is somewhat mischievous
to repeat it, in so far as those writers who draw on political-economy theory explicitly offer critiques of
economic categories such as 'private property', which are properly taken as specific to commodity
production in capitalist economies. 1 The critiques include the general proposition that property is a relation,
not a thing, to be analyzed as a relation between persons with respect to things.2 The 'idea' of property is
thus not treated as self-evident at all. It is an impertinence, therefore, to suggest that such critiques might in
turn incorporate unexamined property assumptions. Nevertheless, this is also what one must expect. In so far
as the critiques were developed in the first place to scrutinize the social relations of capitalist economy, they
were internal to the economic system under scrutiny. We should not be so surprised after all at the
continuity. The continuity I now wish to make evident lies in the manner in which agents and their actions
are assumed to be structured.
My remarks would be less impertinent if they did justice to the debates over the nature of exploitation in
noncapitalist, nonclass social systems; I refer the reader, for instance, to Modjeska's (1982) overview of
inequality in Highlands societies. It is particularly in arguments about the exploitation of labor3 that one
encounters a stubborn Western assumption about the natural proprietorship of persons. In any attempt to
characterize the differences between various Melanesian modes of sociality, it is to my mind an interference
that the way these issues have sometimes been aired has not only, and necessarily, incorporated certain
Western premises about social action but that these have taken a property form.
Yet an important caveat must be entered here. Evaluation, as opposed to interpretation, requires a
self-conscious separation between analytical and indigenous formulations.4 The concerns introduced in
chapter 4 underline the point. An analytical interest in distinguishing political and domestic domains found a
mirror in the myriad ways in

                                                    page_137

                                                                                                         Page 138
which indigenous Melanesian domaining mechanisms are established. This is partly and quite properly
because the analytical impetus comes largely from within anthropological theory itself, and such theory
responds to the ideational constructs of the cultural systems it addresses. Here it is interpretive in nature.
However, the feminist anthropological argument that claims over the products of labor are crucial to the
evaluation of sexual equality does not, overtly at least, rest on attempts to find justification for the analytical
categories in the symbolic systems of those being studied.
In the work of those who align themselves with Marxist-feminists, 5 the theoretical basis for analysis lies
outside anthropology and lies instead in a theory of social action not itself affected by situations for which
there is no indigenous counterpart theory. The main strength of a Marxist-feminist perspective for
anthropologists, then, is that it provides grounds for exogenous evaluation. Given that a principal goal of
feminist evaluation is the degree of equality that particular systems allow men and women, the search is for
measures that can be universally applied, and relations of production prompt such a measure.6 Such
relations are concretely interpreted as resting on the nature of access to productive resources, control over
labor, and jurisdiction over the products of labor. None of these concepts needs rest on indigenous models
and none requires them in order to remain useful. It is, therefore, a specification of and not a denigration of
the debates over equality that they incorporate unexamined property assumptions. These are unexamined
simply because they are incorporated as taken-for-granted facts about human existence.
One well established debate concerns the extent to which otherwise egalitarian societies do or do not sustain
inequalities between the sexes. The debate has been especially vigorous apropos hunter-gatherer economies
and is worth considering briefly here.
Hunter-gatherer societies have engaged Western observers by virtue of their apparent egalitarianism.
Feminist anthropologists have with some force joined the debate over the appropriateness of this
designation. It is my own view that what drives us to contemplate these systems as egalitarian is one unusual
feature: contemporary hunter-gatherer communities contrast with the majority of the world's societies in that
claims on persons are effected through claims on services rather than claims on goods. They lack property
relations; they also lack the mediatory form of gifts. Ties between persons are not constructed through the
control of assets and of persons as though they were assets, and

                                                   page_138

                                                                                                      Page 139
wealth cannot store labor; objects do not become gifts in the sense in which one would use the term in
Melanesia. Value lies in things being instruments of service relations between persons. What is confusing
about these systems, then, is that inequalities are structured neither through the ownership of assets nor
through the transaction of gifts.
This does not mean that inequalities do not exist. The point is made explicitly in the debates on male-female
relations in these systems. Collier and Rosaldo (1981) demonstrate how marriage, affinal obligations, and the
division of labor between the sexes set up asymmetric relations between men and women, although they
allow men to assert a strenuous equality between themselves. People exert all sorts of claims on the acts and
actions of others, including work in the form of service due to another. There are inequalities, then, in claims
on such labor, but although we may refer to it as labor, it is not embodied in property or gifts. Collier and
Rosaldo thus suggest that such asymmetries in relations do not have to be metaphorized as the ownership or
control of resources.
The position against which they argue is familiar from the works of Leacock (1978; 1981; 1982) and Sacks
(1975; 1979). Both have addressed the character of sexually egalitarian systems. In their view, control (in
terms of ownership) over resources is crucial; the test of an egalitarian system rests in whether or not
property discriminates between persons. Leacock is especially interested in the structure of decision-making,
and the relationship between production and consumption and the dispersal of authority. Consensus, she
argues, is fundamental to the organization of everyday life in egalitarian band society. She writes (1981:139):
   food and other necessities were procured or manufactured by all able-bodied adults, and were
   directly distributed by their producers .... there was no differential access to resources through
   private land ownership and no specialization of labor beyond that by sex, hence no market system to
   intervene in the direct relationship between production and distribution.
She adds emphatically,
   Unless some form of control over resources enables persons with authority to withhold them from
   others, authority is not authority as we know it.
Sacks (1979:113) argues a case for what she calls a communal mode of production in such societies:
   All people have the same relationship to the means of production, and hence they stand to each other
   as equal members of a community of 'owners'.

                                                   page_139

                                                                                                      Page 140
Thus they are all in a sense owners: they share equal control. That the sexes may "act on different aspects of
nature" (1979:113) is a matter of occupation not of the critical relation to the means of production. Hence
there may be differences in terms of occupation at the level of productive forces, Sacks puts it, but not at the
level of relations to productive means.
For both authors, 'equality' is present where persons as agents share decisions or utilize common resources
because ownership does not discriminate between them. Men and women are found to be equal on this
score. Control over resources is thus the significant feature by which we know such societies to be
egalitarian. The self-evident nature of this position is apparent in Rogers's (1978:155) general statement that
"[p]ower may be measured in terms of control over significant resources." The qualification that resources
need not only be 'economic' (they may include ritual knowledge and information) does not affect the model
of control.
Sacks makes careful historical distinctions with respect to the emergence of private property in class society
and the definitive character of systems that are not characterized by private property. Yet she perpetuates a
certain type of property thinking in her very emphasis on the significance of co-ownership (though
qualifying the term 'owner', see Sacks 1979:123 no. 2). In her 'communal mode of production', everyone
enjoys equal claims on productive resources. The sexes may do things differently, but they stand in the same
relationship to the band's means of production: each sex owns and disposes of the fruits of its labor (Sacks
1979:133). 'Egalitarianism' thus rests on everyone owning their own labor. She refers to the band members
as owner-producers; one could also say that she makes them into a band of proprietors. For the concept that
persons own and dispose of the fruits of their labor renders them individual proprietors of it. Others cannot
interfere in the exercise of this ownership. The individual's relationship to his or her labor is not imagined as
that of private property, since the argument is that labor is not alienable and cannot circulate in commodity
form. The proprietorial assumption to which I nevertheless draw attention is the unitary identification
between persons (as subjects) and the products of their activity (work).
This is a general postulate in Western assessments about whether or not men's and women's worth is
culturally recognized. It involves an ethical definition of the person as an agent responsible for his/her
actions. So says Leacock: "[T]he basic principle of egalitarian band society

                                                   page_140

                                                                                                        Page 141
was that people made decisions about the activities for which they were responsible" (1981:140); others did
not take that 'right' away from them. I suspect that this position includes the idea that the author of an act
should also be the one to execute it and accountably so. Endicott (1981:1) is explicit: she defines equality
and egalitarianism in hunter-gatherer economies as the "individual control of one's own labour, decision-
making, course of action, social contacts and sexuality." Yet the Western notion that people own what they
do to the exclusion of others seems hardly borne out by the evidence on how claims and ceremonial duties in
such non-Western societies are often structured. Indeed, she refers to the cooperative nature of familial
relations. To assume that one can take as an analytical base a condition in which people control themselves
and their labor, without reference to social others, is to introduce a neoclassical economism when one least
expects it.
I have touched on arguments about egalitarianism in hunter-gatherer economies partly because of feminist
interest in the extent to which such systems are also sexually egalitarian and partly to demonstrate a
particularly interesting property assumption in the accompanying adjudications. The reader might be
reminded of the prevalence of 'control' in the reasons Highlands ethnographers adduced for the cults and
ritual presented in the previous chapter. This notion of control implies something like an exercise of
proprietorship, either over attributes 'belonging' to oneself or else over attributes 'belonging' to others and
yielded by them. The concept already prejudges the manner in which persons impinge upon one another. In
the same way, the concept of individual ownership of the self, which these writers on hunter-gatherer
systems unwittingly use, implies an exclusion of other parties; it thus prejudges the analysis of how claims
are established on persons and exercised by social others.
Sacks extends her argument to what she calls the kin corporate mode of production as one might find, she
says, among clan-based Papua New Guinea Highlands horticulturalists, though her detailed examples are
drawn from Africa. Here she explores the crucial contradiction between men and women who as siblings
share the same relations to the means of production (corporate kin resources) but who as spouses stand in
different relations. She notes the appropriation by husbands of what the wife produces, so that by contrast
with their relations with sisters, men control their wives' labor or the labor's products.
Writing specifically of the Duna (to the west of Paiela but belonging

                                                   page_141

                                                                                                        Page 142
to a different language family in the Highlands of Papua New Guinea), Modjeska raises the question of how
the discrete ownership of particular products, such as the husband's claim to pigs, can be conceptualized in a
situation in which the different labors of husbands and wives are combined in quality and quantity. He
observes (1982:70) that it is "in the movement from the organization of production to the allocation of rights
... that the primary moment of false appropriation" must lie. He dwells particularly on the appropriation of
wives' labor in pig production: "the interactive and social character of domestic production is not matched by
equal rights in determining the allocation of pigs [my emphasis]." He continues: "Women are granted equal
rights in consumption, but their rights in determining circulation are flatly denied. This denial is mediated by
ideological justifications'' (1982:82). In fact, most interestingly he proceeds to offer an observation that
compromises too close a parallel between the political economy of the Duna and the corporate kin mode
systems described by Sacks; Duna kinship corporations are structures made and perpetuated by the
circulation of pigs under male control. The modalities, as he puts it, of exchange, which include bridewealth
and compensation payments definitive of group action, are effected through the circulation of pigs in their
appropriated form. 7 Even as siblings, relations between men and women are not equal. But that is not why
his argument is introduced here. Rather, it is to draw attention to the assumption that there can be some
independent determination of what a person's 'rights' should be.
A vocabulary which turns on the deprivation of 'rights' must entail premises about a specific form of
property.8 To assert rights against others implies a type of legal ownership. Does the right to determine the
value of one's product belong naturally to the producer?
The postulate that equality exists where agents exercise control over their activities, based on the assumption
that what they do belongs to them in person, is itself part of an ancient European critique of property and
inequality. Work is regarded as just such an activity. The internal critique of Western capitalism that draws
attention to alienationto the separation of a person from his/her workrests ultimately on the notion that
persons somehow have a natural right to the products of their own work, since they are the authors of their
acts.9 Such intrinsic possession of one's own activity (work) means it has a value in the first instance for the
self (and thus may we also speak of it as labor). It is the person's own appropriation of his or her activity that
gives it value, in so far as the person is a microcosm of the 'social' process by which

                                                   page_142

                                                                                                        Page 143
exogenous appropriation by others, by 'the system', also gives it value. Not only is internal proprietorship
assumed (Barnett and Silverman 1979), 10 but a one-to-one relationship is imagined to exist between a
producer and what he or she produces. Ownership of what a person does properly rests, it would appear, in
that person as a singular individual. This notion, already mentioned in chapter 5, is one to which I shall
return.
Comparative analysis does not in the end turn on the applicability of single concepts but on the comparison
of whole systems. To isolate the idea of 'equality' is a case in point. No one would suggest that in Melanesia
relations between men and women are egalitarian either in fact or ideology. Indeed, Josephides (1982) points
to the significance of an overt ideology of inequality between the sexes as concealing the combination of
their labors. But, following Godelier (1976), this observation can also be reversed. It is through gender
imagery that concepts of equality and symmetry or inequality and asymmetry are fashioned. The connection
between this imagery and relations between men and women as such cannot be assessed without some grasp
of the overall system within which equalities and inequalities are generated. On this point, all those writers
whose work has been mentioned agree. It is necessary to specify the nature of the political economy that
produces these formulations of gender. This task requires an evaluative decision on the observer's part about
what kind of system it indeed is.

A Critique Of The Gift
Adopting the concept of gift economy to apprehend the political-economic form of Melanesian societies
avoids certain prejudgments. Specifying the products of economic arrangements as 'commodities' and 'gifts',
rather than referring to different ways of producing and circulating 'goods', avoids assumptions about values.
For instance, Gregory (1982) argues, the category goods implies a subjective relation between an individual
and an object of desiregoods are pre-defined as things that people want. Categories such as commodity and
gift refer instead to the organization of relations. Commodity exchange, as he (1982:41) puts it, establishes a
relationship between the objects exchanged, whereas gift exchange establishes a relation between the
exchanging subjects. In a commodity oriented economy, people thus experience their interest in commodities
as a desire to appropriate goods; in a gift oriented economy, the desire is to expand social relations. For in a
clan

                                                   page_143

                                                                                                        Page 144
(rather than class-) based society, production and consumption are related in such a way that consumptive
production, the consumption of things for the production of persons, predominates. 11 This is close to
Modjeska's formulation that Duna social practices concerning pigs as objects with a mediating potential
('gifts') confront one "not with a system of commodity production but rather with a system for the
'production' (or social reproduction) of persons as lineage and family members" (1982:51). The
self-replacement of clans, in Gregory's scheme, involves turning things into persons, a process of
personification that is predominant over what he calls objectification, persons' production of things. By
predominant, he means that this process determines the social form of things and persons.
'Gift economy', then, is a shorthand for describing a relationship between production and consumption in
which consumptive production shapes people's motivations and the form in which they recognize productive
activities. To so refer to Melanesian economies entails as much a cultural as a social categorization.
But such a decision is bound to entail prejudgments of its own. The questions posed about the ideological
states of 'property' and 'ownership' as Western cultural idioms raise counterquestions: perhaps terms such as
'gift' and 'exchange' have a similar cultural status. Chapter 4, for instance, axiomatically adopted the concept
of reciprocity in defining the domestic production of persons in Hagen. The exegesis of the last chapter
depended upon an interpretive resonance with Melanesian ideas about the interchange of sexual attributes
between the sexes, thus adopting a model of exchange to describe the way relations are set up between
persons. But what is the status of these Melanesian ideas? If the idea of property as a thing conceals social
relations in a commodity system, then what is exchange concealing in gift systems of the Melanesian kind?
We require in turn a critique of the ideology of exchange rather than adopting it unexamined into analysis.12
The concept of 'reciprocity' in particular has drawn recent anthropological fire. Among many commentators,
from among and beyond Melanesianists, A. Weiner has supplanted interpretations that rest on notions of
reciprocity derived from The Gift (Mauss 1954) with a modelling of Massim exchange as a species of
reproduction. Exchange, she argues, feeds the way in which "transactions allow for the build-up and the
embeddedness of wealth and value in others" (1980:73; see also 1978; 1979; 1982). Reciprocity in exchange
cannot be taken as an independent social form.13 As will become apparent, my later arguments

                                                   page_144

                                                                                                       Page 145
dovetail with hers in so far as I attempt to elucidate different types of productivity. However, the impetus for
the present chapter comes from Josephides (1982; see also 1983; 1985a), a Highlands commentator who
tackles reciprocity in terms of its ideological dimension.
Although to some extent independently conceived, Josephides's argument can be related to those offered by
feminist anthropologists addressing the issue of sexual inequality in terms of class relations and exploitation
and the comparison of political economy types. As we have seen, there are advantages to such a position:
namely, it distances itself from cultural categories. In conventional accounts of gift exchange indigenous
formulations are captured for analytical purposes; it is not necessarily the case that the theoretical frame is
derived from them, but the kinds of data fed into it are. Actors' concepts about transactions or indebtedness
in gift relations are selected as the essential data. In the Melanesian systems, these also involve assumptions
about reciprocity and equality. Josephides queries the ease with which they have been taken on board. On
the one hand, her critique of gift ideology derives its force from considering gift exchange as constituting
relations of production; on the other, she discusses the way in which the 'equality' and 'reciprocity', on which
the exchanges appear to rest, disguise the nature of these relations.
For my part, I regard the argument about equality as something of a detour: the crucial observation to which
her thesis leads is that gift exchange conceals the conventions of reification. All the same, the detour is
worth making briefly, if only to dispose of a number of questions that lurk by the way.
'Gift economy', as a shorthand reference to systems of production and consumption where consumptive
production predominates, implies, in Gregory's terminology, that things and people assume the social form of
persons. They thus circulate as gifts, for the circulation creates relationships of a specific type, namely a
qualitative relationship between the parties to the exchange. This makes them reciprocally dependent upon
one another. Some dependencies are conceived of as prior to transactions, while others are constructed
during the course of the transaction itself. In the latter case, parties may come to the transaction as
independent social entities, a condition for the kind of reciprocity that ceremonial exchange partners in
Hagen, for instance, sustain between themselves. The outsider may establish these points through the
examination of social arrangements (political and kinship) contingent on the circulation of persons and
things; but it is the actors, of course,

                                                   page_145

                                                                                                       Page 146
who construe the qualitative nature of the relationships in terms of an 'exchange' or as a matter of parties to
the exchange being in a state of 'reciprocity'. As Sahlins (1972:134) warned, "everywhere in the world the
indigenous category for exploitation is 'reciprocity'."
Josephides's critique of the gift is directed specifically to the manner in which the sphere of ceremonial
exchange has been thus described for Hagen. She writes:
    the ideology of reciprocity, and especially in the form of ceremonial exchange in traditional Papua
    New Guinea societies like the Melpa of Mount Hagen, Western Highlands, serves to disguise actual
    inequalities in the distribution of social, political and economic power. (1982:1)
In other words, ceremonial exchange and its attendant norms of reciprocity are presented in a form that
mystifies power relations. She argues that they both hide inequalities between men and cover up the
productive base on which men's prestige-gaining activities rest. They thereby facilitate men's exploitation of
women's labor.
Her view of the systemic ('ideological') nature of this facilitation is a subtle one. Disguise is at issue in so far
as these ideas present a version of the relationships in question which promotes the interests of some of the
actors at the expense of others; thus she raises the question of divisive interests. But she does not imagine
that they belong to another order of reality. It can be argued that relations based on 'gift exchange' quite as
much as those based on 'kinship' function both as relations of production and as ideologies, in Friedman's
phrase (1974:445), upon which mythologies are built. These relations disguise features of themselves. 14
Josephides argues that "What is concealed ... in these [ceremonial] exchanges ... is the relationship between
the prestige gained there and productive labour; in other words the role of moka as the mode of
appropriation, and, in a wider sense, as relations of production" (1982:32). Consequently,
    to say that at the core of moka [Hagen ceremonial exchange] transactions is exploitation and
    domination, and all the rest is mere waste of social energy in converting and reconverting economic
    capital, is not to present a true picture of the economy; rather, as Bourdieu warns, it is to strip it to its
    final, material effects; in fact to impoverish and caricature it. For within a definition of economic
    activity is included also the activity that conceals its functionthe relation of 'misrecognition'. ... We
    have to penetrate to the 'deeper logic' to understand the economy; but at the same time we must
    realise that this 'deeper logic' would not be visible if it had no overt structures to support it [my
    emphasis]. (1982:32)

                                                     page_146

                                                                                                            Page 147
The crucial domination, she argues, is of big men over little as well as men over women. Her analysis
suggests that it is big men's inevitable interests in prestige and group aggrandizement and its converse that no
strong group could exist without a strong individual, which are the source of the misrecognition. Her insights
rest in turn on a fundamental premise about the nature of social life:
    I arrive at an irreducible socio-economic activity which I see not as culturally relative, but as being
    present in all societies and ordering power differentials. This is unequal access to the pool of human
    labour in a community which enables some people to control the labour power of others. Whether
    the control is direct or indirect, ... over or covert, enshrined in institutions or practised surreptitiously,
    it establishes and reproduces relations in which some social actors may exercise political dominance
    over the community. (1985b:18)
Most widely conceived, Josephides's argument is that to concentrate on gift exchange is to overlook the vital
sphere of production, a procedure that participates in indigenous evaluations:
    While the exchange sphere is said to be egalitarian, the productive domestic sphere is one of
    interdependence. Yet the egalitarianism of exchange is false, precisely because of its
    unacknowledged relationship to production; and the interdependence in production really supports
    hierarchical domestic relations. (1985a:1)
But in saying that I regard the issue of equality as a detour, I would comment that it is with respect to
adjudications over equality and inequality in the course of examining this 'egalitarianism' that she implements
the same kinds of property assumptions encountered in the discussions about hunter-gatherer economies.
Since Josephides addresses herself to Hagen, her comments have a special interest for me and I first
re-present some of the Hagen material to suggest how her very pertinent criticism of gift ideology
incorporates certain property ideas. It is this aspect of the root metaphor that importantly establishes the
exogenous viewpoint from which the criticism is made. But at the same time, it limits the criticism to its own
premises, viz., productive work and the disposal of its products. Let me repeat that the problem here is not
the bias of the criticism (the criticism is properly conceived of as drawing on a different frame of reference
from indigenous formulations). The problem is rather the form the bias takesthat it entails specific
assumptions about proprietorship that interfere with our understanding the indigenous premises of
Melanesian social action.

                                                    page_147

                                                                                                        Page 148

The Exploitation Of Female Labor
Aspects of Hagen domestic organization were introduced in chapter 4. The division of labor in subsistence
horticulture involves men clearing and fencing the land which women plant and harvest; pigs are raised,
tended and fed by women, to be used as wealth items in exchange transactions. These include bridewealth,
funeral and compensation payments, and also that class of gift giving, ceremonial exchange (moka), that
promotes men's prestige and political interests. Kin-based exchanges tend to be completed fairly quickly, and
any enduring transactions based on them develop a moka format. Shells, and nowadays money, circulate
alongside the pigs. Public ceremony is in the hands of men, and I coined the epithets 'producer' and
'transactor' to distinguish women's and men's places with respect to these activities (M. Strathern 1972).
Whereas men are both producers and transactors, women are by and large only producers. As one polygynist
declared: "Women are on our hands; they are not strong enough to do things themselves and we men look
after them. We men work with our hands, and women are on our hands and eat the food that comes up."
'Looking after' typifies relations between political allies and help given between clansmen as well as between
parents and children. It also typifies relations between husband and wife in so far as they contribute to one
another's enterprises. Thus, women are said to look after their husbands and sons. Both spouses may plant
their own patches of the cash crop coffee and may declare that each harvests the trees they have planted and
keeps the proceeds without regard to the other. Here a unitary relationship is conceptualized between the
planter and the yield, which applies also to the planting of foodstuffs. Such claims are exercised especially
by women, who jealously guard their crops against all comers (including husbands and children). And then,
in the same breath, they will also say that the husband 'looked after' his wife and gave her some of the trees
he had planted, or the wife 'looked after' him and picked coffee for him. Men's and women's labor is not
contrasted here; what is contrasted are the ends to which the labor is put.
Whereas husband and wife both look after each other, the husband is also in a position to acquire a name,
that is, public prestige. The help his wife gives him assists him in this, and in turn she may thereby participate
in his prestige. So, for instance, in the name of his potential prestige, a man may ask for monetary help from
his wife to buy a vehicle that will bear his and not her name. But the reverse transaction

                                                    page_148

                                                                                                        Page 149
is traditionally inconceivable. The same holds for the disposal of pigs. Husband and wife together rear
themthe pigs are tended daily by the wife, fed her food from land belonging to the husband's clanbut only the
husband can transform the pigs into gifts and dispatch them in ceremonial exchange. He makes a name for
himself; later he returns stock to his wife's care or allocates her pork; she gets more pigs, and/or pork but not
a name.
A small illustration may make the point, in relation to preparations a young man and his father were making
for ceremonial exchange (moka) in 1981. They had collected together cash sums from various female
relatives. The youth commented that the women were just helping them both, and it would be their own two
(the men's) names which would "go inside the ceremonial exchange." Pigs were also involved. There were
various pigs of the house which his mother and father would put in the moka. Both parents had looked after
the pigs together, but the father would, of course, transact with them. There would also be pigs gained from
his exchanges with other men. 15 However, in talking to me later, the mother herself used the unit model
that suggests an exclusive relationship between a planter and what she plants. She said that she was going to
contribute to the exchange apart from her husband, in the name of one of her immature sons. They were her
own pigs, she had tended them, and they would go in separately from others that the husband had acquired
from elsewhere.
These are not to be understood as conflicting property claims but rather as glosses put on differentiated
sources of production. Pigs may be seen as cared for by the wife, as the product of the spouses' joint labor,
or as ultimately derived from earlier transactions of the husband's. Yet the situation seems ripe for an
analysis of exploitation. Indeed, it is reminiscent of the Barotse case from central Africa scrutinized by
Frankenberg (1978). The notion of reciprocity in the division of labor between Barotse husband and wife,
and the legal fact that they have equal rights in the crops she has worked, serves to hide inequalities in their
access to productive resources. Frankenberg refers dryly to the wife's labor as rent for the land she works. A
wife's control over the fruits of her labor is restricted by her obligation to feed her family, and her claims to
land depend on her marriage to her husband. Her labor does not establish any independent entitlement.
These observations parallel Josephides's.
Josephides worked among the Kewa, to the south of Hagen. She describes Kewa ceremonial exchange in
which men distinguish, as Ha-

                                                    page_149

                                                                                                         Page 150
geners do, 'house pigs' that the wife has reared from pigs obtained by the husband's transactions and over
which the wife has diminished control. Because of all the coming and going of animals, in fact at any one
time most pigs can be shown to be the result of the husband's transactions, and are claimed by him as 'his'.
Thus Josephides argues, transactions mystify women's continuous input of labor. A wife must feed all the
pigs to which a husband lays claim, wherever they have come from, yet her labor does not necessarily
establish any entitlement to them. 16 Rather
   transaction upon transaction creates a smokescreen in which a woman's labour in the acquisition of
   exchange pigs is irretrievably lost. Women's labor receives official recognition at the pig feast, but
   this is exactly where the products of that labour are appropriated. The husband distributes pork,
   creating debts in his name. The wife may still enjoy the fruits of the returns if she remains with her
   husband, but if she separates and remarries she forfeits her investment. (1983:306)
Although Josephides points out that Kewa have no elaborate exchange cycles with a momentum of their
own, it is from a similar vantage point that she mounts her critique of the Hagen data. She argues that the
ethnographers had overlooked the ideological force of Hageners' rhetoric of reciprocity, which perpetrates
the myth that gifts create gifts. To regard items used in transactions as coming from transactions with others
obscures two things. It obscures inequalities in men's access to productive resources among themselves,
since the ability to obtain gifts is seen not as a matter of number of wives or size of gardens but of skill in
transactions. And in the case of pigs it obscures the considerable female labor that goes into their
maintenance. Since only men gain a name, they convert material into symbolic capital while excluding
women in the process. Relations between husband and wife might be represented as reciprocal (when they
speak of 'looking after' one another) but, she argues,
   it is the relationship between work and its product [my emphasis] that the system disguises. Formal
   reciprocity espouses a strict division of labour which is intrinsically unequal. ... The exchange is
   fetishised as creating wealth, whereas in reality wealth is merely appropriated [author's emphasis]
   there [in exchange] by being transformed into [men's] prestige. (1982:32)
Exchange, and not the labor that creates the product in the first place, is presented as creating wealth. This
sets the conditions for what she calls 'relations of exploitation'. Production is appropriated in the interests of
men. In raising pigs, women produce a man's most strategic

                                                    page_150

                                                                                                         Page 151
resource. For this reason, Hagen "men cannot allow their women rights of disposal over their products"
(1982:30). Appropriation is understood as inhering in the conversion of the products of work into material
capital (wealth) that can be converted into symbolic capital (prestige), excluding the producers as producers.
Ceremonial exchange, with its myth that gifts create gifts, thus hides the underlying fact that such exchange
is the means through which wealth is appropriated. The dogma of 'reciprocity' pretends that men come as
'equals' to their exchange partnerships; "what is suppressed is inequality of access to resources" (1982:3).
The domination of some men (those with the most productive resources) over others is covert. Domination
of women by men, however, is overt. Men and women must be conceptualized as different for the sexual
division of labor to operate, and as unequal since the work of one sex is accorded more social value than the
work of the other. The value is itself constructed through the disguise of economic capital by symbolic
capital, by the dogma that it is not the products of labor that are put into circulation but the result of
transactions, viz., gifts. Reciprocity between spouses glosses over the inequalities intrinsic to this division of
labor.
    Every transaction must be euphemized as a gift, because what is formally stressed is always the
    relationship between people transacting, rather than the acquisition of goods. This cultural emphasis
    covers up the unequal exchanges which take place between husband and wife, married man and
    bachelor, big man and his agnates. ... Gift economy, then, disguises unequal exchange and mystifies
    transactions as free gifts, yet at the same time presents them as wealth creators. (1985a:218, 220)
Inequalities are created, Josephides argues, in the relationship between production and exchange. The
ideological separation of production from transaction renders the producer's position inherently exploitable.
It may be a gentle rather than violent exploitation, the big man hiding behind kinship ideologies in order to
reproduce the relations of domination, 17 but we must recognize it as such. However, I build on Josephides's
insights through a gentle deconstruction. Two things interest me: first, the assumption that it is work which is
the subject of value conversion, so that one can speak of the appropriation of labor; and second, that persons
ought to own and retain control over what they do.
Domestic labor and the question of alienation. There is certainly a Western sense in which all value-
conversions are regarded as exploit-

                                                    page_151

                                                                                                        Page 152
ative, that is, the value that people acquire for themselves is seen to be at the expense of others. With
respect to wage-labor, extraction is envisaged in the form of alienation, because it is supposed that what lies
at the basis of value-conversion is something being done by other agents to the work people do or to the
products that embody their work. The worker does not determine their value. In effect, he/she has given up
control over the use of his/her labor. When Hagen men make gifts out of pigs, they do indeed transform
value: the animals have been reclassified. By turning pigs as food to be eaten into gifts to be exchanged, the
husband relocates their social origin: the pigs are now seen to be the result of other previous gift-transactions
by which they entered his household. As gifts, they circulate only to enhance men's names. Any credit that
comes to the wife is secondary. The case would seem to present evidence indeed for labor alienation in a
noncapitalist context through ''the concealment of the economic in a non-economic form" (Bonte 1981:39).
However, we cannot dismiss the fact that the concept of alienation is in the first place connected to
particular critiques of Western capitalism and class relations, as noted at the beginning of the chapter. In the
long term, this connection will prove relevant to the manner in which we apprehend modes of symbolization
and, in the immediate term, to the kinds of questions we ask about labor.
It is axiomatic to this critique that interests are advanced through the mystification of social relations. Par
excellence, the representation of commodities as 'goods' promotes them as objects with self-contained value,
capable of being owned and circulated as property, without reference to the social sources of production.
Goods are created with particular persons' concrete labors, but that labor is embodied in them as abstract
labor, so that their origin in the work of particular laborers is rendered irrelevant. They can thus be
appropriated as the new owner's 'property', attached to the owner by virtue of the owner's own actions:
ownership implies control over the alienability of things. This is possible in so far as labor and/or its products
may itself be construed as alienable property and put under the control of another. Here we have a
description, then, of the internal rationality of relations of production and of its constituent ideology by
which the separation of worker and product is taken for granted. However, another dimension tends to take
center stage in both feminist and anthropological arguments that draw on such critiques, and that is the
substantive question of control over domestic labor.

                                                    page_152

                                                                                                        Page 153
One issue facing the analysis of noncapitalist systems is that typically labor is not made abstractit remains
concretethat is, it remains indicative of its social origins and cannot be measured or quantified by criteria
common to all labor. The proposition applies, for instance, to the production of knowledge on Malo;
knowledge there has value because of its reference to specific persons and thus specific social sources. It
also applies to basic subsistence activities. If a division of labor between the sexes defines their relationship,
then the labor has no abstract value outside it (if a wife's job as a wife is doing X for her husband, she cannot
sell doing X to someone else). Indeed, in subsistence technologies of the Melanesian kind, the status of
domestic labor becomes relevant to the characterization of the whole economy.
As it was debated in the 1970s and early 1980s, the issue of domestic labor turns on the extent to which, in a
capitalist economy, domestic relations lie outside capitalist institutions or contribute to them. It also turns on
whether the very notion of concrete labor in the domestic contextthe way in which members of a household
are locked into rendering services to one anotheris not itself a mystification. The question is the nature of the
work being done. It has no 'social' value, not because the sources in particular persons are not acknowledged
but because it remains private labor. Not abstractable in terms of an average quantity, it has no currency and
thus no visibility outside the domestic sphere. 18
There is an interesting equivocation here: the Marxist-derived epithet 'social' refers to an abstract value (e.g.,
the socially necessary labor time inherent in the commodity), the anthropological epithet to particular,
nonquantifiable relations of all kinds. Thus Harris and Young (1981), agreeing that where production is not
for commodity exchange labor will not be abstracted but allocated by social criteria, add that the circulation
of goods and people must form part of the account of social reproduction as a whole. This nonetheless
prompts one, as Josephides was prompted, to ask the same question about concrete labor in noncapitalist
systems: what interests are served in the way the mobilization of labor is embedded in structures of kinship
or politics? If one relocates the question of production as the production of social relations through
circulation (of items, food, women, children, and men), by what mystifications do people represent these
structures? Can one regard gift exchange as analogous to exchange (i.e., 'distribution') in a commodity
system that separates such exchange from production and consumption as part of its own self-description? If
the social circulation of products

                                                    page_153

                                                                                                          Page 154
is consequently regarded as distinct from production, conceived as a self-contained process, the separation is
an ideological one in capitalist representations, concealing the process of alienation. Yet can we
concomitantly extend the argument that the gift, an appropriation of items produced by domestic labor, also
conceals the nature of these productive relations?
The argument has been extended in negative form: were such concealment not to take place, and the
productive base of exchange activity to be openly recognized, then exploitation based on alienation would
not occur. Feil (1984) takes this view in his study of Tombema Enga. 19 Relations of exchange, he says, are
equally relations of production, and since production and exchange are linked together, then men's and
women's complementary efforts are recognized (1984b:7980, 232). Women's labor is not alienated from
them, because the labor is never extracted: it remains embedded in the pigs that circulate as 'produced' items.
Thus although Feil (1984b:80) says that "only by exchanging them, by giving them away, does 'social value'
accrue to the producer of the pigs," he also regards exchange and production as a continuous process, so that
production is not thereby devalued. In other words, he denies that there is any conversion of value, or, if
there is, that at the point at which social value is created, it continues to bear reference to the joint activities
of both sexes. Significantly, women are seen as central to the very constitution of the exchange partnerships
(created through affinal and matrilineal links). Women's essential role in the formation of exchange
partnerships means that "relations of exchange are equally inalienable from them, for ... men cannot form
partnerships without women" (1984b:232).20
Feil adduces historical reasons for the rather different developments in Hagen society (see 1982a), which he
sees as leading there to women losing "their crucial role in and partial control of the exchange system"
because "[t]hey no longer helped produce the items of highest exchange value, pigs" (1984b:98), since shells
had become the most esteemed item. In Tombema, women's crucial role remained intact, and he refers to
husbands and wives as partners in ceremonial exchange. Prestige is to be gained for both. One basis for this,
he argues, is that "[p]igs are the inalienable property of the woman whose labour produced them [my
emphasis]" (1984b:118). A woman thus has rights of disposal over 'house pigs', that is, those produced within
her own household as opposed to those that come along the exchange 'road'. A property relation constitutes
rather peculiar grounds for arguing that women's labor is

                                                    page_154

                                                                                                          Page 155
not alienated! One may also note the asymmetry in his argument, that such pigs of the house are not also
classified as men's 'property', in spite of the complementary effort that went into their production. 21
Nevertheless, Feil's general point is that labor is not misrecognized; it does not undergo a value conversion
that renders it as something else, as Josephides suggested is the case in the Hagen conversion of the products
of labor into wealth and gifts.
The historical argument is to some extent a red herring. In a context where, as Feil correctly notes for Hagen,
production as a category of activity is devalued in certain situations, I want to argue both that labor is not
alienated and that there is nonetheless a radical value transformation that sustains the distinction between
production and transaction. There is a concealment, but it is not best grasped as the concealment of the
economic in a noneconomic form. There is domination but not domination through the exploitation of labor.
The Hagen ethnography (e.g., M. Strathern 1972) apparently gives the unfortunate impression that domestic
labor is women's labor. It was never the case, of course, that domestic production in Hagen was described as
engaging female labor alone. Men and women are both producers;22 it is in the rhetorical context of
evaluating transactions that men distinguish 'male' transaction from 'female' production, thereby feminizing
their own productive efforts. They eclipse their own productive activities as well as women's.23
I use the metaphor 'eclipse' to draw attention to a special feature of this concealment. It is not the case that
transforming pigs into gifts re-'produces' them, re-authors them in terms of production. It is not their own
(male) labor that is made the basis of their claims, as appears to be the case among the Sa-speakers of
Vanuatu. Sa men claim certain products "as incarnations of themselves, of their labour, thus obscuring the
interdependent nature of co-operation and the sexes in their production." Jolly adds: "although the ideology
correctly represents products as congealed human labor [it is not misrecognized as property], there is a
partial misrepresentation in that particular products, namely yams and pigs, are seen pre-eminently as the
creations of men"; this supports her analysis of relations here involving 'partial exploitation' (Jolly
1981:286287). By contrast, the evaluation of Hagen pigs as male wealth entails the apparently paradoxical
corollary that female labor as such is not concealed. The creative work of producing pigs is not denied; on
the contrary, the work that women do in their gardens and in tending the herds is fully acknowledged.

                                                   page_155

                                                                                                        Page 156
There is a puzzle here: Hagen work is not disguised as something else. The value switch does not affect the
products of work in the Sa sense, making out that the work belongs exclusively to one of a pair. Nor does it
affect it in the manner in which in the production of goods which as commodities every input of labor is
made more useful by the addition of further laborat each stage of a manufacturing process, the prior stage is
regarded as yielding a raw product, in a relatively useless form, which the manufacturer of the moment turns
into a more useful one. Hagen gifts in no sense make useful objects out of useless ones. On the contrary, that
use remains embedded in the domestic cycle and in the pigs' eventual consumption as food. It is when they
are consumed that the labor in producing them is recognized. The creation of a gift makes a quite different
entity out of the animals. Indeed, as gifts, there is an embargo on them being consumed. The gifts create
debts, and the debts sustain the circulation of pigs; they are re-transformed into use items only by the
original person who put the gift into the system and who decides to kill the pigs he gets back in return for his
initial investments. Both husband and wife eat: no one else can take the spouses' joint interest in the animal
out of the system. 24 Whatever work went into the production of the pigs, others cannot appropriate it as
work; they acquire the gift as a debt to be repaid.
Modjeska (1982:8586) has a comment on this process.
   Women find themselves labouring within a structure of social relations created by a flow of pigs in
   circulation, produced at least half by their own labour, and yet it is a world they never made. The
   surplus product can be returned completely to its producers without altering the alienations of a
   social edifice constructed by male-dominated circulation.
That the demands put on women are a consequence of men's operations should not be underemphasized.
Given the way work is oriented to social others, power lies in the effective definition of the scope of
relations that such work can create. It is scope about which Hagen women complain: they too would like to
be able to travel around all day visiting others.
Work as such is not being transformed. Rather it is a sphere of agency. Men who, like women, are produced
out of domestic households eclipse that social source in arrogating to themselves a domain of political action.
They do not encompass domestic relations, but they claim that their activities are not determined solely by
them. For instance, in the relationships created with exchange partners through

                                                   page_156
                                                                                                         Page 157
debts, it is dependency between kinsmen that is eclipsed. Hagen practice tends to make matrilateral and
affinal relations the basis for (further) moka partnerships and to set to one side the essential asymmetry of
such relations conceived in terms of domestic kinship. Elsewhere in the Highlands, through an elaboration of
kin-based exchange, the work of nurture and procreation does indeed create unilateral debts. Return gifts
acknowledge that work, although as we shall see there is more than acknowledgment of work at issue; such
exchanges also have ends of their own. Consonant with the last fact, Hagen ceremonial exchange displays
the exertion of male agency in creating a special set of effects. But, as in a lunar eclipse, for the effects to be
registered, there can be only partial concealment and not obliteration. It is in deliberate contradistinction to
domestic sociality that political life is created. Definitively, political life does not re-'produce' the
interdependencies and asymmetries of kinship.
This is the point at which to refer back to the supposition in the exploitation arguments that persons naturally
own what they do, that is, they own their own capacity to labor. Western proprietism inheres in the way
relations between persons and things are conceived through the metaphor of the commodity. Persons are
assumed to be the proprietors of their persons (including their own will, their energies, and work in the
general sense of directed activity). Hence commodity thinking supplies two sets of formula variously present
in the analyses considered here. We might imagine them (see pp. 134136) as the roots and branches of one
(Western) system of thinking.
The ideology and its critics occupy alternating positions. One is the thesis of market exchange, which
supposes that a product can be separated from the producer with no loss to the self (it can be freely bought
and sold). The antithesis is that every such separation in fact alienates the producer from part of him or
herself, namely his or her labor. The second thesis concerns private property, namely that proprietorship
instantiates an identity between owner and thing owned, between producer and product. Its antithesis is that
such a state is realized 'naturally' in the enjoyment of the use value of things but cannot be realized under the
conditions of labor alienation. What brings these ideas together is their resting on a common (cultural) notion
of a unitary self, the "possessive individual" (Illich 1982:11). 25 It was noted earlier that this holism supposes
an internal relation of a rather limited kind. Either the unitary self is an autonomous agent with control over
things external to him or her, but which, in his or her possession, is part of the person's

                                                    page_157

                                                                                                         Page 158
identity (thesis one and two), or else (antithesis one and two) the person is indissolubly linked to his or her
own activities in such a way that this unitary self is split apart when the products of activities are
appropriated by others. None of these Western propositions allows for the intervention of social others
except in the guise of a supplanted authorship or proprietorship. As long as things are 'owned' or the 'use
value' of labor is enjoyed, the one-to-one relationship between proprietor and product is assumed. The
visibility of such a one-to-one relationship gives the person's subjective autonomy with respect to others its
recognized cultural form.
The common proprietorial metaphor of an identity between the person as agent and the agent's acts/products
implies they are his or hers before they are appropriated by another. Specifically, the identity is that between
an act or product and the source of the act or product in an agent. For the postulate that people own
themselves is linked to the notion that they are the authors of their own actions. Authorship combines two
elements in this constellation of ideasthe property-derived conceptualization of legitimate ownership and the
critique based on a metaphysical definition of the conscious individual agent who is the singular source of
his/her own acts. Persons 'are' what they 'have' or 'do'. Any interference in the one-to-one relationship is
regarded as the intrusion of an 'other'. This other may supplant and in effect re-author activity by being the
source of a different value for it.
Now this looks, for a moment, rather close to what Hagen men are doing. They claim singular responsibility
of a kind: as wealth pigs are freshly conceptualized as the results of men's transactions, and thus their value
in exchange is the value that men have given to them. Indeed, men's collective identification with the
exchanges they create does produce a kind of unitary measure. There is a one-to-one relationship between a
man's performance in moka or public life in general and his name or prestige. But this identification is a
specific creation of male political life. In fact, men only achieve this state through a set of systematic
separations that render the sphere in which they claim prestige apart from domestic activity, where they are,
quite emphatically, not the singular proprietors of their own persons.
It is no surprise, then, that the paradoxically conceived contrast between root metaphors should yield further
paradox in turn. In a gift economy of the Hagen type, men lay singular claim to a sphere of political
activities, creating as artificial a unity that in a commodity

                                                   page_158

                                                                                                        Page 159
economy is supposed as a natural relation between the individual subject and his or her activities. Inversely,
the commodity supposition that it is culture or society that pluralizes and diversifies the values of things runs
counter to the supposition of the gift economy that persons are intrinsically plural and diverse in origin and
in their acts. With this in mind, let us return to the issues of exploitation and alienation.

Transformations
Ceremonial exchange activity of the Hagen kind is set off from domesticity and from production and
reproduction in household relations, as it is from the demands of personal kin ties. In this latter domain, work
remains concrete, specifiable by its social source. Moreover, since products are seen as constructed from
multiple sources, sustained as multiple, the products themselves remain multiply authored. Where work is
combined (as in the reproduction of children), one type of work cannot establish a claim over the product to
the exclusion of others. What is true of children is also true of foodstuffs and pigs produced by the
household. Indeed, whether we are dealing with kinship systems of the Hagen or Gimi type (see chap. 5),
such products replicate the discrete input of no one author: the child has neither the mother's nor father's
social identity but combines them both in an entity that in this sense is unique. It exists as a specific
combination of other identities. When wealth circulates in this domain (through bridewealth and child
payments, for instance), it will also carry a multiple identity. In Hagen, it is emphatically the achievement of
men's ceremonial exchange system that they transform this into a singular identity for themselves: wealth
comes to stand for that part of themselves which is then construed as their whole self, their prestige.
To emphasize the achievement of singular identity, I prefer to call this dynamic a transformation rather than
a conversion, because rank is not an issue. 26 'Subsistence wealth' and 'prestige wealth' are not to be
measured against one another. The two domains do not simply comprise different spheres of exchange: the
concept of wealth is freshly constituted, and it is this symbolic constitution that I wish to capture in the term
'transformation'. Conversion may well typify the mutual translation of gifts into words or into blows, and
vice versa, all within the domain of political action. Transformation consists in a switch from one domain to
another; it results in the very creation of wealth items

                                                   page_159

                                                                                                        Page 160
and their messages about the donor's and recipient's prestige. There has been a dramatic alteration in the
perception of the joint products of domestic interdependence.
In other words, it would mislead to present the case as the supplanting of one proprietor by another, or as
though the conversion from economic capital into symbolic capital substituted one relation of unitary
identity for another. The transformation in the Hagen case is the creation of a unitary identity (for men) out
of a multiply constituted identity.
This being so, perhaps one should abandon the term labor altogether. If we follow the distinction between
work (purposive activity in the production process that creates use value) and labor (which is apprehended
as having social value) as Ollman (1976:98) elucidates it in his discussion of Engels and Marx's terminology,
one would have to say that in the Hagen case 'labor' is not an instituted category. 27 That is, there is no
objectification of work apart from its performance. It is social relations that are objectified in pigs and
gardens: work cannot be measured separately from relationships.
This is highly pertinent to the way in which the multiple identity of persons is evinced in the sphere of
domestic kinship. I take the Hagen division of labor between spouses as the principal relation out of which
the values established in ceremonial exchange are constructed. Between husband and wife, we have seen
that the work each of them does demonstrates both motivation ('mind') and intentionality as well as
commitment to their relationship. When people consider the work that went into producing pigs, neither the
woman's nor the man's work can encompass that of the other partner. The pig is multiply produced, and I say
multiply rather than dually in order to retain a reference to the open-ended transactions with (multiple) kin
of all kinds in which any particular set of transactions, including those between spouses, is enveloped. As a
product of the relationship between the conjugal partners, the pig is not reducible to the sole interest of
either party. Now the work of feeding pigs is not part of them in the eyes of its recipient in moka: what is in
his eyes are the animals he will eventually match (his debt). The donor, on the other hand, cannot recall such
work independently from his domestic relationships. To think of the work embodied in the pig is to think of
the value husband and wife have for each other. A man takes a fattened animal as a sign of his wife's care (it
is when he does not that conflict arises). Conversely, the wife is not an owner of the pig who can transfer
that ownership to someone else or who has

                                                    page_160

                                                                                                         Page 161
it wrested from her control, because there is no one-to-one relationship between her and her working
capacity or between her working capacity and the products of her work.
Here is the crucial factor that makes it impossible to speak of alienations in the gift economy. 28 Gregory
stressed that it was particularly between exchange partners that a tie was created by the transfer of
inalienable things; the point may be extended, with qualification, to spouses. Inalienability signifies the
absence of a property relation.29 Rather than talking about 'inalienable property', I prefer to sustain the
systemic contrast. Persons simply do not have alienable items, that is, property, at their disposal; they can
only dispose of items by enchaining themselves in relations with others. Whether between exchange
partners, spouses, or between kin, the circulation of things and persons in this sense leads to comparisons
between the agents. Items cannot be disposed without reference to such relations.
Enchainment is a condition of all relations based on the gift. The inevitability of enchainment reveals a
continuity between kin-based relationships and those of ceremonial exchange. Indeed, I would argue that it
may extend to barter and indigenous market transactions (Godelier 1977; Gewertz 1983) in so far as people
are tied to a perception of traders as enemies, victors, strangers, or whatever and thus to comparison
between themselves and these outsiders. And Hagen men might attempt to transform domestic sociality into
political sociality, but they cannot do it by freeing themselves of enchainment altogether. On the contrary,
they establish new forms of dependency in the reciprocity that defines exchange partners. Partners compare
themselves with one another. This dependency in turn is a condition for the accretion of prestige; in this
sense, the wealth objectifies persons, that is, their relations with others.
The difference between gift exchange and commodity exchange is systemic; it is hardly admissible to decide
that this particular transaction results in alienation, while that particular one does not. One cannot tell by
inspection. For sometimes it is suggested that all that is at issue is the continuing 'ownership' or, if not that,
'control' exercised by the producer or transactor.
Thus I understand Feil's insistence that Tombema women's 'ownership' of the pigs they produce means that
their 'labor' is not alienated.30 This assumes that alienation occurs where the original person loses control
over what happens to the item in question. The evidence now to hand suggests the following objections,
among others. First, it is not

                                                    page_161

                                                                                                         Page 162
of course the relationship to the item which should be considered but relations through others with respect to
the item and thus to the kinds of debts that are created. The cultural form of relationships becomes pertinent.
For instance, the Melanesian idea that work is evidence of and governed by the mind precludes its
appropriation: one person's mind cannot be put to another's use; instead, it is through appeals to the mind
that people try to exert influence. Second, one cannot argue that women's work is not alienated as long as
women are looking after pigs, but it is once the pigs are disposed of. Either work is alienable or it is not.
Alienation occurs at the point at which its objectified social value, as labor, is determined in such a way as to
preclude it as a value for the laborer. One might envisage that alienation occurs when the products of work
are classified as wealth, but in fact, if work is not in a technical sense labor, we lack the crucial middle term
that makes sense of the shorthand that work is simply converted into wealth. Finally, in a commodity
economy where all objectifications are alienable, if one's own products are enjoyed as (private) property, this
does not mean they are not alienable from one's person. Even if it is the person's own labor that created it,
the item now stands in contradistinction to his or her subjective agency. Simply owning what you have made
does not preclude its alienability. On the contrary, what is owned, so to speak, is control over the conditions
of its alienation. For the possibility of (future) alienation has already created a division between the self and
its products. 31
Hagen wives are clearly put into the position of 'helping' their husbands to gain names while they themselves
gain none. Yet the character of this domination is not to be grasped by assimilating it to the exploitation of
labor in commodity economies.
The Western concept of exploitation rests ultimately on the idea that violence can be done to a supposed
intrinsic relation between the self as subject and its realization in the objects of its activities. I have stressed
that this entails a view of agents as single entities, as singular authors of what they make and do. The
partibility of persons under the regime of a gift economy is very different from the positive or negative, but
either way 'unnatural', dividing of the 'whole' self in a commodity regime. In a society such as Hagen,
persons do not have to strive for singular identities in the domain in which they are produced, viz., that of
domestic kinship. Other items are also produced here. As we have seen, these products are multiply created.
That is, food fed to a pig by the wife is grown on land of the husband's clan, cleared by the husband,

                                                     page_162

                                                                                                           Page 163
planted by the wife, and only an exogenous theory of labor extraction would hierarchize these mutual
investments. Neither husband nor wife can claim sole ownership vis-à-vis one another, because the
relationship between them is constituted on a differentiated input of work into joint products. Sole
'ownership' is claimed by the husband only vis-à-vis other husbands, in the sphere of ceremonial exchange.
The situation is not closed to manipulation. Individuals wanting to make claims in one context will force
their cross-sex partner to enable them to put the claim forward. It may well be against his wife's wishes that
a husband takes off a pig for a particular purpose; yet though she may be screaming out her objections, he
has not extracted it from her to dispose of without further regard. Removing the pig from the house stalls to
display on the ceremonial ground does not remove his obligations. As far as that pig is concerned, the
husband is still obliged when the time comes to yield her part in it, by handing over pork when, at the end of
a chain of transactions, pigs are killed, or by replacing that pig when live pigs come back in return. In fact,
women are likely to receive something both ways, and on the basis of a pig being sent away, will get back
both pork and more pigs and in the interim may lay claim to other pigs that come in to the household from
unrelated transactions.
If work produces relationships, men's own work embedded in domestic relationships, as between husband
and wife, is eclipsed. From the point of view of the collective activities of ceremonial exchange,
particularistic domestic relations come to appear subordinate. Yet what is transformed is not the work which
the husband contributed towards joint production, any more than it is his wife's work, for that input remains
intact in the relationship between the spouses. What is transformed is the part which this source of his social
identity plays in relation to his (multiple) other identities. There is a switch in the way items are attached to
the person. Thus the relationship established by the mutual contribution of work within the household is
differently constructed from the relationship established between exchange partners. One person cannot
'give' work to another, in the way that a donor gives a gift (or 'thing' in the Hagen language) to a recipient.
Such 'things' appear to be created by transactions, not by work.
One consequence of the division of labor is that a husband or wife does not transform the work of the other
into use for her or his own self. The relationship between work and motivation is important. Items produced
for the use of another are not subordinated to some overriding purpose that redefines the ends for which
they are conceived, and hence

                                                     page_163

                                                                                                           Page 164
their value to the advantage of one rather than the other, as in the classical sense of exploitation. Each
acknowledges and consumes the products of the other as such.
Under a commodity regime, purposive activity results in artifacts; hence 'work' can be equated with 'making
things', and hence a crucial relationship to investigate, as Josephides indicates, is that between producer and
product. Hagen work is also purposive activity but is directed towards effectiveness in relationships. Work
includes making things, but things are instruments of relations, and the creation of relations is not disguised.
Work produces or makes visible a relationship, for example between husband and wife. A person's activities
become overt evidence of their intentions. Consequently, the products of work are expressive of the person's
own mind, what she or he decides to do. But a person's mind is known not only by its singular location in the
chest; there it lies hidden. The mind is made visible in the context of multiple social relations with others.
Evidence of a child's growing mind lies in its capacity to see its duty towards others. A person may thus
intend to do things for another: the intention is her or his own but is directed away from the self; its social
object is another. 32 A pig a woman raises is evidence of her effort; but her effort flourishes in the context of
an orientation towards her partner, and in that sense its outcome belongs to him as well. That a woman may
regard a pig as under the direction of her energies is not at all incompatible with the context of her regard,
rearing an animal the husband will use in his exchanges. If she wants to make a point of dispute against the
husband, then she will reclassify the social orientation of her work, not by saying that it was for herself but
(in the instance cited earlier) that it was for a son.
The example recalls an awkward point. I have neglected an observation introduced at the beginningthe
unitary nature of the relationship women assume in claiming total control over the crops they plant.
Although men also claim similar control over sugarcane and other luxury crops, it is women for whom these
claims are especially important. (Indeed, men's parallel 'control' is perhaps built on an analogy to women's,
much as women's help in ceremonial exchange gives them an analogous 'prestige' to men's.) It is significant
that this control is exercised during the growing of the plants and to the point of harvest. Subsequently,
claims on the woman's caretaking take the form of claims on the harvested food she has at her disposal; but
during the growing time, while the crops are in the ground, they are uniquely hers as their planter.

                                                   page_164

                                                                                                       Page 165
Hagen views are not as developed as the exclusive proprietorship claimed by Gimi women who assimilate
growing things to their own substance (chap. 5). In fact, the Hagen identification of the crops with the
woman's person lasts only as long as they are also in explicit relation to the ground with which her husband
(or son or sometimes brother) is identified. The link between herself and the crop is via her particular
concrete work. One could suggest an analogy here with men's contrivances in ceremonial exchange. The
unitary connectionthe identification of the growing plants with the woman who watches over themis a
deliberate achievement in this sphere. It operates to a precise effect to bring the plants to maturation. Once
the crops are taken out of the ground, they are no longer the woman's own. Instead they are reactivatedlike
the pigs that return to the householdin terms of their multiple social sources. (The plants cared for by the
wife were nourished by the husband's work on his clan land.) Thus a husband has irrefutable claims on a
woman's harvested food, where he would never help himself to her planted gardens.
If we were to argue that men's deployment of pigs in moka exploits female 'labor', in so far as women are
never in a position to realize the full 'social' value of their work, we would have to argue a counterpoint for
women's claims over the crops they grow. When women prevent men from helping themselves to food
growing in the gardens, they could be said to deny the productive input from men's preparation of the soil.
However, I have labored the characterization of gift as opposed to commodity economies not simply to
conclude with an equivocal evaluation of the inequality between men and women. Rather, I have wished to
formulate the basis of the transformation that men effect in creating wealth items 'out of' the products of
domestic relations. The general enchainment of relations means that persons are multiply constituted. There
is no presumption of an innate unity: such an identity is only created to special, transient effect. The
transformation is made visible, then, as one which turns multiple into single sources of identity. Exactly the
same process occurs in the association of women with growing crops. A multiple identity is overridden by
her exclusive claims. At the heart of domestic relations, then, as well as beyond them, an effect depends on
eclipsing the multiple or composite character of persons and things.
A theme intrinsic to these four chapters has been the relationship between collective and particular relations.
The relationship is evinced

                                                   page_165

                                                                                                       Page 166
in the contrast between two types of sociality, which for the moment we may consider in their shorthand
form as characterizing political and domestic domains. One comparison between ceremonial exchange and
male cult performances can be made explicit in this regard. It holds for both that in transforming domestic
(multiple) sociality, men eclipse this sphere of their own identity. It is an operation they perform upon
themselves, for they consequently refashion their own visible qualities, and their own minds.
That being the case, we might ask what form domination takes in a gift economy. A preliminary answer can
be given through pointing to an interesting lacuna in the present discussionthere has been no reference to
surplus. Since it is the appropriation of surplus product that is held to lie at the basis of capitalist exploitation,
an obvious comparative question is how surplus is realized in a gift economy. Surplus is a problematic term:
33 a relationship between input and output tends to be confused with the scale of production, so that it may
even be argued that technologies of themselves lead to surpluses which can then be appropriated (e.g., that
some horticultural systems produce an excess over subsistence needs). There is no doubt, as Brown (1978)
and Modjeska (1982) make clear, that within the Papua New Guinea Highlands considerable differences
exist in the levels of horticultural and pig production. I would follow Modjeska's comment that magnification
of pig production is to be associated with the magnification of mediated forms of relations, that is, relations
based on wealth exchanges. But what needs explaining are the conceptual categories (wealth, mediation):
the quantity of goods is after the fact.
Sahlins (1972: chap. 5) proposed an answer to the question of domination by treating gift economies literally
as economic systems. As systems for the redistribution of goods, the extraction of surplus takes place at the
point of distribution, not production. The extractors are those who gain advantage for themselves in
controlling the flow of goods. But we can add here a twist concerning the classification of that advantage.
No conceptualization of 'surplus' is required. In transforming subsistence items into wealth items, men are
not in the first place performing operations on these items. They are performing operations on themselves
and thus on their relations with others, much as initiators/initiands do in the course of their rituals. They are
altering the manner in which objects are attached to them and the meaning these objects hold for their
identity. This can only be done if they are seen to create one type of relationship out of another.
Concomitantly, every-

                                                     page_166

                                                                                                            Page 167
thing turns on how the items that objectify these relations are attached to and thus mediate between persons.
The number of pigs would not matter so much if increment in ceremonial exchange were not defined as
evidence of one's capacity to make relationships.
The appropriation of surplus product is central to a commodity economy; those who dominate are those who
determine the manner of appropriation. In a gift economy, we might argue that those who dominate are those
who determine the connections and disconnections created by the circulation of objects.
Indeed, if we follow through the inversely formulated root metaphors of commodity and gift economies, then
we might recover an important implication of Josephides's argument. 34 Commodity exchange involves a
process, to quote Godelier (1977:156) again, by which the essence of the commodity's value ''disappears in
its mode of appearance." Its value, social and therefore abstract human labor, "can only be expressed in a
form, the 'equivalent form', which conceals it by making it appear a natural characteristic of things." Gift
exchange, by contrast, involves a process in which human value is made apparent. Social relations are
alternately eclipsed and revealed, but the partial concealment that results makes a drama out of their
potential visibility.
If that process of eclipse and revelation conceals and thus mystifies anything, it is the conventions of
reification. And thus concealed, as we would see it, is the extent to which the things that people make stand
over and beyond them. We apprehend things as imposing their own material limitations on the management
of human affairs, including relationships between men and women. There is an analogy or metaphor here for
what we might wish to know about such management. If analysis can make explicit the social relations
contained within the reified nature of the commodity, then it can also make explicit the dependency of the
relations of gift exchange upon the nature of things. One would understand as constraints, then, the symbolic
conventions by which social relations are indeed the overt objects of Melanesians' dealings with one another.

                                                     page_167

                                                                                                            Page 169


PART TWO

                                                     page_169
                                                                                                         Page 171



7
Some Definitions
Speaking of the regenerative power that Tubetube people in the southern Massim, off the coast of Papua
New Guinea, ascribe to shells, Macintyre observes,
   [w]hereas commodity fetishism abstracts the human activity that produced an item from its producer
   and ascribes it to the product, the ascription of reproductivity to shell valuables ideologically
   reaffirms the centrality of human agency in production. (1984:113)
To the far east of Tubetube lies Sabarl. The wealth items that there flow between people are said to look like
people, the shadow they cast being linguistically classified as animate (Battaglia 1983a:291). Battaglia's
description of wealth items does not stop at discerning anthropomorphic form. Hafted axes and shell
valuables do not simply depict human beings but depict the relationships between persons. The 'elbow' of the
ax represents the vital turning point in a person's relations with the father's kin; the strands and colors of red
shell necklaces not only refer to their procreative powers but to the relationship between maternal images of
corporation and paternal images of individuation. To state that these wealth objects are 'personifications' is
not to set them against 'objectifications', for that implies an unwarranted double participation in the equation
between subjects and persons, and the separation of subjects from objects, promoted by commodity
fetishism. Objects are created not in contradistinction to persons but out of persons.

                                                    page_171

                                                                                                         Page 172
Objects are so created through various overt indigenous equations (such as the connection between elbow
and ax) and separations (maternal kin disconnected from paternal). From a Western point of view, thereby
concealed is the conventional nature of such 'symbols'what we normally recognize as their 'expressive'
character. In our own world, whether symbols take the form of people or things, they are, like all other
things, regarded as the products of society and culture. For a commodity world view sees work as producing
things and regards relationships as created through the social or collective ownership, distribution
('exchange'), and consumption of things (Sahlins 1976:211). Symbolic interests are set against material ones
(Bourdieu 1977:177). This holds also for symbolic 'relationships'. Relations between symbols, whether or not
they are reducible to an infinitude of binary oppositions, are regarded as composing a classificatory system
that orders its component units like so many segments of a society. The relation between a symbol and what
it stands for thus occupies a position analogous to that of the commodity with its dually derived values
(Reason 1979) or of the person who is a microcosm of the domesticating process. Consequently, one thing
can stand for another thing, we hold, as a cultural expression relates to what it expresses, and one thing can
be converted into another under appropriate circumstances, as concrete into abstract labor.
But in a world where social relations are the objects of people's dealings with one another, it will follow
that social relations can only turn into (other) social relations, and social relations can only stand for (other)
social relations. Thus might we imagine, for instance, the two types of (political/domestic) sociality to which
I have referred, the one created out of the other. Indeed, although it may sound counterintuitive, it is also
possible to regard the one as an alternative form of the other.
The contrast imagined here between Western and Melanesian worlds applies equally to the nature of
symbolic constructions themselves. I doubt if the people of Tubetube and Sabarl speak of one relation
'standing for' or even 'turning into' another. We know that on Sabarl Island it might be more appropriate to
use the concepts of 'support' and 'complementarity'.
Supports (labe) are of different identity but assist one another: "one item structuring or positioning an
analogous one without essentially changing it"; complementary relationships (gaba), however, stress "the
oppositional aspect of paired elements and the process of completing, or bringing to potential, one of the pair
through the other" (Battaglia

                                                    page_172
                                                                                                       Page 173
1983:292). The Sabarl terms for the two types of relationship clearly distinguish them by their functions; at
the same time, the one may be used as a metaphor of the other (so that complementary relationships may be
said to be supportive). It is no surprise that the same items (ax blade and shaft) or the same social persons
(husband and wife) may be connected by either relation. The fusion is not accidental: both principles are
said to underpin Sabarl growth and health. When maternal and paternal food are considered as 'supports' for
one another (labe), "pigs provided by affines support the yams from the matriclan" (Battaglia 1983a:292),
each positioning the other without changing it. In a gaba relationship, which entails an internal relation of
opposition, "fat complements the bones and flesh of the fetus, completing the physical person"
(1983:292293). Mortuary ceremonies transform support relations between certain kin into opposition ones,
and the terms can thus refer to the same items in different states. The result one might note is that "paired
complementary items are neither in balance nor ever unequal in any fixed sense [original emphasis]"
(1983a:293).
We do not necessarily need to adopt the Sarbal formulation. We do need to pay attention to the fact that it is
the capabilities of relations, not the attributes of things, which are the focus of these operations. And since
we have already encountered the proposition that persons and things have the social form of persons, we
know in what form the objectification of relations so appears in people's dealings with one another. The
objectifications are realized in persons.
This, in turn, constrains the manner in which difference, and thus the basis for connection, can be registered.
Connections between social relations, like connections between persons, have to be experienced in terms of
their changing effects upon one another. Relations and persons become in effect homologous, the capabilities
of persons revealing the social relations of which they are composed, and social relations revealing the
persons they produce. But revelation also depends upon the techniques by which one entitya person, a
relationshipis seen to be differentiated from and to have an impact upon another. Persons appear as
individuated women and men with influence and power at their disposal; relationships appear to contain or
extend people's potentialities.
My account is thus lured into considering ideas about cause and effect. The constitution or capability of one
person becomes externalized by he or she drawing out of another a counter condition. This response in turn,
of course, provides the actor with the very evidence of his or her own internal capability. And the other is
not necessarily

                                                   page_173

                                                                                                       Page 174
another human being. Munn observes of men from Gawa Island, to the north of both Tubetube and Sabarl,
that although "they appear to be the agents in defining shell value, in fact, without shells men cannot define
their own value: in this respect, shells and men are reciprocally agents of each other's value definition"
(1983:283). In lieu, then, of a theory of symbolic construction, as we would reckon it, we find a Melanesian
theory of social action. Action is understood as an effect, as a performance or presentation, a mutual
estimation of value. Such presentation we might be tempted to call 'representation'; in indigenous terms it is
perhaps better apprehended as 'knowledge'. "A symbolic expression is the actualization rather than the
representation of people's shared understandings" (Clay 1977:3).
This description accords with recent re-thinkings of the nature of symbolic activity, in critiques of the
supposition that we can understand symbols simply as expressive instruments of meaning (e.g., Bloch 1980;
1985; Sperber 1975; and among Melanesianists, Harrison 1985a; Lewis 1980; Schieffelin 1985; Wagner
1972; 1975; 1978; J. Weiner [in press]). A performance is not necessarily a performative.
I take an example from about as far from Sabarl as one can travel in Papua New Guinea. Writing of the
Mianmin, a Mountain Ok people near the western border with Irian Jaya, Gardner (1983) criticizes analyses
of initiation and other rituals that regard them as simply instantiating by their acts a known state. The aim of
Mianmin ritual action is to change states and create effects, but not in the constitutive sense by which
performatives are defined. Mianmin so act in a context of uncertainty about outcome, which makes every
performance also an improvization. A successful outcome may be judged in the display itself, but this is only
then to be judged by subsequent effects, in the long term affairs of the community. Magical and practical
techniques "are not intended to be 'performed' [qua performative] or followed as a 'code', but rather used as
the basis of inventive improvisation" (Wagner 1975:88, emphasis removed).
Indeed, Wagner's is the most elegant formulation of this theoretical position, for it encapsulates both Western
and Melanesian proclivities, the idea of a symbol both as a conventional, artificial expression of something
already (invented) existing in itself, and as the inventive desire to draw out of relations and persons the
innate (conventionalized) capacities that lie within them. Where the one rests on a linking notion of
arbitrariness (culture), the other rests on a notion of uncertainty (and thus of power), of a state not being a
state in any fixed sense.

                                                  page_174

                                                                                                      Page 175
The status of these constructs must be specified. In the same way as the root metaphors of the commodity
and gift economy were grasped as an inverse construction, so we may also grasp these differences in
symbolization. I present them in terms of a self-contained contrast. Consonant with the fictions through
which my account is composed, the relationship between invention and convention is like that between
person and thing, or between consumption and production; the one concept contextualizes the other. And
like gift and commodity, they necessarily derive from the symbolic practices of a commodity economy. But
the predominance of one or other term may serve to capture the distinctiveness of an intrinsic cultural form.
I quote Wagner:
   Convention, which integrates an act into the collectivity, serves the purpose of drawing collective
   distinctions between the innate and the realm of human action. Invention, which has the effect of
   continually differentiating acts and events from the conventional, continually puts together
   ('metaphorizes') and integrates disparate contexts (1975:53). ... And because both kinds of
   objectification take place in every cultural act (one in an explicit and 'masking' role, the other in an
   implicit and 'masked' one), it follows that every such act involves the interplay of invention and
   convention. (1975:45 my emphasis)
   If Americans and other Westerners create the incidental world by constantly trying to predict,
   rationalize, and order it, then tribal, religious, and peasant peoples create their universe of innate
   convention by constantly trying to change, readjust, and impinge upon it. Our concern is that of
   bringing things into an ordered and consistent relation .... and we call the summation of our efforts
   Culture. Their concern might be thought of as an effort to 'knock the conventional off balance,' and
   so make themselves powerful and unique in relation to it. (1975:8788)
The contrast is, of course, a technique of our own devising for making the suppositions of others 'appear'
with some autonomy in our accounts. The chapters that follow draw on a number of Wagner's own
techniques as well as allude to his Highlands ethnography. For the necessity for such devising continues, as
must critiques of this kind, because of the tenacity of our own intervening metaphors. The chapters of part 1
were intended to give some sense of that tenacity and in places one would least expect.
It is both interesting and incidental that it was a Melanesianist (Leenhardt) who in 1947 formulated the
notion of a mode of thought that juxtaposes but does not classify, and an historian who unearthed this
prescience with a comment on that significant "break with common habits of closure and wholeness,
structures of the intellect and the body" (Clifford 1982:181). But the break never became one.

                                                  page_175

                                                                                                      Page 176

Objectification
Where objects take the form of persons, actions and activities necessarily reveal the person in turn as a
microcosm of social relations. What become hidden are the techniques of reification, the conventionalized
assumptions through which revelation works. Yet such conventions have wide ranging consequences for the
conduct of people's lives. Let me try to make these consequences appear by continuing with the set of
contrasts I have chosen for myself.
Critiques of commodity ideology, which supposes that labor is a thing, point out that labor in fact originates
in the work of persons. If gift ideology supposes that work produces relations between persons, then the
countercritique might point out that while relations are sustained through the mediation of things, these
things have an independent existence and character which will also determine the manner in which relations
are structured. But as we shall see, what is crucial is not their materiality as such (Sahlins's 'practical
reason'), the fact of them having substance that may be consumed/utilized. It is the specific form or shape
they take that matters.
By objectification I understand the manner in which persons and things are construed as having value, that
is, are objects of people's subjective regard or of their creation. 1 Reification and personification are the
symbolic mechanisms or techniques by which this is done.
These terms refer to nothing other than relations between concepts: they embody certain concepts of
relations. My recursive formula is deliberatean internal play on the terms of a metaphor derived from one
component of commodity thinking, namely its analogy between things and persons. If these concepts thus
refer to anything it is to the forms in which persons make things appear and the things through which persons
appear, and thus with the 'making' (-ification) of persons and things. That in a commodity economy things
and persons take the form of things (p. 134) is encompassed in the proposition that objects (of whatever
kind) are reified as things-in-themselves. Concomitantly, in a gift economy, objects act as persons in relation
to one another.
In using objectification as a basis of comparison between the two 'economies', I make the assumption that
one can so perceive similar processes in each. At the same time, one perceives their difference. If we take
symbols as the mechanisms through which people make the world known (objectify it), these mechanisms
themselves may or may not be an explicit source of their own knowledge practices. The

                                                    page_176

                                                                                                         Page 177
commodity logic of Westerners leads them to search for knowledge about things (and persons as things); the
gift logic of Melanesians to make known to themselves persons (and things as persons). For the one makes
an explicit practice out of apprehending the nature or character (convention) of objects, the other their
capabilities or animate powers (invention). If I call these practices reification and personification then, in the
first case people are making objects appear as things, in the second as persons.
Personification: separation and exchange: A helpful starting point is a commentary on Marx's views of the
objectification of capitalist labor. A summary of his position goes as follows: "[B]y transforming the objects
of his environment, man not only satisfies his needs and gives them value, but he also separates the objects
and makes them his own. The transformation of objects into possessions is through labour" (Ortiz 1979:210).
The process of objectification here establishes a relation between subjects and the objects of their regard that
is known through the separation of one from the other. Reification is its overt mechanism. And the
reification of objects is created through commodity exchange, through the equivalence of forms that
Godelier notes. Thus do the objects of people's relations with one another appear to be things, as may indeed
the objects of a person's creativity, both encapsulated in the Western idea that work produces things.
The Melanesian personification of objects is also established by separations. But the separations are
constituted in discrete social identities. It is the (social) separation of persons as distinct from one another
that provides the precondition for objectification. Work ('production') thus appears to produce relationsto
give the orientation of a person's activities value in the regard of a differentiated other. Transactions, as in
ceremonial exchange, may be considered in the same way. Here a relationship is objectified through items
(such as valuables) which pass between donor and recipient. In so far as they are 'transacted', they have a
social identity different from the transactors. This 'separation' is accomplished in turn through the way in
which the relationships are defined.
Thus items become separable under the following condition: they are separated from the donor in so far as
they are transacted with another whose social identity is not that of the donor him/herself. The very fact that
the item is received by another means that its significance cannot be the same for the donor as before the
transaction. In so far

                                                    page_177

                                                                                                         Page 178
as it mediates and thus has an effect upon the relationship between them (donor and recipient), it stands for
that part of the donor invested in the relationship, appositely to some other aspect of the donor's identity.
Thus 'objects' are created out of what these persons can dispose of because of the social separation of the
interests of the parties to the transaction. In sum, relations are objectified by persons and things being
separable or detachable from one another, and this condition of separation is known, in turn, from the
relations that ensue. In this sense, the possibility of producing or creating relationships, of taking some action
with respect to them, is itself a precondition to separation or detachment.
The processes just described, however, commence at different conceptual points. The result is two symbolic
modes that we can call modes of exchange. And using persons as the form in which objectification is made
visible seems in Melanesian cultures to be limited to drawing on one or the other mode.
First, as in ceremonial exchange transactions, things are conceptualized as parts of persons. Persons or things
may be transferred as 'standing for' (in our terms) parts of persons. This construction thus produces objects
(the person as a 'part' of a personhim or herself or another) which can circulate between persons and mediate
their relationship. As parts, then, these objects create mediated relations. They are not, of course,
apprehended as standing for persons: that is our construction. They are apprehended as extracted from one
and absorbed by another. Donors and recipients are consequently regarded as distinguished from one another
by the way these items, such as valuables, are detached from or attached to their persons. The second mode
I call unmediated. It characterizes the work of production. Persons do not detach parts of themselves:
whereas in mediated exchange a person's influence upon another is carried in the 'part' that passes between
them, here effects are experienced directly. What are separately conceived as products of the activity
embody the effects in a different form, as we shall see. Persons are construed as having a direct influence on
the minds or bodies of those to whom they are thus related. The capacity to have an unmediated effect
creates a distinguishing asymmetry between the parties.
The content of this contrast may be grasped in many ways. Through mediated relations, items flow between
persons, creating their mutual enchainment. The items carry the influence that one partner may hope to have
on another. Through unmediated relations, one person directly

                                                  page_178

                                                                                                     Page 179
affects the disposition of another towards him or her, or that person's health and growth, of which the work
that spouses do for one another or the mother's capability to grow a child within her are examples. Or one
may think of the contrast between the circulation of blows in warfare, and the harm that one body can do to
another because of its very nature, as evinced in so-called pollution beliefs. Despite the absence of mediating
objects, these latter interactions have the form of an 'exchange' in so far as each party is affected by the
other; for instance, a mother is held to 'grow' a child because the child, so to speak, also 'grows' her.
Yet whereas the first mode of symbolization is recognizable to us through Mauss's description of gift
exchangepersons transfer parts of themselvesthe second would not normally be recognized as a type of
exchange at all. However, the earlier remark that social relations take the form of gift exchange is meant to
include both mediated and unmediated modes within a single type, for they are created within the frame of a
single conceptual system. Though there are differences between them, the differences are related to each
other. One cannot, out of the workings of Melanesian social action, extract one set of relations as typical of
'gift relations' and another as typical of non-gift relations: the unmediated mode takes its force from the
presence of the mediated mode, and vice versa. I therefore use the nomenclature of gift exchange to cover
all relations, even though this produces the semantic paradox of there being gift exchange without a gift. The
paradox in fact usefully points up the crucial absence (no gift) that characterizes the unmediated mode of
symbolization.
To say that work produces relations and that transactions create objects, then, captures different points of a
recursive sequence of revelation (relations as the objects of people's interactions). The sequencing is itself
marked by separations, as in the distinction the Daribi of the Southern Highlands act upon, between
consanguinity that relates and exchange that defines (Wagner 1967), or in the Hagen distinction between
production and transaction (M. Strathern 1972). Hagen gift transactions are specifically ukl ('creations') in
which 'things' (mel) are manipulated (mel in general are wealth items). As we have already seen these
objects of mediation are not produced in the course of 'work' (kongon), for that simply evinces an orientation
of 'mind' (noman). 2 Work has a direct (and unmediated) effect on one's partner. Ukl, however, includes
display, political speech making, and the mediations of magic spells. Ukl thus brings things visibly to one's
outer

                                                  page_179

                                                                                                     Page 180
'skin', where kongon evinces the orientation of the inner and hidden 'mind'.
The analysis or critique of constructions such as these must be as follows. In a gift economy, social relations
are made the overt objects of people's activities. In the direct, unmediated activity of work, the fact of
relatedness may be taken for granted (as between kinsmen), but work makes the specific relations
visiblekinsmen do things for one another as kinsmen should, as spouses also work with each other in mind as
spouses should. Transactions, however, appear to make relations afresh, for the instruments of mediationthe
giftsappear to be creating the relationship. Transactions are thus experienced as holding out the possibility of
relationships ever newly invented, as though there could be an infinite expansion of social connections.
Hence Josephides's shrewd observation about the myth that gifts seem to create gifts. Together these modes
of exchange compose an explicit practice of personification. From the perspective of Western knowledge
practices, however, they conceal their own conventions, that is, the further mechanism of reification.
Reification: the constraint of form. Separations are intrinsic to the ability to perceive ('personify') relations.
The activities that Hageners, for instance, distinguish as production and transaction are themselves
composed of distinctions. In the first case, the products of work are separable from those who produced
them in that they stand for the relationship between the producers. In the second case, the transactors are
separable from each other in order to create a relationship between themselves. The necessity to
differentiate becomes an explicit burden of people's interactions with one another (Wagner 1975:52; 1977a:
624). But the differentiation in turn will only be apparent, made visible, if the correct forms eventuate and
the correct 'conventions' thus hold.
This can be put another way. The objectification of relations as persons simultaneously makes them into
things in so far as the relations are only recognized if they assume a particular form. Indeed, there is a very
small number of (conventional) forms that will do as evidence that relations have been thus activated. They
must display certain attributes. Establishing attributes, the nature of things, is not the explicit focus of these
symbolic operations, but it is present as an implicit technique of operation. From our point of view, the
operation thus conceals its conventional base. Objectification necessarily requires the taking of a form;
knowledge has to be made known in a particular way. Now Western-

                                                    page_180

                                                                                                         Page 181
ers apprehend as symbolic a relationship between an item and what it 'expresses', as we imagine a shell
valuable depicting a child, for the relationship is between 'things' each with their own form. Where
Melanesians personify relationsendow valuables with human attributes and human capabilities as they do
individual peoplethey must instead make the form appear. For a body or mind to be in a position of eliciting
an effect from another, to evince power or capability, it must manifest itself in a particular concrete way,
which then becomes the elicitory trigger. This can only be done through the appropriate aesthetic.
My argument is that relations are objectified in a few highly constrained ways. Only certain specific forms of
interaction will be taken as evidence of the successful activation or maintenance of relationships. In being
conventionally prescribed these are reified: they-in-themselves hold evidence of the successful outcome. We
might call these things performances. Performances must thus be recognizable by their attributes. Only
certain performances, then, will make the relations that they objectify properly 'appear'. Improperly done,
the relations will not appear, as people dread when they take omens to establish the blessing of ancestral
ghosts or tremble in their finery before the scrutiny of a critical audience. The Paiela equivocations
described by Biersack (see chap. 5) make the point nicely.
In this sense, we may understand the two exchange modes of personification as 'reified': their manifestation
is prescribed in either mediated or unmediated relations. The differentiating (conventional) prescription of
these forms is hidden in so far as what they make apparent are the relations themselves. The two modes of
reification I am about to mention similarly hide the principles of their own aesthetic. Their conventional
nature is made covert in people's overt experience of these forms as invented, individuated performances,
for all they perceive is their own activity, freshly instigated, that ''[a]n innovation is an event" (Wagner
1978:253, emphasis removed).
Three types of event are acceptable indications that social relations have been activated through mediated or
unmediated exchanges. First are two performances that one might call the external and internal analogues of
one another. These both manifest replication. What is replicated are relationseither extending beyond the
person or operating within the person. If we were to focus on the substantive form of the relations from our
point of view, we might be tempted to call these respectively the flow of things between persons and the
growth of things within a person. In both cases, however, the object of interaction is to

                                                    page_181
                                                                                                         Page 182
make relations visible through their replication. As an alternative, and it is the only alternative, relations may
be made visible through substitution, the creation of a thing that embodies those relations in another form.
The production of wealth or children is how we might phrase it.
Chapter Eight first analyzes the replication of relations through the kinds of mediated exchange familiar in
the anthropological literature and then touches on the replication of relations made visible through
unmediated growth. Chapter Nine turns to the process of substitution by which relations are made visible in
a form other than themselves; the substituted effect is often staged as the transformed outcome of relations
magnified through replication. These latter are thus doubly revealed, as themselves and as themselves in
another form.
The pairs of analytical contrasts (mediation, nonmediation/replication, substitution) participate in each other.
There are two manifestations of replication (mediated and unmediated), which I have described as the
external and internal analogues of one another. There are two manifestations of unmediated relations
(replication and substitution), which may be considered as alternatives to one another. These permutations
are made concrete in the imagery through which the performances are contrived. This is the imagery of
gender. In my account, it is the final reification, the final constraint, but in the lives of those who live it, of
course, gender exists as a further enablement.

Gender
What are the attributes to which I have referred? The distinction between replication and substitution
underlies the staging of events: those events themselves must take concrete shape. That shape is their gender.
And this basic, limiting aesthetic accounts for the paucity of modes that will provide proper evidence for
objectification. Everything must take one of a pair of forms. At the same time, this aesthetic is the enabling
condition for an infinite reduplication of the pairs themselves.
Gender is evinced through what Melanesians perceive as the capabilities of people's bodies and minds, what
they contain within themselves and their effects on others. Conversely, like the differentiation of relations
into mediated and unmediated types, capabilities are made manifest through an internal differentiation
between male and female. But it is the capacity or capability which appears as people's concern: the
conventional basis through which the attributes of maleness or fe-
                                                    page_182

                                                                                                        Page 183
maleness are established is not apprehended as an artificial, symbolic practice.
Since all persons are defined in terms of their capabilities, it follows that persons can only be apprehended in
a gendered form. I note that the reference to persons here includes reference to individuals; the ambiguity is
important to my purpose at this juncture.
The shape that people's bodies and minds takewhether they are seen as male or femalebecomes the focus of
their operations upon one another. That is not the same as saying that they are always in a sexually activated
state. On the centrary, sexuality is a specific activation of a particular gender state: for a person to encounter
another of 'opposite sex' means that her or his own gender takes a singular form. In this condition, one
person elicits a corresponding sexual form in another. He is all-male or she all-female, strictly with respect to
that other. When gender identity thus becomes homogenized in a unitary, single sex form, the person's
internal parts are in a same-sex relation with one another. However, the outcome of such activation,
conceived as a product of the relationship between partners, takes another form: it embodies within itself a
cross-sex relations. 3 A person's gender may thus be imagined as dually or multiply composed, and in this
androgynous state men and women are inactive. In their dealings with one another, persons alternate
between being conceived in a same-sex state or a cross-sex one. They thus embody or objectify social
relations by evincing them in either one or the other shape. And, as Clay (1977) argues with respect to the
Mandak category of nurture, they can consequently only evince a relationship in its already differentiated
form.
Sexually active, a person elicits a cross-sex relation with a partner with whom he or she thereby establishes
an unmediated relation. That effect is registered in that person. Their relationship may be perceived as an
outcome of their unmediated activities and take the form of its productthe results of a division of labour or
procreation in which each has some interest. The product (food, a child) becomes a substitution for that
relationship: a dual relation consequently appears in a singular and composite form. However, relations may
also be elicited with a same-sex partner. The elicitation, the creation of an effect through bringing separate
entities together, can be achieved only if the partners become differentiated as subjects, their interests
thereby being separated through the relationship itself. As I have already anticipated, in the same way as
donors and recipients are created by their different

                                                    page_183

                                                                                                        Page 184
interests in the items that pass between them, so same-sex relations can be created by the process of
mediation, the passage of an item between parties already conceived as other than themselves. Indeed, this
applies to the internal as well as the external constitution of the body. The exchange of items, which have a
dual value in being differently conceptualized from the donors' and from the recipients' points of view, thus
appears to effect a replication of singular persons.
Imagining a multiplicity of persons of the same singular sex makes replication visible. Similarly, the
successful substitution of an unmediated relationship, as a child substitutes for its parents, is shown in its
cross-sex or androgynous composition. Single sex replication provides an image of the flow and the growth
of items, but at the point at which flow and growth is revealed, at the point of production (birth) or
consumption (death), a cross-sex relation appears. This is the moment of substitution. Here production is
analogous to consumption: the outcome of unmediated relations that substitutes for the relationship its own
effect. 4
Although it is only in a single sex form, then, that persons create an effect on others, as substitutions they
also evince the effects of active others upon them. I thus regard gendering, like exchange itself, as
significantly present both as a same-sex identity (male or female) and in its combination or 'absence',
imagined, for instance, in the cross-sex androgyne. It therefore becomes impossible in my account to think
of gender simply as a question of the relationship between male and female. That incorporates an
inappropriate commodity view which, in supposing that entities exist in themselves, requires explanation as
to the relationship between them. This is the sex-role model of gender which has dogged analyses of
initiation rites, described in chapter 3. More generally, it underlies the current Western orthodoxy that gender
relations consist in the 'social or cultural construction' of what already has differentiated form through the
biological sexing of individuals (chap. 4). Melanesian orthodoxy, however, requires that the differences must
be made apparent, drawn out of what men and women do.
As I understand the gift view, at certain moments male and female persons may be opposed, as discrete
reference points for the relationship between them. In itself being neither, the relationship is different from
them and may be imagined as embodied in its product. The (androgynous) entity so produced, the object of
the relationship, literally evinces their cross-sex relationship within itself.5 Each singular state anticipates
future interaction, since it is as independent entities that male and

                                                   page_184

                                                                                                        Page 185
female persons then join together. For this joining to occur, a composite, androgynous entity has had to be
reconceptualized as singular, and in being differentiated from another as incomplete. Figuratively conceived,
'male' and 'female' exist as analogues of one another, alike in that each is a same-sex construct.
This recursive formulation cuts across the commodity-derived view that it is as (figuratively conceived)
individuals with intrinsic ('biological') attributes that male and female persons are in a perpetual relation of
difference. We therefore have to avoid any presupposition that takes the differentiated single sex state as a
'natural' reference point. If there were such a reference point in Melanesian society, it would have to be
drawn from the root metaphorthe multiple person produced as the object of multiple relationships (markedly
but not exclusively from the duo of sexed parents). In being multiple it is also partible, an entity that can
dispose of parts in relation to others. Gender refers to the internal relations between parts of persons, as well
as to their externalization as relations between persons.
Hence I have proposed that the Melanesian gender relationship upon which we should concentrate is not
between male and female but between same-sex relations and cross-sex relations. We may apprehend them
as the gendered forms of persons who must appear as either singular or multiple in their composition. The
one is a potential transformation of the other.
Although resembling categories belonging to the analysis of kin terminology, my terms derive here from an
extension of Clay's (1977) distinction between same-unit and cross-unit relations in Mandak, New Ireland.
Sex has the connotation of a unitary state. Same-sex and cross-sex relations may refer to identities held in
commonan 'all male' relationship between the men of an agnatic clan (same-sex); a male-female relationship
between brother and sister, in which the sister produces wealth for the brother (cross-sex). Or they may
connect the parts of a persona 'female' clan member with 'female' wealth at her disposal (same-sex), or a
'female' mother giving birth to a 'male' child (cross-sex). The encompassing relationship, between same-sex
and cross-sex identity, is the subject of considerable attention. For the reproduced person conceived
(objectified) as the outcome of relations is itself nonreproductive. The objectifications of a gift economy
consequently require a double coercion: to ensure that reproducers will indeed interact and produce objects
(persons); and to ensure that the completed object is itself transformable into a subsequent reproducer. What
is true

                                                   page_185

                                                                                                        Page 186
of human beings is also true of food, wealth, and the other items they produce. Each must acquire a
reproductive potency. These coercions in turn manifest the exercise of agency in the effective
transformation of one gender state to another.
This applies as much to political as to ritual activities. The hazard of gauging whether or not any particular
event has been successful engenders a general ethos open to change, to 'trying on' new ideas and new
relationships. For only effects validate procedures. Such concepts prize us away from inevitably regarding
culture as a structure of fixed points whose interrelations must be explained. Melanesian ethnography
enables us to contextualize this selfsame decoding, inherent in the Western idea of explanation, as the laying
out of conventional or literal (cultural) relations between figuratively conceived (natural) things. But
Melanesian ideas also impose their own drastic limits on the behavior of men and women, as ideas must.
One such limitation is evident in the fact that every construction participates in another. This is true for the
relationship between exchange and gender. As Battaglia noted, each can become a metaphor for the other
(see Clay 1977:3). Thus, the different interests of exchange partners can be metaphorized as though they
were male and female to one another, and as though gifts, the objects of mediation, were like androgynous
children. And the combined interests of parents in their children can be split apart by a metaphorization of
parenthood as though it were the consequence of same-sex relations among men or among women, and the
child were an object of mediation like a valuable. To return to an earlier example, cult displays in Hagen are
on the one hand ukl, performances, a type of political activity that involves the manipulation of magic things
and thus creates a mediated relationship between men and the cult Spirits; on the other hand, through
conjugal and domestic idioms, cult preparations may be spoken of as work (kongon) for the Spirit who will
attend to the personal condition of the participants (A. Strathern 1982b:308).
The consequences of thus deploying people as persons, as the objectification of relations, entails their being
always in a gendered condition: whether same-sex or cross-sex, their form either has an effect on others or
evinces others' effectiveness. Hence Buchbinder and Rappaport's observation that in "taking gender to be a
metaphor for the conventional oppositions they impose upon the world, people establish forever those
oppositions in their own bodies" (1976:33). And there is a sociological consequence: sociality is always
presented as an alternation between

                                                    page_186

                                                                                                         Page 187
one of two types. This becomes the precondition for the domination that men and women variously exercise
over one another.
The terminology of same-sex and cross-sex relations is, to say the least, inelegant. Its repetition will make for
awkwardnesses in the language I use. But I must regard that as a necessary dissonance.
I have also introduced the concept of reification with deliberate dissonance, to draw attention to what as
outsiders we may legitimately regard as 'expressed' or 'constructed' in these gender ideas. Constraints exist in
the way in which certain overt forms are taken as indicative of internal capabilities in things and persons
which, in being capabilities, can also be externalized in relations. Indication depends on aesthetic
convention. Appearance is structured: the color and curvature, hollowness and hairiness, extendability and
edibility of things thus circumscribe as much as they open up possibilities. A hollow container may present
itself to our Western eyes as an incongruous mix of radically different metaphors, female breast or male
penis in the case of Sambia initiates; 6 but from their point of view, it must be one or the other or both in
combination. For the participants' attention is directed to the crucial relationship of the encasing instrument
and what it exudes, to its capacity. When they know that, they will know the gender of its form.

Fixing Points
Quite a plethora of terms has surfaced. The nomenclature is incidental: it is the differences and
identifications which they delineate that count. But the plethora itself is presented without apology. The
terms cannot be summarized or collapsed by privileging one of the several contrasts as the archetypical
contrast. On the contrary, each is a vantage point from which to think about others. Thus, should we think of
the modes of mediated or unmediated exchange, or of events as replications or substitutions, or of same-sex
and cross-sex gender relations, we may also think of the techniques of personification and reification, of
invention and convention, of the two types of sociality, and of the contrasts between collective and
particular activities, singular and multiple persons. Any one of these discriminations affords a starting point
for considering the others. But they are expansions and contractions of one another, tropes in a general sense
of the term, not subcategories of a category or the species of a genus or components of any overarching
classificatory system. I am afraid it will not help the reader to get out a pencil and list them as though they
could be held together as two

                                                    page_187

                                                                                                         Page 188
columns of a table. In any case, a conventional table is held up by four legs, not two columns.
I do not joke. Metaphors participate in one another. The manner in which they so participate must be traced
through as an act of faith in the details of the images that provide the linking thoughtsthe linkages being the
anthropologist's subject matter.
The plethora of steps or stages along such paths are no more nor less complex in Melanesian thought than
the multitude of 'levels' that Western anthropologists discover in their descriptions of cultures, the 'structures'
they devise, or the range of 'domains' into which they classify segments of society. The way I have presented
the Melanesian ideas are bound to appear both too abstract and too concrete. But perhaps thus they will
make explicit the nature of our own concretenesses and abstractions. Politics, economic systems, religious
belief, family life, or for that matter, ideology and cognitive structures, or relations and forces of production,
systems, and events all appear to Westerners as manageably distinct levels or domains whose similarities or
differences we may then expound in showing their relationship to one another. It is of this orderof the order
of the connection between politics and religion, say, or of infrastructure and superstructurethat we must
comprehend the workings of a contrast between mediated and unmediated exchange or of collective and
singular identities or of male and female shapes, and the workings of the contrasts upon the contrasts. 7
The contexts of these operations are supplied by themselves: one 'construction' as we would have it is the
vantage point from which others appear. Thus the replication of gender identity may be evinced in either an
external, mediated or an internal, unmediated mode. From the point of view of making things grow,
unmediated relations may be construed through either the replication or the substitution of effects. At each
juncture throughout these operations a distinct condition is made known through having to appear as one of
a pair of interrelated forms. Thus we could say that in so far as people think about sociality in general, they
do so through thinking about it as either a collective or a particular set of relations: it presents itself so to
speak in one or other aspect. One can act only in reference to the one or the other, and thus sociality is
'immanent' within them.
Each of this pair of terms may be figuratively conceived, that is, taken for itself. And it may be taken for
itself in two wayseither as one of a pair of like (rather than unlike) entities, as the collective life of one clan
or group is reduplicated in the collective life of another; or it will

                                                     page_188

                                                                                                           Page 189
be made to appear not as half a pair but as divided internally, existing in itself because it encompasses
relations within, so at the heart of a clan's collective identity are its extra-clan relations with particular
others. The result is that, for the actors, the clan is present only under one of two conditions. If matrilineally
composed then it appears either collectively as 'one breast', 'one womb', with its own land, its own magic, or
else as a matrix of particular exchanges that unite and divide brothers and sisters, husbands and wives. But it
must be made present. Social action itself consists in 'presentation', in making such entities appear, and this is
done through eliminating one or other of the forms. My own critique has been that what the participants
apprehend as an effect of their interaction with one another depends upon the aesthetic conventions by
which, in this instance, collective and particular relations are contrasted. In this sense do their actions
depend on a prior reification.
All this is hindsight. What must be supplied are the details, the evidence. The multiplicity of operations
creates problems of exposition, and I merely continue a set of sequences already begun. I thus make the
evidence lie, on the grounds of my own argument, in the elucidation of gender relations. I have to show how
things look from its vantage point and thus that gender ideas 'work' in the ways suggested. This will involve
backtracking over materials already partly discussed. But there are also expository problems in the very
nature of the exercise, for as one moves from one proposition to another, each will have the capacity to
dissolve into its own components. The description could be ramified forever. I must therefore backtrack in
another sense: to remind the reader that what is now presented as evidence was first apprehended not as an
answer but as a question, not as solutions but as problems. These concerned specifying the nature of
Melanesian gender relations in the first place, and the consequences for men and women.
My argument is in fact already implicated in its own sequencing. It has turned on a contrast between the
overt personification of relations and the covert techniques that determine the proper forms through which
these are recognized. The latter I see as analogous to reification in a commodity economy, though it holds a
very different place in people's knowledge practices. I have suggested that gender works as an instrument of
reification, presenting 'things' so to speak (effects, events) as people assume they ought to appear. However,
this is really a particular case of the general contrast between invention and convention. Every
discrimination, for example between same-sex or cross-sex gen-

                                                     page_189

                                                                                                           Page 190
der or between pigs to eat and pigs to give away, or between male and female procreation as Clay
(1977:152) describes for Mandak, pivots on a relation between terms which itself remain implicitthe nature
of the conventional relationships is 'hidden'. It works simply as an aesthetic; the conventions are ultimately
aesthetic conventions. What people do is make the distinctions visible. And they then reveal the 'invented'
effect or event, the distinction manifested in a particular form. At every juncture in the exposition that
follows, then, we shall encounter forms that are revealed through distinctions, while the 'construction' of the
distinctions themselves, the classificatory scheme they constitute, the symbolic relations as we would have
it, remain implicit.
This interplay is an attempt to evoke Melanesians' own preoccupations with secrecy and exposure, with
shape and what the shape contains. At the same time, the awkward plethora of terms is an attempt at making
explicit and thus obtrusive the conventions that to them appear in the incidental and invented guise of
people's actions and performances.

                                                    page_190

                                                                                                        Page 191



