8
Relations Which Separate
The societies of the Massim briefly alluded to in the last chapterTubetube, Sabarl, Gawaare all 'matrilineal' in
terms of their kinship organization. The affairs of women and men are, nonetheless, governed by constraints
similar to those elucidated for the central Highlands dominated by 'patrilineal' kinship ideologies. Indeed, the
Massim will advance the argument in important respects, for it bears comparison through the nature of
ceremonial exchange. Although mortuary ceremonies in many of these societies should be given first
prominence, 1 my initial interest is in the exchanges that take men away from their home communities.
While it by no means extends over the entire Massim, the overseas kula is a principal exemplar.
It is a good place to begin, if for no other reason than that the kula has suggested itself to anthropological
inquiry as an integrating mechanism. The thought of dozens of tiny islands bravely linked by sailors who
hazard the seas in order to exchange and trade with one another forms an irresistibly concrete image.
Sociality, it is concluded, must be some kind of inner drive to form relationships and maintain cohesion
between people who would otherwise remain strangers to one another. Anthropologists consequently stress
how the circulation of gifts creates relationships and integrates 'society' (for two examples, see pp. 6668).
But we shall not get very far in the analysis of gift exchange without realizing that gifts quite crucially sever
and detach people from people.
Exchange is essential to the processes of personification through

                                                    page_191

                                                                                                        Page 192
which persons are separated by the social relations between them. It is the relations (their reciprocity,
Wagner 1967:85) which differentiate them, for each is defined with respect to the other and thus has his or
her separate interest in the relationship (Gillison in press). I suggested that exchange takes either a mediated
or unmediated form: it is known through its appearance as one or the other type. The hidden convention on
which these appearances rest, their reification, is that of gender replication. Replication is imagined as the
infinite expansion of same-sex relations.
                                                    Fig. 1.
                                         Techniques of Objectification I

Mediated Exchange: Partibility
Mediated exchange draws on the indigenous image that persons are able to detach parts of themselves in
their dealings with others. Its effect is evinced in the 'flow' of items. The manner in which valuables may be
detached from one person and attached to another is of consummate interest to kula participants. Munn
writes:
   The control embedded in possession of a shell includes not simply Ego's ability to get others to act in
   ways that carry out his own will, but also his capacity for becoming the focus of the attempts of
   others to get him to act as they wish. (1983:278, original emphasis)
Everything turns on the influence people can exert. It need hardly be added that the detachability of items
has nothing to do with alienation; the parts circulate as parts of persons. Again, however, a concrete image
intervenes in our understanding. The precious valuables, after which kula partners hunger, disappear on the
perimeter of their vision, to circulate between the partners of partners, beyond the original per-

                                                    page_192

                                                                                                         Page 193
son's 'control'. This has too much the appearance of alienation for us (see, for example, the correspondence
in Man 1982:n.s. 17:340345; 1983:n.s. 18:604605). Surely, we protest, the item is no longer thought of as
belonging to the original donor. But for the participants, the knowledge that the partners are always dealing
with the 'parts' of other persons, anonymous or otherwise, is established quite simply and emphatically
through their gender. Overseas kula partners are conceptually male. The condition is brought about through
their own separation from females, a separation that also establishes their capacity to mobilize the parts of
themselves that then appear at their disposal.
These observations are prompted by Damon's (1980; 1983a; 1983b) analysis of exchange on Muyuw
(Woodlark Island) in the northern Massim. It is important that he puts his argument about kula transactions
into the overall context of male-female relations. For the separation of males from females is a double
action. Internal relations between parts of persons as well as external relations between persons are
gendered, and separation is not simply a question of men taking themselves off in their canoes and leaving
the women behind. They have to establish the gender identity of their activity and of the parts with which
they do indeed intend to transact, and that involves transforming the meaning of their own previous actions.
Damon supplies a quite necessary digression on domestic kinship.
The flow of wealth: kula. The two significant axes of Muyuw male-female relations concern brother and
sister, husband and wife. The manner in which the activities of the sexes are separated and combined means
that people in these relationships have different and particular effects on each other. Damon (1983a:313314,
318) argues that between husband and wife, for instance, the man is producer and the woman distributor.
The man produces food and children; the woman divides garden products into those for consumption and
those for future propagation and distributes his food to the child which grows inside her. She thus completes
the work the man has begun. Children are regarded as being created by the husband's work. 2 A man
transforms his work, as Damon calls it, into the creation of persons. But, importantly, the products of this
work are also separated from him: the children do not share his social identity since they belong to his wife's
(matrilineal) subclan. The distinctness of their social identity makes his work visible in the body of the child.
The child is not an extension of him but is his work in a transformed state, for it is oriented toward his

                                                    page_193

                                                                                                         Page 194
relations with his affines, and that relationship is its context. Toward the child, his relationship is unmediated:
he 'feeds' it. 3 Damon's own argument is that ''a woman's children are in her group because they hold the
credit she receives by virtue of the loss of her brother's labour. Muyuw matrilinearity derives from the debts
engendered by the process of producing people" (Damon 1983a:317). How does a woman 'lose' her brother's
labor?
The separation of a sister's and brother's work from one another is crucial to the production of children, for it
contrasts with the series of transactions between themselves and between their kin that deliberately
combines the work of husbands and wives. A couple first meet as entities separated by virtue of their
different subclan origins. But the wife's work is eventually combined fully with that of the husband. When
they take up residence on the husband's land, an exchange of items between the affines establishes that the
children are 'his' in so far as they are evidence of his (and not another man's) energies. They embody his
work in a direct fashion, and the wife who helps her husband contributes directly to 'his' productive
enterprise. The transactions that demarcate the nature of her contribution comprise what Damon calls a short
circulation cycle that concludes with her death. Then, the husband's kin give at least one kula valuable to the
wife's kin in explicit acknowledgment of the work she contributed to his enterprises. It substitutes for her
work and closes the relationship by cancelling the debt her work created; that is, it substitutes for the
cross-sex relation between husband and wife. From the brother's point of view, the sister's work that he lost
(to her husband) thus returns to him in the form of wealth.
It is not work or food which establishes the subclan identity of the childrenthat is instituted in the separation
of a woman's relations with her husband from those with her brother. Combining with the husband is being
separated from the brother. She participates little in his endeavors, and indeed the siblings are enjoined to
observe a distance between them, particularly in reference to the sexual production of those children. This
separation generates what Damon refers to as a long cycle of transactions that only comes to an end with the
death of the brother's children. Although she has a lien on her brother's work, it is not translated into
products that the sister consumes: she is "separated from her brother's ability to transform one thing into
another" (1983a:315).4 And because her own work becomes combined with that of her husband's, she is
herself unable to produce consumable products

                                                    page_194

                                                                                                        Page 195
for her subclan. Instead, she (her work) is metamorphosed into a product of a special kind.
From the woman's point of view, the completed effects of her husband's work show in the (external) facial
features of his children; 5 their internal subclan identity is sustained by never-completed exchange. Her
subclan alone exercises the right to recall the woman's work in the form of wealth, and this process
establishes the interests of the children as separate from their father. It is they (the children) who can reclaim
the mother's work as a kula valuable, and they reclaim it from their father or the father's kin. In this they are
identified with the men who can make the same claim, their mother's brothers. Only as members of a subclan
do men recover a woman's work in a transformed state, as a valuable. For 'work', of course, we need to
understand the particular 'domestic relations' (between spouses, between siblings) which the work makes
visible. It is these relations which undergo transformation. The husband enjoys his relationship with the
woman as an unmediated contribution to his productive activities. The subclan enjoys their relationship with
her in a mediated form; Muyuw conceptualize the wealth as a 'replacement' they are owed.
The valuable so singled out bears specific reference to work. It falls into the class known as kitoum, which
are those kula valuables a man deploys by virtue of their standing for some part of his activity. Between
brother and sister, only the sister's work can be transformed into a kitoum, but it is for her brother (or her
children) that this is done. Thus in a 'male' form the subclan has 'female' assets at its disposal.
   An informant once told me that a subclan was 'like a bank'. When I asked him what was in the bank,
   he replied, 'kitoum', and these are the kitoum resulting from the metamorphosis of a sister's labour.
   (Damon 1983a:319)
Indeed, the subclan cannot claim back a man's work in the form of valuables: on the contrary, the products
of his work are only eventually recovered as food. And when a man's work is said to be turned into kitoum,
it is not for his subclan but for himself.6 It is not ostensibly combined with female work and thus does not
activate subclan identity. Men in return for kitoum dispose of things they appear to have 'independently'
made. They speak of kitoum as objects they have manufactured.
The separation of the kula circuit from kinship creates prestige specifically for men. Damon shows how kula
shell valuables are concep-

                                                    page_195
                                                                                                       Page 196
tualized by Muyuw from two points of view. They are both kitoum, the products of male work, and
mwal/veigun, items that compel reciprocity. The distinction lies in their relationship to men. Valuables as
mwal/veigun circulate from partner to partner, making a name for each donor, and thus causing the donor's
name to travel along kula roads:
   These names are produced by exchanging the valuables. But when one gives away a valuable it is
   said that one's name 'goes down', and one's partner's 'goes up'. Only when the article is given again to
   a third person does the first person's name go up, the desired result of Kula action. ... A person
   throws away part of himself, his 'hand', and this self is only reconstituted as it is used to make other
   selves. (1980:280)
What makes the gift return to its original donor is the knowledge that every valuable is somebody's kitoum.
What reappears in this aspect is that the valuable is a product of that man's work. As something that
embodies his activities, it can substitute for the activities of others. As a consequence, kitoum valuables
circulate outside the kula and may be used by men to obtain other products, such as canoes; no debt is
created. Also as a consequence, only someone who owns a valuable as kitoum can take it out of the kula in
the form of a return valuable classed as a replacement kitoum. It substitutes for the one he lost.
In the context of kula exchange, the contrast between the two appearances of valuables has specific content.
As the product of work, an inalienable part of the male person, the detached kitoum brings compensation to
the donor. The same valuables detached from work, from the person's particularistic social identities, carry a
'name', the "social circulation of the self" (Munn 1977:50). 7 This creates an identity for the actor conceived
not as part of himself but himself as a part of a collectivitya name in the kula ring. A. Weiner (1976:232)
quotes a Trobriand man saying "men on Fergusson Island do not know my face, but from my kula valuables
they know my name and my father's name." To turn a Muyuw aphorism, one has to lose (one identity) in
order to gain (another).
Damon (1980:284) introduces a distinction between metaphorical and metonymical constructions in
reference to the different ways in which kula valuables refer to the loss and gain of identities. Valuables are
metaphors for persons in that their circulation in the kula 'is' the circulation of the person's name. At the
same time, these valuables are created metonymically, in so far as kitoum is a (disposable) part of the male
person. In despatching kitoum into circulation, and creating debts

                                                   page_196

                                                                                                       Page 197
and the passage of other valuables appropriatable not as kitoum but only as mwal/veigun, a man has
transformed an internal part of himself (his 'work') into an external name. A metonym becomes a metaphor.
And that, from the point of view of other men in the kula exchange, is all that he is: he is nothing but the part
that he plays in keeping the kula moving. Parts match one another; there is no process of loss and
substitution but the perpetual creation of debt. The multiple person is transformed into a unitary entity: the
man becomes his prestige.
While Muyuw appreciate that all kula valuables somewhere are somebody's kitoum, they can also treat the
circulation of debts between men as a closed system involving the singular identity of men as name-carriers.
The internally partible or multiple constitution of men is thus eclipsed. At this point, we should recall that
kitoum also originate in a sister's or mother's work, and it is relations between men and women which are
also eclipsed.
We have seen that when kitoum enter the kula system they do so as signs of male work alone. Concealed in
Muyuw saying that mwal/veigun is somebody's kitoum is that they mean somebody involved in the kula, a
male somebody. Indeed, only in reference to a male can a woman's work itself appear as wealth. But it is a
particularized or differentiated male, brother (or son) not husband. The woman's work is construed as
disposable only in reference to these male kin. If men can realize their sister's work in such kitoum, it follows
that this realization simultaneously represents her work as a 'part' of this kind of man and as 'detachable'
from him. The sister's value for the kinsman is that he alone reappropriates the work as kitoum. Her work is
an inalienable yet disposable part of his identity, by contrast with the temporary relation arising from the
combination of her work with her husband's. This disposability is the basis for creating a class of items (kula
valuables) appearing as one or other type, which can be used to mediate relations between men.
Although I have spoken of loss, the detachment of mwal/veigun is not the same as the detachment of kitoum.
8 What comes back for a man's kitoum is a 'compensation' (another kitoum) that substitutes for the cross-sex
relation between the male person and the female parts at his disposal. What comes back for mwal/veigun is
an item in a cross-sex relation to the one that was given awaymwal for veigun or veigun for mwal. The one is
specifically matched with the other. But it is not in the sense of kitoum a substitution, any more than one sex
substitutes for its pair. Rather, the matching creates a relation within a relation:

                                                    page_197

                                                                                                         Page 198
a cross-sex relation between the valuables, contained within the relationship between the same-sex partners,
who thereby become separated from each other by virtue of their different interests in the transaction. The
partners must appear as either donor or recipient, debtor or creditor. And thus their 'partnership' is implicit in
the items with which they transact: mwal/veigun mediate between them as the sign of their relationship.
Young cites a man from Goodenough Island who contrasted loss through theft and injury with gift giving.
"When we give something ... maybe we don't keep it, but we don't lose it either" (1983:23). They do not lose
it, I suggest, out of some mystical notion of enduring solidarity, but because of the brute and wily fact that
one gives what is extracted from one. In the nature of mediated exchange, the donor has been persuaded,
cajoled, and suffered the sorcery of another in being compelled to yield the gift. The recipient in turn
perceives his effort as a matter of extracting from his partner the anticipated outcome of their transaction.
The partner contains within himself what properly should be the product of a relationship between the two.
What from the donor's point of view, then, is a part of himself with which to enter into exchange, from the
recipient's is something to be separated and extracted from the donor. For the recipient depends on the donor
for those objectifications of the one relationship which he can use as objects of mediation in further
relationships; the donor in turn depends on the recipient to accept the external evidence of his internal
incremental power, that of having items of which he can dispose. The recipient, with no interest in the
donor's particular kin relations, sees him only in terms of the part he plays in the kula, in terms of his name
and his same-sex gender. His task is to transform the other man's same-sex relation with these items into a
cross-sex one with himself, as a partner in his partner's mind. The entity the other partner holds within must
be differentiated in order to be extracted; in distinguishing his own interest from that of the partner as
potential donor, the recipient thus separates a kitoum from him and turns it into a mwal/veigun. He makes it
seem as if he can "affect the mind of the partner by making the latter's will (desires) correspond to his own"
(Munn 1983:284), thus effecting a same-sex mutuality. In fact, his action subverts that elusive symmetry.
The difference between the two transactions can now be stated. Kitoum stand for unmediated cross-sex
relations, externally created in the contrasts between husband and wife/brother and sister, and in-

                                                    page_198

                                                                                                         Page 199
ternally between the differently gendered parts of a man's multiple activities. Separate efforts are combined
in the product. Mwal/veigun, by contrast, conceived of as a pair of male and female valuables, are brought
together by the efforts of one of the partnersthe coercive recipient who extracts one of them. This effort
distinguishes his interest and thus metaphorizes the partnership as though it too were predicated on an
asymmetric, cross-sex relation (as though all mwal/veigun were somebody's kitoum). But this activation is
only possible because the men are in prior terms of the same sex: it is merely the relation between them
which separates.
Personification through such separations enables relations to be seen to produce relations. The circulating
objects of mediation elicit the possibility that one relationship is only the starting point for others, that
partnerships can constantly be made to appear. All that seems required is a capacity to extract objects. The
replication of relations stretches to the horizon, for the illusion is close to hand in the replication of same-sex
identity among men. And what they create in their overseas voyaging is already created at home in the
manner in which a subclan residentially divides itself into its male members who stay and female members
who depart: it is a collectivity of (same-sex) males that forms its community.
This gives us a position from which to hazard an analysis of Hagen ceremonial exchange.
The flow of wealth: moka. From the point of view of the Muyuw subclan, brothers and sisters are separated
in such a way that the sister's activities return to the subclan in the mediated form of subclan children and
wealth. As we have seen, it is with her husband that her energies are regarded as being combined. From the
point of view of the Hagen clan, however, the separation of brother and sister results in a flow of wealth to it
which is defined not as the recovery of its own substance but as the attraction of exogenous substance for
which the sister is simply the 'road'; it must therefore be reciprocated in kind. What the clan appropriates as
its own wealth, by contrast, comes from the joint activities of the husband-wife pair. As in Muyuw, wife and
husband combine their activities in an unmediated form (the direct effect each has on the other was
described in chap. 6). But it is out of that cross-sex relationship that one of the partners (the husband)
creates wealth for his clan's disposal. The efforts of a Hagen man are thus directed simultaneously towards
the alliance of the wife's particular interests with his

                                                   page_199

                                                                                                        Page 200
in his enterprises and the separation of those interests in the regard of his own collective relations with other
men. Indeed, clanship carries a special weight in these circumstances; the respective clan origins of the
spouses axiomatically guarantee the separation of their interests, as long as the clans remain separate. All
clans are separated by the crucial rule of exogamy. Moka, warfare, and affinal exchanges work to keep
particular clans apart and sustain the discrete social identities of the spouses by reference to these origins.
Since it is the 'work' of husband and wife which is combined, we can now make sense of the previous
observation that in transforming his relationship with his wife, a husband is also transforming aspects of
himself. For it is with respect to their joint products (primarily pigs) that their interests must be seen to be
split. Pigs appear as either wealth or food. The cross-sex relationship ('food') he enjoys with his wife is
eclipsed in the circulation of 'wealth'. Hence pigs are personifiedthat is, it is relations between persons which
is seen to make different objects out of them. One relation can only be eclipsed by another relation. What
displaces his relationship with his wife is a man's relations with other men. But, I shall suggest, the
displacement is effective because those same-sex relations can also appear as cross-sex ones.
Relations with other men are not homogeneous; they too take one of two forms, those the husband enjoys
with his fellow clansmen and those he enjoys with male exchange partners. The differences between these
two sets of relations are mirrored in two separate male interests in the wealth. A man creates it for his
clansman out of his relationship with his wifethe product of that relationship is his agnates' wealth, even as
their (bride) wealth initiated the marital relationship. 9 But at the same time the clan only realizes that wealth
through its capacity to create relations, through exchanges with other clans, who thereby provide a man with
his individual exchange partners. These are regarded as sustained by his own activities: by contrast with
Muyuw, when a Hagen man creates wealth for the clan, he also creates it for himself.
Hagen idioms conjure images of detachment and attachment. Wealth departs from and comes to the skin.
What returns to a man in moka is something he made out of his relations with his agnates, but which, through
his relations with his partners, he can reappropriate as individually and separately his.
This movement between the two types of same-sex relations is the crucial construction that allows the return
on his gift to be conceptualized as increment. For Hagen moka is distinguished from the ex-

                                                   page_200

                                                                                                        Page 201
change systems of the Massim by the definitive notion of increment (A. Strathern 1983). A donor returns
more than he owed: increment is conceptualized as the addition of one kind of wealth (moka 'on top') to
another kind (the debt underneath). 10 As we would expect, the form in which wealth items appear differs
from that of the kula valuables, matched conjugally as they are in attraction and treachery. Moka valuables
in circulation are not in themselves 'male' and 'female': pigs, shells, and money are not gendered. On the
contrary, according to its behavior, any item may take any gender. As attachable and detachable parts of a
man's identity, valuables, in this guise, can be regarded as male or female, disposably male like the agnates
(sisters) which a clan can bestow, or attractably female like the nonagnates (wives) it entices. Indeed, it is
the exogamic rule rather than the love affair that makes men and women, as though they were so many
wealth items, travel from place to place. At the same time, wealth items are also the composite, androgynous
objects that in themselves embody a man's own other (domestic) relationships.11 Each of these genders
affords a metaphoric basis for the way in which men think about their exchange partners.12
Increment in Hagen moka appears through specific effects. Increment is 'added', like a part to a whole, a
structure that supposes a difference, just as a male person adds female wealth to himself. Simultaneously,
that wealth may also be conceptualized as a male augmentation of his male name, an extension of a male
person. Now it is not the case that a 'female' element thereby turns into a 'male' one. Rather, in appearing in
one of two formsas male wealth, an extension of male activity, or as female wealth at male disposalmoka
valuables bestow a gender identity on the relationship of the donor to his own disposable parts. The identity
is elicited by his moka partner being in turn metaphorized as either the passive female recipient of the male
wealth or the coeval male with whom a female item is exchanged. Consequently, the partnership itself, in
terms of its outcome (the gift) may also be androgynously conceived, the wealth combining the male and
female elements of the relationship between the men, like the combination of work between spouses. Yet the
metaphor depends on keeping apart the connotations of 'work' as a distinctive, combinatory activity. No
valuable is itself distinguished, like the Muyuw kitoum, as an embodiment of 'male work'.
Initially I suggested that one could regard a male exchange partner as disposing of male wealth as a clan
does its agnates, and as attracting female wealth as it does its spouses; here I suggest that a male extension

                                                   page_201

                                                                                                       Page 202
of the male self may be equated with a male having female items at his disposal. One can complete the
quatrain. The female wealth he attracts back may also be regarded as male: it comes in the form of prestige.
What is attached or detached may take a male or female form. The conventional distinction that underlies
these appearances is obviously that between attachment and detachment itself. Each implies the other, but
an image of joint production or combination would not do: the wealth that flows must be seen as both
exogenous and as capable of being absorbed, at once on the skin and evidence of the inner self.
Detachability is conceptualized in the single sex form of the item (male or female), for that creates a
cross-sex relation between the donor and what he gives/receives in substitution for his cross-sex relation
with his wife. A man establishes an internal partibility between himself and his own activities/wealth, which
eclipses the part he contributes towards his conjugal relationship.
Now the donor knows himself as a single sex person (a male with either male or female parts to detach)
because his condition is replicated externally in his same-sex relations with his clansmen, and his moka
partners. In competing with his clansmen and exchanging with his partners, he separates their interests from
his. He thus also knows himself as a single sex person in so far as they, according to their gender, elicit that
condition from him. Indeed, the one same-sex relation can be played off against the other. And because they
are not commensurate between themselves, he is able to augment his own maleness, as it were, 'adding' to
his name, that is, by adding relations to relations.
Through his moka exchanges, a man thus converts what he detaches into something very different from what
he absorbs back. What is returned is 'more' than what he disposes. The constant illusion that a person
receives more than he gives lies in the very difference between what he detaches from himself and what he
is able to reattach. 13 Damon elucidated the switch in terms of metonymic and metaphoric symbols, to refer
to how the difference is construed. Since this turn depends on the alternating definitions of donor and
recipient, it also bears comparison with a situation that Schwimmer describes for Orokaiva.
During the course of analyzing how the Orokaiva, from the former Northern District of Papua, use coconut,
areca, and taro, Schwimmer (1974) distinguishes metaphoric from metonymic gifts. The distinction arises in
his discussion of a myth in which a man and a woman exchange various items. The objects of social
exchange are male (coconut) and female (areca) sexuality. At one point, the intention is to establish

                                                   page_202

                                                                                                       Page 203
symbiosis, and here gift and recipient are identified. Thus the female gives coconut to the male, because
coconut is male and appropriate for him. While it is intended for him, it is important that it is given by
another. In this transaction, coconut is a metaphor for the man, and an interdependence is established
between the sexes in so far as the one depends on the other for a gift that is himself. At a further point in the
story, man and woman transact with each other as separate entities. Each uses his or her distinctive object of
mediation as gift to the other. The female whose nature is areca gives areca to the male; his nature is
coconut, which he gives to the female. Here the relationship of the parties, Schwimmer argues, is established
prior to the gift and is not changed by it, and each in metonymically giving a part of himself or herself
sustains that distinct identity. 14
The two procedures are juxtaposed within the one Orokaiva myth; there is a pertinent parallel to the
development of Muyuw transactions between spouses, in the course of which their work, coming from
separate origins, becomes combined (Damon 1983a:308). A Muyuw man courts his future wife with
betelnut, considered female, and she provides him with betel pepper, considered male; the substances are
consumed together. The one is made dependent on the other for internal definition. When husband and wife
are fully joined, however, the completed relationship between them is finalized through a set of external
transactions. The wife's brother gives female things to the husband's kin, who return male things, each side
transacting with a same-sex part of themselves. This is possible because their differentiation as sets of affines
is fixed in the relationship of the spouses. That cross-sex relationship, now combined in their work, is the
mediating object between the kin of each side; the discrete identity of the sides is not altered in subsequent
transactions.
Transactions in which partners have a direct effect on one another (each 'completes' the other's identity) may
involve a transfer of objects, as in the instance of Orokaiva areca and coconut. But I regard the exchange as
unmediated. The objects establish one partner as the other's source of identity, as a 'husband' is created in
association with a 'wife'. The gifts are metaphors of the act of constitution. The metonymic gift, however,
creates a relationship between partners distinct in its identity from either of them alone. It is literally a
mediation between them, created through their interactions, as in the Muyuw exchanges between husband's
and wife's kin. This is the context in which persons, in retaining their separateness, are seen to have parts of
themselves to

                                                    page_203

                                                                                                        Page 204
bestow. The husband's kin give a husband, the wife's kin give a wife. From the donor's point of view, the
parts do not 'belong' to the other partner; they are parts of oneself, which in being detachable create
something 'extra' for both sides. Thus the relationship between them can be 'added' to the identity of each.
Both sides appear as both donors and recipients, each adding this relation to their other relations, an
incremental possibility in mediated transactions not present in unmediated ones. Let me spell this out.
First, a moka partner disposes of a metonymic gift. The pig he gives away embodies his and his wife's work;
but the pig is detachable as a part of himself, in the way the work is not, because the man has transformed
his identity from that of a husband to that of a clansman. 15 The boundedness of the clan unit, like the skin
of a man, enables items to appear extrinsic to it. His clan identity also guarantees the donor's prior social
separation from the recipient. It is important that conjugal work remains thus defined as extrinsic to the
partner's relationship because it is then made visible as a part one of the parties brings to the relation, in his
singular state. Vis-à-vis his moka partners, that domestic work is irrelevant (see chap. 6); the pig comes to his
partners as evidence of the donor's prestige, and for the partner it is only the man's prestige that is at stake,
his standing in the circulation of mediating wealth objects. The wealth he disposes of substitutes for his
person in the eyes of these men. Second, what a partner then recovers is a metaphoric gift, himself
transformed in the regard of others which he attaches to himself, as his prestige. He thereby depends on
these others for evidence of his own name. Their identity is in turn created as a source for his prestige.
In summary, the metonymic gift mediates in a relationship in which the partners retain their distinct
identities; the metaphoric gift establishes a dependency relation that identifies the partners, in an unmediated
way, as versions of one another and augmenting one another's prestige.
Secrecy in Gimi cults enabled the actors to play the parts they allocated themselves, being thus in control of
their meaning (chap. 5). The ritual established an exclusive domain in which only certain sets of meanings
had value; others were suppressed or rendered irrelevant for the event. A comparison with Hagen gift
exchangean arena in which the things men circulate acquire an exclusive valueis patent. Thus 'name'
(reputation) encapsulates the whole man for the purposes of his interactions with other men. The wealth that
circulates his name becomes an encompassing metaphor of his prestige. Things (mel), whether

                                                    page_204

                                                                                                        Page 205
male or female, are detachable from the male person; prestige is not. To lose prestige in that sphere is to risk
losing male identity.
Hagen men's denigration of productive activity as female and things female as 'rubbish', in antithesis to the
gaining of 'prestige', is a separation that can only appear because of the alternative possibility of men
replicating a like identity among themselves. In eclipsing domestic relations, we have seen that the husband
reclassifies his own energies and activities as a part of his replicable male self rather than as a part of the
relationship between himself and his spouse. His productivity visibly adheres to his skin as an element he has
the capacity to dispose of. But a condition for this capacity is collective activity, the presence of a
community of males, to adopt Read's and Langness's term, regarded as equivalent of one another. It is
because of replicated gender identity that the relation between partners can also be regarded as an extension
of the single partnerthat the relationship 'is' his prestige. Items can only be detached on behalf, as it were, of
other men. Men recontextualize domestic relations as parts of themselves, as though they lay on their skin, a
source of wealth in their competition with other men. By virtue of the gender symbolism, they cannot
normally personify as wealth their relations with women.
I return briefly to the point that Hagen wealth is alternatively conceptualized as neither male nor female, but
as an androgynous confection of both. The contrast here is between artifacts in an activated incomplete
(same-sex) and in a completed (cross-sex) state. The coloring of shell valuables indicates this fusion of male
and female characteristics (cf. Ernst 1978; Lindenbaum 1984). But this vivid fusion is created not only out
of a relationship between men and women: rather, that intrahousehold relationship becomes a metaphor for
the extrahousehold dependency of exchange partners upon one another. It is also a relationship between men
that is signified in the cross-sex character of the wealth items. Perhaps this in turn gives Hagen men their
sense of power, the idea that with such wealth they could create new relationships. The mediatory objects in
themselves, in their figuratively complete, androgynous form, present an aesthetic anticipation of the
possibility that with them alone a man could elicit more relations with other men. The illusion is close to
hand in the wealth of every husband's household.
Damon refers to the Muyuw ownership of kitoum valuables as representing autonomy: one appears indebted
to no one for them. Although there is no class of wealth in Hagen ceremonial exchange which

                                                    page_205

                                                                                                        Page 206
is specifically debt-cancelling, the mediatory nature of moka gives men a similar autonomy. By contrast with
the dependency relations of domestic kinship, moka partners are definitively equal and independent in
respect to one another. The enchainment (indebtedness) established by the gift is an outcome of transaction
itself: only as donors and recipients are the partners unequal. Simultaneously, then, transactions indicate the
capacity to create relationships and the ability to do so as an independent person. Their techniques are the
same as the aesthetics of kula: replication of same-sex identity among men.
Replicability introduces the possibility of measurement. When men act as agents of their own domestic
transformation, their agency is encapsulated in the term ukl, performance, creation, custom (see pp.
179180). Whereas work remains concrete, always significant to the particular person's orientation to others,
ukl provides a generalizable basis for comparison. Ukl are occasions on which the measure of one man may
be taken against another; it indicates the success with which they act, precisely because it rests on the overt
use of mediating objects that bring things visibly to the skin. In moka performance, men thereby set up a
basis for inequality between themselves. The all-male collectivity provides two measures (p. 200)the
comparison may appear either between the individual members of a single group or between donors and
recipients who face each other on alternative occasions. Men thus compare themselves according to what
they have in common, the extent of their name, their capacity to achieve. Some fail; yet because of the
gender presumption, all 'men' may be regarded as part of the moka system, and all participate as apparent
equals differentiated only by their performance.
An effect of mediated exchange, then, is to make relationships appear as though they were accumulated and
increased by the flow of things. 16 This replication rests in increasing the velocity of circulation: the more
transactions pass through a person's hands, the more he can transact. The effects of men's exertions are
visible in the multiplication of similar relationships, in the velocity which registers the speed and range with
which gifts flow. Ever 'more' partners can be pressed into a man's network because of the common
denominator that makes all men multiplications of one another. The simple categorization of male persons as
potential exchange partners opens up contacts with strangers, brings distant persons close, or transforms
differentiated kin-based ties into partnerships for the purposes of moka.17 The strenuously defended
presumption of basic parity means that partners start from a premise of

                                                    page_206

                                                                                                        Page 207
no-debt, since debts are created through the exchanges themselves and not by some prior asymmetry. A man
can theoretically take any moka pig out of the system and consume it, and he can put any pig into it. His
power to expand relationships infinitely seems constrained only by his own ability to make his relationship
with his wife simultaneously of central and peripheral significance to the enterprise.
Unmediated Exchange: Transmission
At several junctures, the discussion of mediated relations has turned on comparisons with unmediated ones.
As an exchange, an unmediated relation works through the directness of the effect which partners have on
one another and, in the case of the metaphoric gift, creates a mutual dependency between them each for
their own definition. They 'exchange' identities as it were. The present section focuses on unmediated
exchange which appears, like mediated exchange, in the replication of entities. Here, however, it is the
replication not of individuals as singular, same-sex persons which is at issue but the replication of substance.
Thus we might imagine its effect as bodily growth or as the transmission of bodily tissue from one person to
another.
Growth does not occur through the simple increase of material mass. The Melanesian body is imagined as
composed of internal relations. The generation of substance must therefore either derive from relations or
itself compose a set of relations. Indeed, both are the case: growth and transmission are caused by the
interactions of persons, and occur as a direct result of interaction being duplicated within the body. I refer to
the interaction as an exchange, whether or not other items such as food are present, for reasons already
offered (see above, p. 179). Consonant with the earlier emphasis of this chapter on the replication of
same-sex identity between males, it continues with male replication. Female replication is considered in
chapter 9. Although I refer to bodily growth, the alignment of minds could equally well be taken as an
example of replication through unmediated exchange.
Reference to the replication of substance as the internal analogue of the replication of singular individuals
draws on Wagner's (1977a) exemplification of Daribi ideas. He argues that the Daribi exchange of detached,
partible things stands in apposition to the flow of internal (lineal) substance within a single wife-exchanging
or wife-receiving unit. Meat, women, and shells flow in exchange across relationships not internally unified
by substance. Thus meat can be conceptualized

                                                     page_207

                                                                                                          Page 208
as an externalized partible equivalent of seminal fluid (1977a:632). In turn, semen must also flow: men see
themselves as needing to sustain its internal increase through eating the juices and fats of meat, 18 and their
energies are thus directed toward producing more semen. Technically, in my terms, the replication of parts of
themselves, it is experienced as replenishment of what has been lost (Wagner 1983). In this respect, Daribi
views echo those of other Highlands populations who regard persons as possessing a limited quantity of
expendable life force (see Kelly 1976; J. Weiner 1982).
The conventional separation between internal and external relations is tantamount to the personification of
the body itself. For the Melanesian image of the body as composed of relations is the effect of its
objectification as a person. In the partibility of its extensions into relations beyond itself and in the internal
relations that compose its substance, the body consequently appears as a result of people's actions.
Either type of exchangemediated or unmediatedpersonifies the body; both depend, I have argued, upon the
aesthetic of replication. We have seen how replication works to produce partibility; it also works to produce
internal growth and the transmissibility of substance. What applies to human bodies applies equally to the
'bodies' of food plants and to items such as valuables whose substantial capacity to attract wealth can be
transmitted to others. It underlies magic and the conveyance of qualities between objects. Here, however, I
am concerned with the bodies of people. In their case internal growth beyond childhood is perpetuated
through internal health. Growth and health are intimately related; both are construed as evidence that the
body is indeed inhabited by a person, by the proper activation of social relationships.
If the body is thus personified, so too are its physical parts. We are dealing with the replication of substance
that must assume a same-sex form. Within that context, the potential distinction between male and female is
crucial, and body parts are personified in being given a gender identity as one or the other. Thus we may
apprehend the apparent paradox that much ritual attention is paid to sexual organs not because the organs
sex the person, as it were, but because in her or his relations with others, the person sexes the organs. They
then become evidence of the successful activation of those relations.
Growing boys and marrying men. In a wide-ranging conclusion to Herdt's (1984a) collection of essays on
ritualized homosexuality in Melanesia, Lindenbaum makes a direct comparison between ceremonial

                                                     page_208
                                                                                                      Page 209
exchange and the circulation of semen through homosexual practices. Indeed, she adduces ''the shift from
semen to shells" as accompanying a developmental "shift from involuted forms of marriage and ceremonial
exchange to more expansive chains of ritual and social connection" (1984:351352). Semen can be seen as an
analogue of bridewealth. She then argues that whereas in the circulation of semen, men exchange body
products as parts of themselves, with (bride)wealth, they exchange the social labors of women. Semen
cultures, she suggests, simply mystify women's contribution to reproduction; but wealth items such as shells
'objectify' and make appropriatable women's horticultural productivity. Hence men in societies dominated by
ceremonial exchange are interested in making wealth whereas ritualized homosexuality is focused on "the
idea that men create men" (1984:349). But to my mind an intrinsic distinction cannot really be sustained
between semen and wealth: semen is as much objectified as its analogue. Indeed, the analogue exists
precisely because in both cases men define themselves as exchanging aspects (parts) of their own identity. In
reintroducing the Sambia material described in chapter 3 to discuss the point, I also reintroduce the question
of whether their rituals can be said to 'create men'. 19
Lindenbaum's interest is in the evolutionary consequences of wealth exchangehow it creates possibilities for
forms of social organization from exchange different from those based on the transfer of body substance. My
own interest, however, is in the internal differentiation of social forms. At least as far as the homosexual
practices of the Sambia are concerned, men move between different modes of semen exchange, transforming
their identities thereby, much as Hagen men do in moka. However, whereas the critical contrast between
mediated and unmediated transactions in Hagen distinguishes domestic from political activity, here both
forms of transaction operate to major effect within the one set of ritual sequences. As we shall see, Herdt
captures a further internal contrast in that between direct and indirect exchange (compare Kelly
1977:223ff.).
Male association in initiation cults, such as those found in Sambia, is marked by the overt creation of
inequality and asymmetry within a body of men defined homogeneously as 'male'. Equality between male
participants is achieved via a flow of mediating substances among themselves; inequality by dividing
themselves in such a way that one set of men are seen to have direct, unmediated effects on the other.
Equality is made evident through the replication of same-sex (all male) links, while inequality among the
males is manifested in cross-sex relations.

                                                  page_209

                                                                                                      Page 210
The latter are essential for the senior participants to realize their intention to make the boys 'grow'; the
former essential to their intentions that what is grown within each boy is male substance. In the all-important
first-stage initiation, 20 both facts are revealed to the boys through the one device. They are made to learn
that semen is a version of milk, and that the male penis is a version of the female breast.
This has been at once the significant discovery of Herdt's ethnography and the paradox that has fuelled his
own analysis. Two major themes run through his presentation: the thesis of masculinization, on which I dwelt
in chapter 3, and the fact that the rituals prepare men to marry and reproduce. He makes it clear that men
are not fully men until they are parents. The final stages of initiation are bound up with the birth of their
children; and boys must first be grown before they can, in turn, grow a new child (Herdt 1982a:54).
Herdt analyzes Sambia rites and beliefs about men in terms of their psycho-sexual transformation. The
collective secrecy of male ritual, he says, disguises the experiential secret that "manhood and its supporting
sense of maleness, comes not from within, but from the external, humiliating process of having been another
man's sexual insertee, thus enabling one to eventually become a woman's insertor" (1981:278, original
emphasis removed). Homosexual practices prepare men for heterosexual relations with women. The
ritualization process forges a masculinity that is pitted against the feminine; boys have to make "the
transition from maternal attachment to rugged adult warriorhood" (1981:315), but this process also prepares
them for encounters with women.
The presence of female symbols at the heart of the cult has to be explained. The all-male phallic flutes turn
out to be animated also by a female spirit, or they can be conjugally paired as male and female (as noted on
p. 126). To the extent that he is committed to a thesis of personal gender identity, Herdt (1982a) treats the
female aspect of these flutes as referring to previous relationships with real women. Men's instrumentality
works, he argues, to detach the boys from their links to their own mother and fix attachment onto male
objects. He documents the explicit equations made by Sambia men between flute and penis and between
flute and breast. Indeed, the boy novices are instructed in the matter. Through homosexual encounters, the
penis comes to 'substitute' for the breast, as a source of nurture and as a sensual replacement for the mother
the boys have lost. Sambia are explicit: semen and milk flow from the 'flutes'. In accounting for the eroticism
that sustains

                                                    page_210

                                                                                                         Page 211
these equations, not to say the children's emotional vulnerability, Herdt observes,
   [t]he flute-oriented behavior, releasing feelings of helplessness and fear, supplants the mother as the
   preferred attachment figure by offering the culturally valued penis and homosexual relationships as
   sensual substitutes for the mother's breast and for the mother as a whole person. (1982a:79)
In this analysis, the mother's attributes are objects that become detached and embodied in other objects that
replace them. The flute acts as an erotic fetish. The equation between phallus and breast, he thus avers, is a
fantasized one, and he returns at this juncture to "individual Sambia males' needs to sense themselves
unambiguously and to perform competently as masculine men" (1982a:82). 21
I would comment upon the singularity of the object (the flute that is both breast and penis, and the penis
presented as breast) from another vantage point. The singular form teaches the boys that the organ may be
either male or female; but it also teaches them two other things. First, whether it is a male or female organ
will depend on the person who activates it: for the double penises of a 'mother' which nourished them at an
earlier stage it is as though they are now confronted with the single breast of their 'sister's husbands'. Ideally,
a boy is fed by many men, so this is also a transformation from a particular to a collective relationship.
Second, the activation itself creates a gender distinction: substituting for the cross-sex relation a boy enjoyed
with his mother, the senior inseminator establishes a cross-sex relation with him. The novice plays female to
the man's male-ness. What he therefore also learns is that one cannot act as both male and female at the
same time.
That the gender of people's sexual organs depends on what they do with them recalls the conclusion to
chapter 5. The supposition was inspired by Gillison's analysis of Gimi ritual: the flute that is breast and penis,
and container as well as emitter of fluids, assumes an identity in the way it is handled. In the company of
other males, the Sambia initiate learns that what distinguishes males from females is not their appendages
and orifices as such but the social relations in whose context they are activated. It is relations that separate
the genders, male from female and same-sex from cross-sex. The boys are made to act like women and are
put into a deliberately unequal position with respect to others of their own sex. The difference between male
and female is thus created during the course of the rites, and it is a difference that turns on interaction, not
attributes. In other words, the flutes are not simply

                                                    page_211

                                                                                                         Page 212
fetishized body parts of an absent maternal figure who is reconstructed into a male figure of desire; we must
follow the second theme that Herdt offers and see the fixing of gender as concerning the persons whom the
boys must become, and the relationships with women which lie ahead of them.
The singularity of the sexual organ and its semen/milk also presents an androgynous form. At one and the
same time, the multiple origins of the novice are confirmed (he was born and grown of both male and female
persons), while he must also know himself as eventually having a singular (male) part to bestow. This
developmental sequence is played out in front of the boys. First, the older male participants of these cults
embody the relations that produced them: senior men present themselves as combining the male and female
elements of which they are composed. The flutes, the initiators, stand as both mother and father to the
novices. And if one set of men act simultaneously as father and mother to the others, it is because they, too,
are simultaneously the embodiment of a relation between a mother and father. The novice in turn drinks a
substance he may experience as either maternal or paternal in nature. He is united with, or identified with,
the duality of his own source through this dual nurture, and this identity with his male and female source
establishes his own androgyny. But in order for a boy to be marriageable, he must also be able to contribute
a differentiated substance to his offspring that will be the future 'father's' part as opposed to the 'mother's'
part he will encounter in the person of his wife. The boys have multiple origins, yet they must come to their
own wives with a singular male element to bestow.
The ritual, then, accomplishes the further demonstration that what is combined can also be separated. It is
possible to detach parts of oneself. The unequal division between senior and junior 22 is also the basis for
creating further differencebetween male and female. Here the initiators stand specifically as 'husbands' to the
novices who are their 'wives'. The seniors accomplish this through the flow of detachable substance whose
social activation establishes it as male. Semen taken in by the feminized initiand is itself masculinized. In this
process of personification, the substance becomes a 'male' object by virtue of the transaction itself. These
rites do not make men, that is, they do not masculinize persons; persons masculinize the semen.
In fact, I wish to clear away several grounds on which the rites do not make men, in order to suggest one on
which they do. First, persons are not masculinized; rather persons masculinize their own organs and

                                                    page_212

                                                                                                        Page 213
sexual substance. Second, they do that not to make the boys, as a special category, into men, but to ensure
that they will have the internal capacity to procreate, to be 'fathers'. And, third, men do not in any simple
way make men because men are not in any simple way men. They also have an identity as androgynous
beings composed of male and female elements; and they are produced in male form only in so far as they
can, in fact, be produced out of an opposite, female form (see pp. 128129).
One might imagine, however, that in decomposing themselvesin detaching parts of themselves to bestow on
othersthe androgynous persons would thereby be feminized. That is, the senior man would detach a 'male'
part and leave himself identified with his 'female' part. But what blocks this outcome is what blocks the
Hagen moka maker, who is also able to detach a male part from his male self and sustain it as a metonymic
extension of his masculinity. His masculinity is preserved by the cross-sex relation that he establishes with
the recipient-insertee. His 'female' partner returns him the knowledge that he has bestowed a masculine
substance, because otherwise the relationship would not have been activated. This being the case, the
bestowal has a replication-effect. Semen can be added to semen, and the boys 'filled up': what is transmitted
to them thus grows them. The boys can then be thought of as 'male'; thus the metonymic transmission of
semen returns to the donor as a metaphor for the collective masculinity of all the cult participants. What
'grows' the female-boy can also 'flow' between the male-men. It is not as an individual or as a member of a
special category but as a part of a homogeneous male collectivity that a boy appears as a man. For as a 'boy'
he is already anticipated as a 'man', as I shall try to make apparent.
Apropos the analogy between semen and wealth transactions, it seems that semen is not axiomatically an
extension of men, and is thus not innately male. The revelation of the cult being that male semen is also
female milk, this androgynous substance is made male in the course of those unmediated transactions
(homosexual relations between unequals) in which it assists the novice's growth. The relationship separates it
from the donor, rendering the substance detachable. Semen can then comprise a flow of objectifications
between men.
If one shifts from the initiator/novice relationship, where both semen and milk make the boy grow, to the
community of senior males, it is clear that these men are also creating relations between themselves. It is the
novice who becomes objectified, bestowed with a particular

                                                    page_213

                                                                                                        Page 214
value that is both the object of and product of their interactions. The boy's new growth makes these
exertions visible. He is semen in embodied form. The effectiveness of men's performances as males is
thereby shown in these objects; they do not transmit semen directly to one another but collectively produce
the new men from their body parts. In short, the novice as a mediating object gives value to the relations
between the older men.
Novices, then, like the semen they consume, are mediatory objects produced by the men's transactions. The
flow sustains relations between the relatively equal seniors. By contrast, inequality between novice and
initiator casts their particular interactions into the unmediated mode, and what passes between them is a
substance analogous to food, which confirms the identity of the donor but alters the identity of the recipient:
the one is feeder to the other being fed. But for the food to have a replicating effectfor the homosexual
relations to "increase a boy's maleness and build up his masculinity" (Herdt 1981:204)the semen must also
be attached to him as an additional (metonymic) part. Hence the boys must be, as it were, already
masculinized before the fresh process of masculinization is effective. This is done by making them
momentarily into male vessels for the male substance.
Flutes are initially presented on the very day that the boys' noses are bled, to rid them of bad maternal blood
(Herdt 1982a:59; 1982b). The boys are shown that they can detach what is within them, and are thus
constituted as vessels, their bodies remaining even though the blood is expelled. The flutes are themselves
vessels for the female spirit who is to be a source for their growth, and its sounds are by analogy semen/milk:
the spirit woman's milk is the men's semen. The gender of this internal substance remains, however,
importantly equivocal. This means, too, that the gender of the vessel is equivocal. A summary of the
transactions we have been considering to this point explains why.
What the flute/penis emits is masculinized through a double set of social relations. The substance circulates
among (same-sex) men as detachable parts of themselves, and to the extent that the boys become eligible to
participate in this flow at their own marriage, the semen with which they impregnate their wives will also be
male. However, for the men to remain in a symmetrical, equal relationship with one another, the object of
mediation must itself be cross-sex, at least so one would deduce from the aesthetic of mediated exchange in
the kula or moka. Simultaneously, then, the semen must indeed also be milk, an androgynous or even female
confection at the men's disposal. It can thus be

                                                   page_214

                                                                                                      Page 215
fed to the novice either as a single sex entity (milk or semen) or as a cross-sex entity (a combination of both,
the spirit woman's semen). The female status of the novice elicits the semen in masculine form, and it
replicates the substance that fills him up and grows him. It also reproduces, I have argued, his own multiple
cross-sex identity.
One may further extrapolate 23 on the basis of some of the personifying idioms Sambia use. When the boys
hear the flutes, whom they associate with the men, the flutes are said to be helpless infants crying out for
milk (Herdt 1982a:78). Yet it is the boys who will receive 'milk'. Thus the boys, cavities for the flutes they
must suck, are already themselves flutes. In other words, what the men detach belongs already to the boys, a
metaphoric gift, in so far as the boys are constituted in a form like them. But the likeness is the likeness of
both same-sex identity and cross-sex androgyny. The androgynous identity of the substance that is
transmitted comes from an androgynous container (the breast/penis). It is not milk or semen, but a 'child'.
The flutes are crying children. If the novice who is made into a 'new man' appears as a 'child' of the men (see
above n. 22), simultaneously he is endowed with the child that he will in turn endow his wife with. He is
already the child whom he will beget.24
This is the value that novices give to the relations between men. For in this form they make apparent the
proximate paternity of the senior initiators. In having the boys receive a detachable part of themselves, these
men are given evidence of their own future partibility: those close to fatherhood exercise the capacity
initially on 'themselves', that is, on younger boys. The boys' ultimate paternity, and their capacity to
reproduce, is quite explicit in what Sambia men say about having to fill their bodies up with semen, since
they cannot generate it autonomously. But the paradox remains that fathers cannot directly produce fathers,
for fatherhood is evinced in cross-sex interaction. Here separation is anticipated. Mythology makes it clear
that the male partner (the senior inseminator) is seen as making the boy into a female, creating another
different from himself, like the wife he is soon to meet. In anticipation, the novice also is put into the
position of his own future wife (Herdt 1982a:70).
Lindenbaum (1984:354) notes generally for societies which practice ritualized homosexuality that "[b]rother
and sister seem at times to be treated as a single unit." In Sambia, brother and sister are dependent upon one
another for their identity, though they are not regarded as productive in the way that is true (say) in
Muyuw.25 This is a crucial

                                                   page_215

                                                                                                      Page 216
condition for other separations. We return to the sociological fact that a man is likely to be inseminated by
the same social person ('sister's husband') who inseminates his sister, provided the individuals concerned
observe the age difference between junior and senior (Herdt 1981:238). 26 Although Sambia stress the
importance of homosexual partners being unrelated, in the same generation brother and sister potentially
receive semen from the one source.27 Affinity is thus anticipated in the rites themselves. The 'sister's
husband' stands in an analogous relationship to both, endowing the siblings with a parallel capacity to
transmit substance in turn (their respective offspring). The semen from this man overtly completes the work
begun by the parents of the brother and sister; it also creates containers out of both their bodies.
For semen is transmitted to both nonpartible and partible effect. It has two forms. Some of what is ingested
contributes directly to the growth of the brother's and sister's body tissue, and cannot be further transmitted:
it thus augments the work of their parents. But some of it remains as semen in the boy, thereby filling his
body as though it were a container: the skin and bone tissue created by primary semen is also what envelops
this secondary semen. Secondary semen, in Sambia dogma, remains partible. Most that the brother receives
accumulates within him as a pool, and its containment is made visible, for it is this substance that the boy in
turn will detach and transmit (Herdt 1984b:182). The sister likewise receives partible semen, but its qualities
are further doubled.28 Each type is transmissible but not for her in the form in which it was transmitted: it
becomes both the breast milk (a 'male' food) with which she feeds her child and the very child itself within
her which she envelops.
Perhaps initial proof of the cavity which semen both creates (in nonpartible form) and fills (in partible form)
comes from the emptying of the brother's and sister's bodies when they rid themselves of maternal blood.
given marriage arrangements that encourage people to think in terms of sister-exchange, mother's blood must
derive ultimately from the 'same' clan source as sister's husband's semen.29 Indeed, a primeval brother-sister
pair could be imagined as productively parallel, through the man's transmission of semen and the woman's
transmission of blood. Blood might thus be, as it so appears in other Eastern Highlands societies, 'a version
of' semen. But Sambia separate semen and blood. Milk, not blood, is the cognized female version of male
substance.
Brother and sister are joined, not by a complementary equation of semen and blood but by semen alone, in
the single social person of the

                                                    page_216

                                                                                                         Page 217
sister's husband whose one substance they both ingest. The crucial separation must be between the partible
and nonpartible types: for children to be produced, the semen that coagulates to form a fetus must be
separated from the encasing semen substance of the person's body.
Now it follows that what a man does for his wife's younger brother, other men will be doing for his own
sister and himself. It is these relations that guarantee that the substance a husband passes to his wife (and her
brother) will be different from what she already possesses (cf. Gillison 1980:167168). Bodily identification
with the sister establishes a man's separation from his wife. Persons cannot both act and be acted upon at the
same time in Sambia cross-sex imagery. And a man's passivity towards his sister and her husband establishes
his activity towards his wife and her brother. What enables them to 'produce' children is the separation which
then becomes conceivable between the spouse's internal constitutions (the relation which makes each body
both container and contained). Although the husband is thought also to contribute to the wife's body (the
container), this is only a contribution. Her body is made largely of paternal material; instead he transmits his
own partible substance that becomes contained within the wife's cavity as an entity separate from her
encasing paternal body.
Given that it is milk, rather than blood, which is the Sambia female version of male substance, there is a
parallel between the emptying of the male body through insemination and female breast feeding. While
getting rid of milk or semen may underline the vessel-like nature of the body, blood by contrast does not
have the property of further flow. It is simply discarded, and in being discarded it is 'bad', in contradistinction
to the vital filling and emptying of the semen sac/womb/breasts.
Herdt draws an anology between direct and indirect semen transactions (1984b:175, 194ff.). Semen given
directly to a boy transforms him in so far as he grows thereby; it is an unmediated transaction, and its
productive effect is achieved through its seemingly exogenous sociality. One man inseminates another with
semen from a different source (since the inseminator is an affine) than that which makes up the recipient's
paternal body, hence the male/female asymmetry between them. The indirect transaction refers to the
feeding of the inseminator's child with its mother's semen-fed milk, for the fetus receives the father's semen
through the instrumentality of the mother's body. Herdt suggests (1984b:180) that the woman's body is thus
regarded as a transformer of male substance.
As long as the maternal body envelops and encloses it, the fetus

                                                    page_217
                                                                                                          Page 218
grows. The mother's body does not nourish the child directly. (Maternal blood does not produce any body
part of the forming fetus, although it is tapped during the transformation of the semen into a child.) There is
no passage of substance from herthe fetus is fed only by further contributions from its own father. But its
enclosure is significant. This enclosing of an object signals covert growth. In this sense, the woman's body
duplicates the body of male cult members. And among them, unlike the passage of wealth items between
kula communities or Hagen clans, the circulation of semen occurs in a context that I have referred to as
collectivizing domesticity (see chap. 5). The overall result of the men's closed operations is, in turn, not
expansive flow but inner growth.
The transfer of an item between units (men) who are alike (same-sex) is created through momentary
asymmetry: donor and recipient become senior and junior, male and female, to one another. This asymmetry
is not, as in ceremonial exchange, reversible between the original partners; the junior female can only
become a senior male to other novices. Godelier (1982:14) has drawn attention to the analogue with
generalized marriage exchange. But this 'generalized' exchange between men operates, as he notes, in a
context where actual marriage may take the form of restricted sister-exchange. His observations for Baruya
hold for Sambia. As far as the resultant kinship identities of the cult participants are concerned, there are
ultimately no exogenous sources of vital substance. Perhaps this is at the root of Sambia belief that semen
substance is strictly limited in quantity in the human population. Perhaps too this leads to the perception of
its externalization as loss. Ultimately, kinship closure saves them. By necessity, Sambia male ritual must be
oriented to the realized reproduction of children, and thus they orchestrate the initiation stages to develop
from collective rites to individually centered ones related to the maturing femininity of the women assigned
as wives (their menarche, first childbirth). For the marriage arrangements guarantee in kinship terms the
ultimate containment of their vital resource. The containment is anticipated in their (generalized)
transactions. Unlike the illusion of ceremonial exchange, there is no infinite expansion of like units, no
potential to increase the velocity of flow. The illusion is that the flow of substance remains locked within the
community of males. As Herdt reports (1984b:192), they hold on to the idea that semen transmitted to the
boys is saved for the men.
More than the gender of the transacted item is established: its particular kinship source is also significant. Or
rather, those kin relations establish its gender. Wives' husbands must displace wives' fathers as

                                                     page_218

                                                                                                          Page 219
procreators. Semen must be produced outside the woman's body in order for it to be different from the
milk/semen/paternal substance of which she herself is also constituted, and the community of males detaches
itself from communication with females to effect this separate production. They nevertheless construct an
analogy between bodies of male and female 'siblings'. The siblings are 'affines' to the same inseminator,
prepared as vessels for receiving substance from the one exogenous source. In so far as the inseminating
senior males become 'spouses' to the sister-brother pair, then the future husband is also joined to his 'wife'. At
the same time, men take action in order to render distinct their contributions as 'fathers'. Finally in the
enclosed cult house they force upon one another the growing and extending of the boys as 'children'.
Elsewhere in the Highlands, the circulation of wealth produces prestige; here the circulation of semen
produces persons in the variety of kinship relations just mentioned. Of these, fatherhood seems the most
significant. Now whereas prestige can be assimilated to a metaphoric statement about the whole man, in the
end fatherhood requires an opposite sex partner for its effectiveness. A flow (of semen) creates a unitary
identity among the seniors, yet it itself merely replicates that identity, a trope for an anticipated but, until the
moment of conjugal union, not yet realized capacity. Indeed, these imagined kinship positions are all in a
sense anticipations.

The Anticipated Outcome
The replication of persons and substances in same-sex form is an aesthetic convention through which two
modes of personification appear: mediated and unmediated exchange. Exchange makes objects (persons) out
of people's relations with one another such that the ability to create or enlarge certain relationships stands for
the ability to activate any.
So far I have been considering the extent to which men make themselves effective in their dealings with
other men. But this is done not simply through extending relationships; it is also done through metaphorizing
one set of relations to stand for another, as occurs repeatedly in these instances between conjugality and clan
or cult membership. The next chapter considers more fully the way in which relations are thus turned into
relations, appearing in forms different from their original manifestation. We have touched on this as
displacement or eclipse.

                                                    page_219

                                                                                                        Page 220
In the further process of extraction, the agency of one of a pair of persons is asymmetrically exercised upon
the other. At the point of extraction, a mutual relationship is turned into a nonmutual one, and the
relationship itself becomes embodied in an object that takes a quite other form (a thing, a child, an item of
wealth). The act of extraction is thus reified in the embodied substitution.
Personification entails the possibility that one set of social relations can always be dissolved into or
expanded into a different set. Persons composed of one kind of relation subsequently appear to be composed
of another, as Hagen men transform their identities from spouse into male, and from male into one of two
typesclansman or exchange partner. The entailment is also apparent in the recursive nature of Sambia
transformations. Given that persons objectify relations, I have stressed that it is their internal capacities (the
activation of those relations) which is the focus of interest. But for the relations to exist, they must already
be there: persons must in themselves be what they can become. The boy novice must already be a male
vessel for the male semen he will ingest; the flutes/penises of the men must already be the children whom
they will beget; the semen must already be partible before it is detached. The cue comes from Gillison's
analysis of Gimi rites for girlsGimi suppose that the girl about to be impregnated already has a child within
her (1980:163).
To imagine that the girl is already a woman is, of course, to imagine that she has within her the capacity to
bear children. Internal capacities are personalized: the potential (to procreate) takes the form of its
realization (the procreator) so that these capacities embody the creations of their own creativity. To imagine
that the Sambia boy novice is already his future wife is to imagine that he has within him the capacity to
form a relationship with a spouse, he being dependent upon her, of course, for definition as a husband. Yet
the capacity must in turn be made visible, be made to work, and it must be shown in the only form possibleas
its own outcome. The capacity to bear children must appear in the form of a child who has been born; the
capacity to act as a spouse must appear in the form of a conjugal union.
In English this sounds like stating the obvious. In Melanesian (as it were) people endeavor to make it
obvious, to make these capacities thus objects of knowledge for themselves. They must be extracted from
the body that produces them. The spirit child which her husband's kin force on a Gimi woman alters the
identity of the original fetus; the men's same acts also cause the woman to give birth, the new relationship

                                                    page_220

                                                                                                        Page 221
(with her husband) separating the child from her body. Sambia construct a persistent asymmetry in the
relations between men; the seniors grow the juniors, in a coercive partnership that makes the boys the
objects of men's acts. For what the men put into the boys is also what must be extruded: the boys' (= the
men's) paternal potency. As objects of the men's relations, the boys anticipate the outcome of their
interaction. The anticipated outcome gives the gift economy its cultural form.
Gift exchange has always been a conundrum to the Western imagination. For it is, tout court, the circulation
of objects in relations in order to make relations in which objects can circulate. This is the recursiveness of
the anticipated outcome. There is nothing particularly mystical or humanistic about it. It derives, I argue,
from making explicit a particular technique of objectification, namely, the personifying mode in which the
objects of relations are always other relations. One calls others into existencea sequence visible in what
people seek to know about themselves. If relations consequently appear to them in such objects, then these
objects are apprehended as both cause and effect of the relations. And if we take 'the gift' as a shorthand
for objects (relations), then we can see how gifts pose dramatic temporal problems. They are images of the
possible collapse in on itself of any relationship of separation between cause and effect.
The gift works as the cause of a relation as well as its effect. So conceiving an object to be the outcome of a
transaction posits its existence in the context of transaction. Both prior and subsequent transactions are
implicated in its value.
Objects can consequently take on the appearance of a possession to be extracted (or stolen, Harrison
1984:392) from another. This anticipation is also retrospective; anything one has acquired (wealth, fertility)
may appear to have had its origin elsewhere. An origin may be acknowledged as a source of growth: what
another has grown becomes partible for oneself. A prior condition is thus transformed into its counterpart.
These interrelations follow from the aesthetic constraints of gender imagery.
Transformation consists in altering the value that objects have. By altering the objects, new relationships
become visible, though where we might perceive it is the meanings which are changed, the participants
might imagine it is their appearance. The bodily form of a Sambia boy changes under the activity of his
seniors; no longer the outcome of a cross-sex relation between his parents, he becomes first an object of re-

                                                   page_221

                                                                                                       Page 222
lations between same-sex men, female to their male, and then a partible male entity within a male body in a
potent state. The possibility of so switching the 'value' of an object makes obvious that each relationship
anticipates its own transformation. What is true externally is also true internally, that the outcome or product
of a relationship is already contained in the relationship itself. Thus moka partners are partners by virtue of
the wealth that flows between them, at once cause and effect of their actions.
In this sense I interpret A. Weiner's observation that an ''object is both the sign of reproduction and also the
action of reproduction" (1982:64). But reproduction only exists as a discernible activity in so far as the
gender of objects indicates perceptible movement between same-sex and cross-sex relations. We must return
to the drastic aesthetic limit on the manner in which transformation itself is registered. Since social relations
are evinced in one or other of two shapes, transformation is achieved as the movement between them; the
medium that registers movement is the replication or substitution of gender identity. Basically, actors move
perpetually between being the completed (cross-sex) outcome of the actions of others, and themselves
(same-sex) being able to act in respect of another. To put themselves in this latter condition they thus assume
an 'incomplete' gender.
The creation of a same-sex state seems a symbolic prerequisite for separating gift from giver, the transacted
from transactor. Only this separation allows the detachment of an object which can then be exchanged
between persons and signifies the relation between them. Detachment makes the person incomplete
(Schieffelin 1980), and therefore seek completion with another. Completion is inevitably anticipated in the
oscillation between creating the condition of an active reproducer (incomplete) and the condition of the
reproduced (completed) thing as evidence of past action. Same-sex entities are such activated reproducers
(being of one sex, they evoke their opposite), while androgynes are 'finished', reproduced beings, the sign of
agency in others but not themselves agents.
Persons (relations) can only appear if they take a form. The necessity to display one or other conditionone
must always be one or the otherthus means that to be in a present state one is no longer in the previous state:
same-sex and cross-sex relations themselves emerge both as cause of and effect of each other.
In ceremonial exchange, what looks like the recipients' coercion to

                                                   page_222

                                                                                                       Page 223
attract wealth to themselves is also coercion on the donor's part. The recipients, having been donors
previously, are now the passive cause (the debt) of the newly activated exchange. Activation extracts from
them admission of the donor's prestige. They are forced to accept the donor's gifts, acknowledging the debt
they created in the past, thereby making themselves for the present inactive.
Inequality is essential to this relation, imitating the asymmetry of those unmediated relationships by which
one party grows another. For only what another has grown can become partible for oneself. (Expanded, of
course, this states that the object of a relationship with one person becomes differently attached in a
relationship with another.) If growth occurs on the basis of a unitary identity between grower and grown, it is
apprehended as increment internal to the person. Growth is conceptualized as containedwithin the clan on
ancestral land, within the body of male cultists, within the size of the big man. Growth is also secret and
silent, known only by its effects. But to have effect requires release of the grown entity from the body which
contains it. This act of production involves both force and differentiation: the male clan detaches its female
wealth in exchange; male initiates show themselves to women; a big man attracts exotic wealth as an
extrinsic adornment. Objects are separated from their source by the new relationship that they signify, and a
former encompassing relation (same-sex) is now revealed to be internally partible (cross-sex). Or a same-sex
objectclan strength, male initiate, a big man's prestigemay be inversely construed as a product of a former
cross-sex interaction: husband and wife labor to increase pigs; the initiate is junior female to the senior
males; wealth comes from an unequal partnership between donor and recipient. 'Production' in either case
(growth and release) becomes conceivable only in so far as the produced entity is also exchanged between
persons; it exists in partible form. The relations that thus separate persons in terms of gender also give the
object of their interaction its reified character.
Indeed, we might say that the anticipated outcome is the aesthetic trap of the gift economy. Relations are
objectified in certain forms which leads to objects appearing as things and thus in-themselves holding out the
possibility of activating relations. In fact they can activate only those relations that they can make appear.
Hence the inevitability of enchainment: one can only make appear what already exists. Yet chapter 7 began
with a disquisition on improvization and invention.

                                                  page_223

                                                                                                     Page 224
The further idea that things do not appear on their own but must be forced into existence by people's acts is
the topic to which I now turn. Chapter 10 draws on this discussion to suggest how the enchainment works, in
a way contrary to what we might suppose, to create individuals as agents and relations as the cause of
events.

                                                  page_224

                                                                                                     Page 225



9
Forms Which Propagate
There is one point on which accounts of male initiation ceremonies for the Papua New Guinea Highlands
seem generally agreed: boys are represented as having to be separated from the domestic sphere where they
were nurtured. Separation is construed as removal from maternal influence, with no doubt about the
extractive idiom. The children must be torn from their mothers. Whether or not there is accompanying
female initiation, the parallel with the boys' bride-to-be is sometimes overlooked. As is clear from Gimi
practices, a girl must in turn be detached from paternal influence, separated from an identification with her
own father. Simultaneously, she becomes evidence of successful transactions between men. It is into this
context that idioms of marriage exchange must be put. Highlanders may liken marriage exchange to the
ceremonial exchange of other gifts whose effect is to create ultimate parity between male partners; but they
also make the marrying of women, like the initiating of men, into a forcible process of extraction.
The parallels are mine. In the rhetorical emphasis Highlanders give to their own actions, extraction and
circulation become gendered; boys have to be detached, girls have to be exchanged. Yet each act also
depends on the other, and novices are made into objects of exchange, brides detached from their kin.
Nonetheless, the rhetoric has had an influence on anthropological interpretations. Consequently, my account
must extricate itself from the concreteness of two images as they have

                                                  page_225

                                                                                                     Page 226
presented themselves to the Western eye: the image of the boy child being removed from an overbearing
female sphere, in order (as the analyses went) to socialize him into masculinity; and the image of females
circulating among men like so many wealth items, their femininity or fertility (it was assumed) the instrument
of callous male reciprocity. At best these interpretations captured half-truths.
Sambia tell us that there is an intimate relationship between initiation and marriage exchanges. In both cases,
what is made partible is what another has grown. This is the objectified form of the process by which values
are altered in the transformation of relationships; a part of oneself is seen to have an exogenous source, from
the viewpoint of one relationship to have originated in another. Thus from the perspective of an all-male cult
membership, boys in being separated from a 'domestic domain' are separated from the context of these men's
own cross-sex relations with their wives. From the perspective of the group of males who negotiate
marriages, the bride must be similarly separated. Here the relevant domain of domestic relations is male. It is
her father's influence that must be altered. The difference is that the negotiating men substitute themselves
(as husbands) for another male (the bride's father) rather than for a female (the initiate's mother). The flow
of women can thus be likened to the flow of partible objects between men. The men's aim is to create new
cross-sex relations for themselves (with the wife, with the affines); they substitute for the woman's cross-sex
relation with her father their own cross-sex relation with her.
The outcome of men's transactions with one another is thus the propagation of new domestic ties. Both
initiation rituals of the Sambia kind and marriages conceived as taking place between groups of negotiating
men serve to establish the future conjugal and paternal activities of the men. They also turn the daughters
and sisters of men into wives and mothers.
Parents of either sex are created (appear as objects of people's dealings with one another) by being extracted
from their own parents in anticipation of the offspring that will be extracted from them. Beyond the conjugal
union, then, lies the outcome of itchildren who may be claimed by men, either as extensions of their all-male
identity under patrilineal regimes or as a product of their cross-sex identity with their sister under matrilineal
ones. In either case, childbirth is a powerful enactment of the extractive process itself, and women's capacity
to give birth gives form to the anticipated outcome.

                                                    page_226

                                                                                                        Page 227
The idea that we cannot sustain, however, is that women are thereby symbolized as powerless. They may
indeed lack power to exert influence over the individual men who arrange things for them. But they are not
imagined as passive and powerless in themselves. On the contrary, there is a widespread illusion, on the part
of both Melanesian women and men, that women are able to grow children within their bodies.
Again, we have to resist Western images of maternal nurture. For other ethnographic cases than the Sambia,
dogma seems to have it that a woman does not feed the fetus within her. There, it will be recalled, the
mother only 'feeds' the child after its birth, with her semen-derived milk. Within her body it is fed by the
father. What is significant is the body itselfthat the fetus is contained within her. This is the source of the
connection between mother and child, a relationship of unmediated exchange. She has a direct effect on its
growth, and in a number of societies this effectiveness leads to women's further illusion that mothers
replicate themselves. Where the illusion is shared by men, then the father or mother's brother must extract
what is owed him. In doing so, the men deal with what for them (as Herdt aptly noted) is the mediating effect
of their affine's body in order to cause the child to be born. The difference between the regimes to which I
have alluded is that in the one case the father must act on the mediating effect of the mother's body; in the
second the mother's brother must act on the body of the mother's husband. Only in so far as they can bypass
these bodies are men's actions seen to take direct effect.
The contrast between the two types of production mentioned in the last chapter (release, growth) presents
the outcome of exchanges from two vantage points. This is true of both 'matrilineal' and 'patrilineal' regimes.
In the latter, these are the vantage points of fathers and of mothers. Fathers are given evidence of their own
action in the form of the born child. But it only substitutes for their actions as the outcome of them,
manifesting their agency in a different form. Moreover, they must activate a cross-sex relation, since the
child is only extracted in being separated from its former (same-sex) encompassment by its mother. Mothers
by contrast are given evidence of their own replication in the swelling of their bodies; the cause may be a
former cross-sex relation, but for them the outcome is recognizable as same-sex increment. Both substitution
and replication manifest, reify, turn into things, the effects of unmediated exchange. Thus as things are
personspeople and clansgrown and propagated.

                                                    page_227

                                                                                                        Page 228
                                                   Fig. 2.
                                       Techniques of Objectification II

Substituting Forms: Extraction
I retain the ambiguity of the term 'marriage exchange' to refer both to a reciprocity in marriages, when one
partnership replaces another (as in sister-exchange), and to transactions which accompany marriages, such
as bridewealth. Much has been made of the organizational consequence of their difference. My own interest
is in the fact that in either case spouses are defined as extractable from their natal kin by virtue of being
owed to another. I briefly comment on the marriage exchanges of the Highlands before considering a
seemingly different situation in the matrilineal Massim. The ambiguity of the lineal designations is also
retained, as a mnemonic for the differences by which we habitually know these systems, though it will be
clear that I do not endorse this classificatory schema for my present purposes any more than I do the
difference between kin-prescribed and other forms of marriage. That is, we cannot take these social forms as
the basis of the very real contrasts to be made between Melanesian societies, though they certainly manifest
contrast.
Creating wives and sisters. Those Highlands exchanges that take such a strongly mediated formmen
circulating objects of value to create relations among themselveshave another side to them. The marriage
'rules' that so compel men to take action in relation to women simultaneously give their exchanges an
unmediated form. Their relations have a direct, substitutive effect upon one another. Women are already
wives by virtue of being sisters, and all that men's activities accomplish

                                                  page_228

                                                                                                      Page 229
is the moment at which their transformation from one state to another becomes visible.
Highlanders make overt the analogy between the circulation of wealth items and the circulation of women in
marriage. It is they who liken marriage transactions to gift exchange, who equate women with wealth. 1
Sometimes the 'exchange' is counted post hoc: only after the event do people point out how a woman who
went to that clan was exchanged for a woman coming to this one. But women are also seen to move against
wealth, as when bridewealth is given; or women may move against other women, as in sister-exchange. In
any case, both men and women construe the transaction in terms of reciprocity. Women's equation with
wealth, it can be added, is not restricted to bridewealth but applies to the idea of valuables in general. What
women reify are partible components of male identity. These partible components are not, of course, to be
imagined simply as feminine powers ('fertility') that men have appropriated for themselves, but as the
converse form of their own masculinity with its own maternal origins.
Like Muyuw, Hagen men say "women are our tradestores," and what they mean is that sisters and daughters
bring in bridewealth, in the form of pigs, shells, and money to their clan. This transformation is accomplished
at the start of a working life rather than, as in Muyuw, at its end. Hagen bridewealth is thus compensation for
the detachment of a clan person rather than an anticipation of work to be lost (though this is an idiomatic
element). The person of the sister or daughter is returned to her clan, then, in the form of wealth, but not as
its own recoverable substance. On the contrary, the sister, already separated from her male kin by the
exogamic rule, anticipates that wealth as an exogenous addition. In relation to all-male clans, then, female
agnates are detachable entities, to be 'added' to other clans. This makes them equivalent to wealth disposable
in social relations in so far as they stand for the relationship between units, partially attached to each.
As an aspect of Hagen men's social identities, women are personified as 'female' thereby, circulating as
detachable parts of clans or persons thereby rendered 'male'. But they do so by virtue of the kinship
transformation that turns them from sisters into wives.2 A woman must be separated from her agnates
through her relationship to a particular other (spouse), to whom her kin thus owe the possibility of separation
itself. Only he can do it for them. From the point of view of the donors (wife-givers), the sister is now a
detached part, but she comes to the

                                                    page_229

                                                                                                         Page 230
recipients (wife-takers) as an entire representative of her natal kin. This is a switch from metonymic to
metaphoric gift (see chap. 8). It is constituted in the different perspectives that the male participants have of
their interaction. 3 Hence the necessity that they are in exchange, for what they exchange with each other
are their viewpoints. And the relativity of their perspectives comes from the demonstration of the men's
respective capacities: only one of the kinds of males (spouse, not agnate; that is, the sister's husband, not her
father or brother) can cause the woman to give birth. Again, only he does it for them, that is, convert her
person into (his) children and (their) wealth. He is necessary to effect the substitution of one kind of
relationship that they enjoy with her into another.
But in so far as those relations are already predicated in the exogamic rule, the possibility of substitution is
already embodied in the persons of women. That outcome is anticipated.
In a number of Melanesian societies, such an outcome is construed in the prescriptive kinship claims that
persons have on marriageable others. The bride is represented as already owed to the marrying unit, who
assert their present claims against their former own cross-sex relations with the same people. Cousin
marriage and moiety organization as found in certain Lowlands systems (the Sepik provides examples)
present perfect cases of the anticipated outcome. Each unit produces for the other because it has been so
produced. The gift (the bride) already exists and must be extracted, and extraction thus activates the very
relation which makes the object. In the Highlands, however, it is much more frequent to find sister-exchange
accompanied by a prohibition on marrying relatives, as in Sambia, or a prohibition on any replicated
marriage in kinship terms, as in Hagen. The prevailing ethos that marriage is nonetheless an exchange, as it
has to be to effect partition, leads to the metaphorization of marriage between wife-giving and wife-taking
units as though marriages were substituting for one another (J. Weiner 1979, and see, for example, O'Hanlon
and Frankland, in press). 'Real' or 'metaphorical' sister exchange means that a debt is established, either in
the past or in the case of simultaneous double unions in the present. This latter is also the structure of
bridewealth, though the debt is construed in the moment of negotiation. Transfers of bride-wealth establish
the claim at the same time as the claim is met. A claim is, of course, an anticipation of separable interests or
viewpoints.
Separations are activated at the moment of extraction, since an object can only be extruded through social
differentiation. That is, the

                                                    page_230

                                                                                                         Page 231
object of one relationship becomes the object of another: sister becomes wife, a woman's father's child
becomes her husband's child. And if women subsequently reify aspects of male identity, men also reify
aspects of female identity. In their cross-sex relations with different categories of males, women's female
capacities are released in different ways. As far as their ability to grow children is concerned, this release is
anticipated, but not realized, in the exogamic rule or in prescriptions about the kinship status of the conjugal
partners. Evidence that the appropriate transformation has been realized requires the intervention of an
agent who, in becoming a source of action, acts to a direct and in this sense unmediated effect. To give
evidence of their own capacities, the 'things' they can yield, women need men to exert themselves on their
behalf.
Creating fathers and sister's husbands. At several points in her writings on the Trobriands, A. Weiner
(1976:229; 1978:178; 1980:75) notes how inapposite it would be to interpret marriage exchanges as simply
defining women as objects of men's transactions. This criticism lies within her larger concern with the way
women's 'power' has been overlooked in the ethnographic record. She develops a general approach to
reproduction, the manner in which in her terminology persons 'replace' one another, stressing the formation
of all kinds of relationships through the flow, combination, and separation of substances (1980; 1982).
Exchanges sustain these flows and include transactions initiated by women quite as much as men. They are
part of a general process of social regeneration, in which "women and men, exemplified in the objects they
exchange, perceive the value of each other through the interface of the value of human beings and the value
of regenesis" (1976:231). Women's reproductive power cannot be regarded simply as a biological resource at
men's disposal. It is not the case that "women were one object among the many objects that moved between
men" (1982:60).
One significant context for her perspective (1980) is provided by the small gifts (mapula) that Trobriand
husbands give their wives, and fathers their children, particularly sons. Since there appeared no material
return, Malinowski called these free gifts, even though the local term ('repayment', 'equivalent') aligns them
with other reciprocal exchanges. Weiner takes, in fact, Malinowski's own position, that exchanges cannot be
considered in isolation. Such gifts, from a man to his wife or his sons, initiates a much larger flow between
his dala (ma-

                                                   page_231

                                                                                                       Page 232
trilineal kin group) 4 and theirs. Gifts to male children include resources such as land use or coconut palms.
These are redeemed by his dala at his death: when the man's kin group takes them back it replaces them
with male wealth (ax blades, pots, shell ornaments). The children's relationship with their father over his
lifetime is thus finally transformed into male wealth at death. The return is a substitute for the work which
the sons do for the father, in much the same way as the wife's work is also joined with his. For this, female
wealth comes from the deceased's female relatives.
A parallel with the combination of husbands' and wives' work on Muyuw suggests itself. However, the
ethnographers note differences between the two islands. The significant Trobriand category of female wealth
(skirts and banana leaf bundles) is absent from Muyuw; people there also make minor business of the
harvest payments from a brother to his sister/sister's husband which formed such a role in Malinowski's
explication of Trobriand kinship. But there is more to the variations than the classification of wealth items.5
Distinctive to the Trobriands appears the possibility that a man can transform his 'work' (p. 195) into wealth,
albeit male wealth, for his kin group. On Muyuw, a man's kin are only compensated with produce for
producetransformative power lies with the sister, whose work is compensated with valuables. (Men's work in
'manufacturing' is envisaged by Muyuw as being transferable directly into shells for their own, not subclan,
use.) Weiner (1983:158160) stresses the value Trobrianders give to stone ax blades in internal exchanges.
These items of male wealth circulate to secure the replacement of individuals or propertythey appear in,
though are by no means confined to, mortuary distributions as final substitutions for the original marriage
transactions, including mapula gifts. Like kula valuables, axes walk around and have genealogies consisting
of the names of their owners (Weiner 1976:183). They are conceptualized as the property of individual men
and are not dala property. But they can come to the men of a dala in completion of kin obligations, and
although the axes are obtained through a variety of transactions and services, receipt can terminate relations
that male dala members have with their paternal/affinal kin. Prime examples of male wealth, the return of
such same-sex valuables cancels the reproductive potential of a cross-sex connection between a son and his
affines.
The cultural weight that Trobriand men put on the male valuable (the ax) must be appreciated in relation to
its counterpart, female wealth.6 In one sense 'male' and 'female' wealth circulate in parallel in

                                                   page_232

                                                                                                       Page 233
internal exchanges. But there is also an asymmetry between them. Women's wealth bears a more emphatic
connotation of inter-dala connection (1980:78). Female wealth is given, for instance, in reciprocity for the
harvest gifts of yams which a brother sends his sister/sister's husband. Weiner (1983:157) argues that a
woman is in debt to those who so provide her with yams, and she has a lien on her husband to provide her
with female wealth to meet it. For one of the husband's return acts lies in his efforts to help the sister, his
wife, find such wealth, including from among his own female relatives; it is part of his productive work on
her behalf, which also includes making gardens and feeding the woman and her children, an activity closely
monitored by the wife's brother. Weiner (1978:179180) suggests the harvest gifts are thus a register of ''the
productive work effort" of a husband towards his wife.
In fact, these efforts also separate the joint work of the spouses by gender. The wife is assisted by her female
affines to make a return of female wealth to her 'brother'. Meanwhile the yams also bring the husband
personal prestige, and in addition he reciprocates with male wealth that includes stone axes. The significant
point that Weiner stresses, however, is the manner in which the efforts of particular persons are transformed
into dala objects. The husband's work, for instance, is returned initially by his wife's brother in the form in
which it is given (yamsproduce for produce) in the same way as his caring for her children is reciprocated by
the wife's caring for the yams he grows for his sister (Brindley 1984:67). But when we look at the work of
the siblings, it seems that female wealth is tied to mortuary contexts, for this is when inter-dala relations are
mobilized. Thus a woman's return to her 'brother' (which is received by the brother's wife) is made on the
occasion of a death in his dala (which is also her own) (Weiner 1976:197198; 1983:157). These transactions
simultaneously separate dala members by gender into two kinds.
The brother gives the products of his work (yams) for the use of his sister's husband, while the sister provides
her brother's wife with the skirts and fibers of female wealth. From the point of view of the siblings' dala,
wealth returns to them by a double route: female wealth via the sister's marriage to her husband and male
wealth via the brother's yam exchange with the sister's husband. The work of each sibling is thus objectified
in these items. An asymmetry between female and male wealth has already been noted, the latter as Weiner
stresses not carrying the regenerative overtones of the former. But the two kinds of wealth

                                                   page_233

                                                                                                       Page 234
could also be regarded as analogues of one another, just as there are two (different) kinds of dala
membersfemale and male.
Despite the asymmetry between them, then, Trobriand brother and sister jointly generate wealth for the dala.
That men as well as women do so may be linked to the idealized 'ranking' of Trobriand kin units, in so far as
they come to be conceptualized as accumulating resources (1980:81). Male and female siblings together
recoup their double 'work' in the form of the male and female wealth generated by their relationship with the
sister's husband. Indeed, the husband emerges as the crucial single conduit by which the two kinds of wealth
come to the pair of siblings. The wife holds an analogous though possibly less visible position; she is an
alternative single conduit, so to speak, from the viewpoint of her husband's dala.
Any deathas an inter-dala contextgenerates both male wealth, which initially takes the form of
compensation from the widow/widower's kin to the deceased's kin for having let him or her die (1976:74),
and female wealth given by women to the kin of a deceased spouse to terminate the relationship. 7 In the
long term, gifts of both forms of wealth from the deceased's dala make a return to the spouse for having
cared for the deceased while he/she was alive, as is made to a father for his nurture of children. Marriage is
the pivot for these exchanges. And without the sister's marriage and her husband's exertions, which elicit
both hers and her brother's work, there would be no such flow of male and female wealth.
Brother and sister each give and receive their own type of wealth (male and female valuables) at the explicit
point of termination of extra-dala connections. I have suggested that the parallel same-sex transfers thus
separate the siblings, making them into two 'kinds' of dala members, male and female. Mortuary gifts, then,
are perhaps a covert restoration of the cross-sex tie between them, which substitutes for the cross-sex tie of
the conjugal-affinal relationship. The generative potential of this latter relationship is cancelled in the
reactivation of the gender of the sibling pair. But brother and sister do not give male and female wealth to
one another. Their relationship is unmediated. For it is transactions between husband and wife, as between
father and children, which take the form of 'gift' giving. The cross-sex relationship between spouses and
affines is the overt reason for exchange, where the substances of food and work are transformed into wealth:
from the receipt of yams from her brother, Weiner (1976:197) writes, a man is obligated directly to his wife.
Their exchanges are material. But while

                                                   page_234

                                                                                                       Page 235
these substances thus comprise something of a closed circuit (work/food/wealth), the production of children
is without substance. It is the absence of direct exchange in the covert cross-sex relationship between
brother and sister that makes their joint child. 8
Trobriand assertions that there is no physiological connection between father and child has long excited
Western observers. The lack of such connection between mother and child also calls for comment.
There is an apparent ambiguity in Trobriand ideas about conception as to the relationship between the entry
of the child into the woman's body, thought of as a spirit brought by a matrilineal ancestor, and the
contribution that a woman's internal substance apparently makes to the fetus. Malinowski's original account
emphasized that "without doubt or reserve,...the child is of the same substance as its mother, [whereas] ...
between the father and the child there is no bond of physical union" (1929:3). The mother contributes
everything, and above all her internal "blood helps to build the body of the childit nourishes it" (1929:149).
Indeed, in conception theories where the mother's blood is bound with substances from the father (as are
found in the Western Highlands), the child is said to come from the mingling of both. But here there is
nothing with which the mother's blood can bind. In fact there seems to be no indication that the blood is
regarded as the basis for a connection of substance between mother and child. We should query whether
indeed the mother feeds the fetus with it. Weiner (1976:123) is clear on the point that it is the figure of the
father who is regarded as 'feeding' a woman's children. Blood is simply the counterpart already in the mother
of the spirit children who will be brought her by matrilineal ancestral beings; it is not to be thought of as food
at all. Malinowski's error, if we can call it that, comes from mistaking form for substance.
Trobrianders insist that the child is implanted as spirit and by spirit into the body of the mother. The partible
form that blood takes is an anticipation of the very form the (partible) child will take, filling up the mother's
body as a container is filled. But ultimately the child must also be separated from the maternal container.
That scenario is already anticipated in the affinal exchanges. Let me make the connections explicit.
Brother and sister covertly transact together as joint producers of dala wealth and of dala children, but they
cannot overtly exchange with each other. Rather the siblings produce 'different' items (yams, children),
analogically equivalent but which each must make the other

                                                     page_235

                                                                                                            Page 236
yield. In childbirth, the brother has an urgent interest in his sister's production. But he cannot interact
directly with her; instead, he forces an exchange on the woman's husband. Although the woman remains
titular 'owner' of the brother's yams, the harvest gifts go to him. For the husband is the man who 'opens the
way', through sexual intercourse, for the child's entry into her body at conception. He creates the maternal
body as container, an anticipated separation of container and contained on behalf of the woman's brother.
Indeed, it is the creation of the woman's body as container rather than the extrusion of the fetus which seems
the husband's significant act; he separates child from mother while it is still within, by the internal molding of
its shape. The brother's harvest gifts to the husband, one may say, coerce him into so acting and hence the
sister into producing an entity out of but distinct from herself. And in this it seems to be the husband's
activity rather than his emissions that take effect. That activity is in turn a product of his relations with his
affines.
Either spouse may be the single conduit through which flows male and female dala wealth. The brother's
wife is as essential to the objectification of the sister-brother tie as the sister's husband is to the brothersister
tie. But what distinguishes the two relationships is the crucial part which productive work plays in the latter
by contrast with the former. This introduces an asymmetry, and puts a particular emphasis on the affinal
position of sister's husband/father. For the husband whose single figure is the focus, and thus the object, of
the brother's and sister's overt workhe elicits it from both of themis also the catalyst for joining their covert
work in the single figure of a child.
An object of the brother-sister relationship is the brother's child whom the sister grows within her. The
husband is made into a catalyst by the brother, who supplies him with yams, analogues of the child in that
they are conceived of as yams that the brother grows for his sister. 9 One might suggest that it is because the
husband 'consumes' the yams that he in turn gives birth to the child, which would recall the Gimi image of
the women who are forced to eat the male meat that forces them to extrude male spirit. Yet the Trobriand
husband who deploys the yams for his own purposes does not give birth out of his body. As is characteristic
of his exchanges with his affines, he does so through the mediation of 'work', the effort of molding the fetus.
The father's activity gives the child his bodily form, as an extraneous and partible entity.
Putting his face on the child is the visible act by which the Trobriand

                                                     page_236

                                                                                                            Page 237
father effects its separation from its mother. His efforts are reduplicated through nurture. Paternal feeding
establishes a connection between the child and its father, but making the father's contribution very much an
external 'part' of the child's constitution. He simply gives it external shape. As a contained entity within the
mother, then, herself composed of dala blood, the fetus is fed by the father; once it is born, it is its own
external and containing form that he creates, its inner form being dala blood. Mother and child are thus
internal and external homologues of one another (compare Weiner 1978:182). It is by externalizing the child
while still in the mother, reifying it with his features, that the husband anticipates its separation. Moreover,
in so far as the husband's work is regarded as a gift to be repaid, it is kept separate, exogenous. That the
neonate continues to be fed from an exogenous source (father's work) individuates it from its dala
co-members.
Between brother and sister lies a giftless transaction that they cannot by themselves externalize. For the one
impinges on the other to the extent that they engage in exchanges with their respective spouses on behalf of
what unites them, their dala identity. It is dala identity that is given form in the person of the child, since the
father's acts of feeding are subsequently turned into wealth objects that are not the child: as we have seen,
affinal nurture can be reclaimed by the wife's dala who pay out wealth in substitution for it. But from the
point of view of that dala, the woman's brother has already extracted his child from the relationship between
the spouses. He has done this through the regular yam prestations, which match continuous work with
continuous work. That is, he substitutes for the joint work of the spouses on the husband's gardens his
singular work in his own garden, which is seen to be to the joint benefit of himself and his sister. And the
sister's body duplicates the swelling of her brother's pregnant yam plots.
Trobriand mother and child are not connected by ties of substance. The woman's body, like the dala, is the
site for cooperation between brother and sister, but only through the exertions of the sister's husband can
children, and indeed yams, be reified in the proper form. The blood within the woman indicates the silent,
giftless relationship between the sibling pair. This identity between brother and sister is unmediated, for each
is the other's body, and by contrast with relations between spouses, there is no mediating exchange between
them. What mediates their relationship is the body of the person who will objectify itreify its productsthe
spouse.
From the Western point of view, there is a double paradox here. A

                                                    page_237

                                                                                                         Page 238
Trobriand man gives birth to his wife's child; a Trobriand woman does not feed the fetus within her. The
child's inner identity replicates that of the wife's brother and his dala, conceptualized as blood and spiritthe
stuff that dala members share. But the mother does not 'give' this blood to the fetus as though it were food,
any more than the brother impregnates his sister or sister and brother exchange gifts between themselves.
And only most indirectly does the mother's brother feed it; the feeding is mediated by the sister's husband's
vital act as nurturer. It cannot be the case, then, that the fetus is an extension of the mother's bodily tissue
and that the mother 'makes' it in this sense. Yet the fetus is regarded as growing with her, with the mother's
body seen as essential for growth. This further apparent paradox is a consequence of our own nutritive
metaphors. The Trobriand material suggests we should distinguish feeding from growing.
The concept of maternal nurture is so linked to the concrete Western image of a woman imparting first her
own substance (milk) and then the substance she has prepared (food) to her offspring, that I suspect growing
and feeding are often treated synonymously. In the figure of the nurturing Trobriand father, however, food is
apparently treated like a mediating wealth item and is contrasted with the 'growing' activated in unmediated
exchange. Elsewhere, of course, food may work to unmediated effect. When Gimi women eat meat, the
meat is a direct substitution for the male body that the women will egest; when Sambia boys ingest semen,
the semen is a direct replication of their inner substance and is held to grow them. Indeed, food should be
treated to the same range of objectifying operations as indicated for wealth items and persons: I do not
attempt it in full here. But I signal that we cannot know from inspection alone if feeding and growing
relationships are analogous or being contrasted with one another. 10
A Trobriand woman is regarded as feeding her child with milk in the specific context of the relationship with
her husband, with whom her work is combined. It is not only her brother's yams that feed her. A wife is also
fed by her husband, and her child nourished by him; this 'feeding' work by the husband is joined with the
feeding work of the wife (through her milk).11 And since the yams she eats come from both her husband and
her brother, the woman's post-partum feeding continues to form a child both the same as and different from
herself. After birth, the child is thus fed by two kinds of males.
As far as prenatal development is concerned, the Trobriand fetus
                                                    page_238

                                                                                                        Page 239
can, as it were, only grow within the mother. She does for the fetus, her brother's child, what he with his
yams does for her. Each grows his or her product for the other. This joint work is covert because it must take
place within a container. What the brother grows in the ground, the sister grows within her body. Since yams
and children are 'the same', the brother's yams cannot be conceptualized as directly feeding the sister's child,
for they are analogues of the child. It is in what he replicates that the brother bypasses the mediating body of
the father; brother and sister grow for themselves, as a single dala body, in male and female form producing
like bodies (yams and children).
The mother's body is an aesthetic construction: what matters is its form. It holds what is within, and this is its
secret. Growth does indeed occur offstage, as is emphasized in Paiela. It is a consequence of a relationship
between mother and child but one that need not be mediated by feeding or any other transmission of
'substance'. The relationship consists of form itself: a contained entity is enveloped by a container.
The image of the maternal body as a container to be filled with spiritual essence is also fashioned during the
course of Sambia initiation rites for boys, though here there is a doubling of the paternal contribution.
Fathers provide both spiritual essence and substance. Far from paternal substance being irrelevant, the
bodies of Sambia women are the mediating receptacles for male semen that both forms and grows the fetus.
12 It is the sister's husband who, like his Trobriand counterpart, is the significant agent. But whereas the
Trobriand sister's husband is coerced by his wife's brother to open the sister's body, in the Sambia case the
affine inseminates a sibling pair (his wife and wife's brother) in order to grow both of them and thus evince a
capacity he cannot display in relation to his own sister. I make the comparison in order to recall that the
outcome of these operations is the multiple genders of the Sambia childlike the flutes, at once male,
androgynous, and female. We can say the same of the Trobriand child.
The cross-sex relationship between Trobriand brother and sister results in a single outcome (the sister's
child). But the capacity of that sibling relation can be realized only through the exogenous efforts of the
husband who substitutes for the relationship a singular entity in proper form, that is, the correctly shaped
neonate. A further cross-sex tie is thus made visible (between husband and wife) that substitutes for the
one-dala relationship between the siblings, and in this interaction

                                                    page_239

                                                                                                        Page 240
the husband has unmediated effect on the fetus. He cannot have this effect on the wife. It is to the fetus that
he gives his own male shape; and he can only give his shape to it.
First, then, I refer to the father's extractive activity as male. A man's acts have direct effect, and the form
they take is the act itself. The Trobriand father extracts something that is extractable because it takes his
own form, as is equally true of Gimi or Sambia fathers who are regarded as filling up the empty bodies of
women with the 'male' child the woman will produce. Childbirth reifies men's actions, in so far as male acts
produce male acts. Second, the visibility of the produced thing depends on a cross-sex context: the 'male'
child is extruded from a 'female' body. Acts are thereby reproduced in another form: the birth is the end
product of other actions, the completed or finished 'thing'. The state of the neonate's (androgynous)
completion signifies that the activation required this cross-sex interaction with the mother. So the neonate is
also the multiple product of that interaction. The Trobriand child puts the mother's kin in the father's debt; in
many Highlands societies, the father is in debt to the mother's kin. But in either case the child within is
separated from the maternal body because it is conceived as a product of external cross-sex relations. Third,
until that moment, however, the child may also be conceived to enjoy an exclusive single sex ('female')
relationship with the mother. In that connection, the mother's body encompasses it as a replication of its own
form, and in that condition the fetus is also grown by her.

Replicating Forms: Encompassment
It has been impossible to separate an analysis of how the objects of relationships appear as things in
extracted or extruded form from concerns with growth. This is not surprising, since the process by which one
relationship substitutes for another elicits a conception of the first relationship as producing something
which, in being owed, ought to be relocated in a second. Substitution may, as we have seen, appear as one
cross-sex relation being displaced by another just as the Trobriand brother supplants the work that joins
husband and wife by his work for his sister: yams for children. An intervening mechanism lies in the
possibility that a previous cross-sex relation can always be regarded as a same-sex one. A same-sex relation
is one of isomorphism between a person's internal parts or a shared isomorphism with like others. In itself it
may be perceived as already a transformation of sorts.

                                                   page_240

                                                                                                        Page 241
I formulate here in reverse the suggestion made in the context of ceremonial exchange, that an expectant
recipient has to transform a same-sex relation (between a donor and the donor's wealth) into a cross-sex one
(the other's wealth becomes partibly what is owed him) in order to extract anything. Indeed, if one thinks
about it, the reverse must hold: a cross-sex relation can only work to substitutive effect if differentiable from
the previous relationship. If the cross-sex relation takes the reified form of difference, then the previous
relation must be construable as a same-sex one. Thus from the point of view of his relationship with his wife,
a Trobriand man may regard the wife and her brother as 'one'. (They are co-members of one dala.)
If personification means that relations between relations are predicated on separation, reification requires
that distinct forms can also be apprehended as transformations of one another. The aesthetic necessity is that
every relation contains within it or anticipates (as its 'capacity') its own outcome (a 'thing'). That outcome is
the previous relationship in a transformed state. But how is a transformation from a unitary same-sex
condition into a multiple cross-sex condition rendered conceivable?
Without a distinction between same-sex and cross-sex relations the one cannot appear to displace the other;
at the same time, the one must also appear to come out of and be anticipated by the other. Thus a cross-sex
relation can be regarded as bringing together two same-sex relations, as the separate internal constitutions of
(say) husband and wife are joined in conjugal union. Conversely, and this perhaps is the more difficult
construction to apprehend, a same-sex relation can anticipate a cross-sex one. Its internal completeness is
perceived as incomplete in relation to its prospective oppositean all-female relation is elicited in the presence
of an all-male relation. But the prospect of elicitation is already contained in its own construction. The
evidence lies in the way in which people's perceptions of a same-sex relationship can be altered, as the Gimi
boys were confronted with the masculine features of their universe suddenly appearing as feminine ones:
one same-sex relation is revealed as the analogue of its opposite. That is, an all-male relationship can be
simultaneously reconceptualized as an all-female one.
The switch in perception depends on people's differently placed viewpoints. The system works because one
person exists by anticipating the viewpoint of another. Thus the Daribi brothers who detach a female
agnate, part of their male person, know that the bride will appear

                                                   page_241

                                                                                                        Page 242
as a female entity to the wife-takers who regard them (the brothers, male in their own view) as female. Her
transfer temporally activates the anticipation. Anticipation is implied in the contemporaneous form of
analogy.
The relation of analogy does not mean that an all-male relation will 'turn into' an all-female one. Rather, an
all-male relation appears as a coeval 'version' of its all-female counterpart. The other form is present at the
same time. 13 From the point of view of the Trobriand husband, the wife's child is an extension of his own
work in his relationship to her, its partible form being established by the fact that the 'male' child can be
separated from the 'female' body. He enjoys an all-male relationship with it, as the product of his nurture.
From the mother's brother's point of view, the child is extractable in so far as the 'female' body is created to
extrude a 'male' form, but what the mother extrudes is the basis of the tie between brother and sister, namely
dala identity, and it is the replication of her female form that is important, that the child is composed of dala
blood. The same-sex tie between mother and child thus duplicates in turn his own 'same-sex' tie (via their
one mother) with his sister.
An all-male entity (the child as a product of the affinal father's efforts) can be equally conceptualized as
all-female (the child as product of the dala siblings' efforts). The two perceptions develop vis-à-vis one
another, in the cross-sex context of the affinal relation. We might construe them in terms of competing
claims but only to observe that the other's point of view is always part of the construction: the father knows
what construction the mother and the mother's brother put on the child's identity; the one viewpoint elicits
the other.
If this is so, then the one viewpoint is also contained within the other.14 Such is the condition I call
encompassment.
Encompassment may be aesthetically apprehended as a male person containing within and having attached
to himself female elements in male form or as a female person containing within or having attached to
herself male elements in female form. (Either an entity within or an entity attached can be
encompassedindeed, as far as body parts are concerned, or the wealth or work that people create, an
appendage is the 'same' as a body organ.) In that Trobriand brother and sister are two kinds of dala persons,
male and female, each sex encompasses the other. The woman's swelling female contour evinces the
productivity of the brother's male work. Conversely, in the brother's garden a tall yam pole supporting a
triangular base is erected in a corner of each

                                                    page_242

                                                                                                           Page 243
plot that is the magical focus of its productivity. Malinowski describes it as the first vertical pole introduced
into the garden, ''a finishing off, so to speak, of the surface work of the garden ... [that is] now encased in a
glittering framework of strength and loftiness" (1935:131, 128, transposed). To see this pole as "a symbolic
projection of the pregnant womb" (Brindley 1984:37) does not seem at all fanciful. But it is a womb in male
shape.
Either a male or a female same-sex relation, then, may be seen as a simultaneous version of its analogue, and
this possibility is contained in the image of encompassment. A Sambia woman nourishes her 'male' child with
male substance contained in female form (milk), while a man nourishes his 'female' wife's brother with
female substances contained in male form (semen). Significant to the analogic relation is its simultaneity. The
one form is the other at the same time. In this construction, male 'is the same' as female. Yet each is a
totalizing imageand the Sambia boy, like his Gimi counterpart, is forced into switching perceptions in the
way in which he thinks about bodily substances, while knowing both the forms they take.
A dual identity thus seems to the perceivers to inhere in the object of perception. This lays the basis, I would
argue, for temporal sequencing: to the actor, revelation about one or other condition must be sequential. The
actor may also perceive a further sequence. The same-sex relation that is simultaneously its opposite sex
counterpart can appear to turn into a relationship between the two, as a cross-sex relation.
There is no paradox in considering the Trobriand mother's brother as first a female figure and then a male
figure. This is how he may be construed in relation to his sister. 15 The aesthetic analogue between the
female Trobriand mother who is also her children and the woman's male brother who is also his yams is the
conceptual basis for the giftless relationship between them. There is an outcome to their cross-sex tie: a thing
eventuates, the harvested yam, the born child. That outcome both supposes a temporal sequence, a moment
of revelation, and is the relationship in another form. It is the child who is born that is the outcome, not the
hidden fetus or the yams in the ground. They remain for ever tropes for one another. Indeed, the covert,
cross-sex sibling tie is only productive when it is made visible in the context of another and overt cross-sex
tie, namely the relation between the woman and her husband. A same-sex relation (mother and fetus) can
turn into a cross-sex relation (mother's brother and sister's child) only through an active intervention that
registers their temporal distinction. The once encased

                                                    page_243

                                                                                                           Page 244
fetus is now the exposed neonate. But the embryo grew, so to speak, with its birth in mind. The same-sex tie
'anticipates' its transformation into a finished thing.
Imitations. Although at several points I have referred to perception, it should be clear that mine is not a
cognitive analysis but an attempt to give a cultural description of Melanesian symbolism, of gardens that
swell like bellies and of milk that is male. My remarks are not intended to be taken beyond. At the same
time, they try to bypass the swathe of anthropological explanations that rest on some kind of appropriative
metaphor.
We may recall that the revelation that much male cult activity contains within it female elements has often
been interpreted as evidence that men had appropriated or were controlling properties that belonged to
women. It was taken as a sign of their victory over the opposite sex. I do not see that we require this mode
of explanation. Women's bodies are not conceptualized as having a 'natural' form that men appropriate. The
composition of men's and women's forms each metaphorizes the other. To make the point, I turn briefly to
the question of menstruation and bleeding, for in the analyses of Highlands rituals this has been taken as
prime evidence of appropriation: men bleed themselves to imitate women's bleeding and thereby (in the
observer's view) show that they have appropriated women's powers. The further conclusion drawn from this
is that men covertly desire self-sufficiency, that they would reproduce without women if they could. This
curious fantasy, noted in chapter 5, obviously holds power for the Western observer to be so consistently
read into the ethnographic record. My description is intended to put the practices into a wider context.
The collective activity of ceremonial exchange (chap. 8) sets up a homogeneity and replicability among the
participants that creates the conditions for a flow of items by which men measure themselves. They dispose
of wealth which refers back to their male persons yet is simultaneously differentiated from them, and
conceivable in female form. The flow of such items stimulates velocity, a speeding up of circulation through
like (same-sex) units, so that the total metaphoric claim is self-productive, of more wealth, more prestige. By
contrast, in initiation ceremonies Sambia men, and some of their Eastern Highlands neighbors, detach and
circulate objects (novices, semen) which take a male form, though there is a sense in which they derive from
a female source. Here a male part is separated from the person's otherwise androgynous

                                                   page_244

                                                                                                        Page 245
constitution. This objectification of maleness in initiation activity, then, does not heighten or increase an
innate maleness within persons but makes detachability evidence of a specific (male) capacity. At the same
time, a partible substance cannot flow unless it is released. We also saw that the initiands are constituted as
vessels through the release of blood from their bodies. This may be perceived as a female part. Yet it is not
women as such that the men are so imitating: it is another version of themselves.
Sambia men bleed themselves throughout their life just as they supplement their internal semen pool by
drinking the sap of pandanus and other 'trees' (Herdt 1981:chap. 4; 1984b:195197; J. Weiner 1982:9). The
sap ('milk') is covertly seen as coming from a female (the tree's 'breasts'). One would expect the blood they
let to be covertly male, but this does not appear to be the case. I suggested that a relation of potential
analogy between blood and semen is displaced by the Sambia analogy between semen and milk, because the
origin of a man's sister's husband must be distinguished from that of his mother. Thus the blood is regarded as
female not male in origin. Or rather one could say that men rid themselves of the 'same' substance in female
form (blood) that they ingest in male form (semen). It is dangerous to reverse the sequencing (compare
Gillison 1980:150), and this is the chief danger of ingesting women's menstrual blood, which Sambia men
regard as polluting.
Women are thought to have within them both the circulatory blood supplied by their mother's womb "that
stimulates body functioning and growth, and the ability to withstand sickness or injury" (Herdt 1982b:196),
and that they share with men, and their own menstrual-womb blood, a pool we might say is similar to men's
pool of semen although Sambia do not emphasize the equation. This second kind of blood is lethal to men in
historical-temporal terms. Their mother's womb blood was an appropriate container of their person but one
that has already completed them. For a person to be re-haematized, re-contained by more womb blood,
would put history in reverse. Rather, historical sequence is sustained, I would argue, by blood-letting. What
grew them before birth cannot grow them again but can be released in partible form. This partible substance
(blood) remains something that they do not themselves transmit. Its origin in their own particular mothers is
its significant characteristic.
The masculinity of blood is made apparent in other Eastern Highlands systems. Where marriage exchanges
do not entail the same possibilities of reduplicated substance, it is blood and semen that may be

                                                   page_245

                                                                                                        Page 246
construed as analogies. A woman's blood is thought of as paternal substance and evidence of her paternal
spirit (e.g., Gillison 1980:167). 16 In these latter configurations, the mother's brother emerges as a crucial
figure, not unlike the Trobriand father/sister's husband. He is the exogenous male who makes creative the
difference between male and female forms of the same substance.
In Eastern Highlands societies such as Gimi, menstrual blood is a version of semen because of its reference
to paternity. Thus, ritual at a girl's first menses establishes that what flows from her body is paternal
substance, belonging to the girl's father or lineage, and is explicitly analogous to the noseblood ('semen') of
her brother (Gillison 1980:149). This blood must be kept separate from male substance in its form as semen;
indeed, the two are inimical. In order to receive a male substance in productive form (the husband's semen),
the woman has to get rid of its paternal counterpart already within her (father's semen in partible form, her
blood and thus his 'dead child') (1980:169).17 This creates her internal cavity. She herself continues to bleed,
in that her paternal affiliation can never be completely eliminated.
   [F]emale menstruation is a substitutive process in which the 'deposits' of one man (the father or,
   collectively, his lineage) are destroyed and replaced by the 'deposits' of another man (the husband or
   his lineage). (Gillison 1980:168)
In this context, women's womb blood is denied a feeding role: semen alone forms the body of the fetus. Food
implies an equation with the maternal body itself, and Gimi men periodically induce vomiting (through
cane-swallowing) to get rid of maternal food, including breast milk, "parts of their mother's bodies"
(1980:150). Men also bleed their arms and noses to invigorate the body. What they get rid of is a part of
themselves, but here themselves in female form. Menstrual blood is not food but in women a female
manifestation of paternal substance. For men, its possible paternal origin is mediated by this female identity.
Because it can be voided, the man's 'male' body can thus be separated from his 'female' part. It is a part that
was formed during the creation of the man's own body, and as generally appears to be the case throughout
this region, the voided 'paternal' substance is thus overtly described as 'maternal' blood.
On the surface it would appear that the blood is simply that of the woman's paternity (derived from the
father). However, I suggest that

                                                   page_246

                                                                                                       Page 247
this also covers a further equation between a man and his own paternal substance, insofar as he reenacts his
own birth. Let me spell this out.
Bleeding among men offers evidence that they can detach parts of themselves. The detachment of a 'female'
part (blood) invigorates the male body, enhancing the personal health of the performer: it does not result in a
product that can then circulate between men. (Men circulate their blood, so to speak, in the bodies of their
sisters.) Nevertheless, it is the activity of separationthe moment at which male and female elements are
visibly distinguishedwhich effects this enhancement. The man's person momentarily enacts its internal
male/female constitution, and the results are beneficial for himself. For at the same time he is activating the
already completed transactions that brought about his own (androgynous) constitution. Men thus energize
themselves, one might say, in terms of the transaction by which they were born, and as an object extruded
from a container are reproduced as containers. In this they decompose themselves. And they do so, I suggest,
by detaching from their bodies both maternal (vomit) and paternal (blood) substance.
The energy that Gimi men derive can be traced through a devolution of events. First, it is a male activity to
so effect detachment (Gillison 1980:147). As in Gahuku-Gama and Bena Bena, Gimi women are regarded as
receptacles for men's semen. To expand this proposition we might say that women, themselves
androgynously constituted, enclose an androgynous substance (blood/semen): its masculinity lies in its state
of being enclosed to encloser, and potentially detachable thereby. When he performs this operation on
himself, the male 'mother' voids a replica of himself that is at once maternal and paternal substance. Second,
the man's body is the single site for its dual composition through mother's body and father's semen. Men also
disaggregate these two contributions, thus tapping the energy that caused the original pair to unite (each
parent being in a unitary, single sex state). This is possible because, third, they reenact this historical event
by turning themselves into a similar unitary state. In so far as they then claim this state through evidence of
its maleness, the two parental substances that they decompose can only be envisaged as female. Thus both
mother's food and father's semen must be extruded in female form (cognized as 'mother's' vomit and blood).
Decomposition through blood-letting thus celebrates different procreative moments. Sambia men do not
reenact their historical containment by their mothers but show in themselves their mother's blood in

                                                   page_247

                                                                                                       Page 248
transformed, partible (male) form. In contrast, Gimi men use bleeding to indicate their own partibility, for
they were born only because their father's semen (blood) displaced their mother's blood (semen) within her
body. As its analogue, blood cannot turn into semen; but blood/semen appropriately appears only in one or
other form, which must be sustained as unmixed.
In certain Western Highlands societies, the distinctiveness between blood and semen is taken for granted,
and it is their productive mingling or pairing that takes place within the woman's body. Menstrual pollution
simply indicates the difference between blood creatively paired with semen and blood that has no creative
outcome. In contradistinction to the metaphoric (analogic) equations that render semen as a type of milk,
Western Highlanders who do not let blood may perceive semen and milk to be irreducibly antithetical
substances (e.g. Meggitt 1965: chap. 7).
For Paiela, the crucial contrast lies between 'bound' and 'unbound' blood. Biersack argues that the Paiela
wife's blood must be properly bound with semen in order for her to procreate. This deliberate combination of
distinct substances produces a mediating object (the child), the wife's 'return gift' for the bridewealth
(1983:96). Biersack suggests that it symbolizes the alliance of kin groups mediated by the marriage; but more
than this, "it presages as well the consummation of a transaction that the husband himself has initiated. It is
he who has given bridewealth and placed his wife under an obligation to reciprocate" (1983:97). The
substances are the basis for a transaction between the new couple: blood and semen hold the possibility of
the future transaction within themselves (each a same-sex substance) rather than, as in the Eastern
Highlands cases, holding within themselves the androgynous record of transactions completed.
I return to these regional contrasts in the final section of this chapter. A remaining observation concerns the
Highlands, which one might conceivably resurrect in terms of men's appropriation of female powers.
Cognized as female substance, neither milk nor blood is directly reified into objects of mediated exchange;
they circulate only through their analogies as semen or wealth, as metonymically parts of men rather than
parts of women. Is it only 'male' substance, then, that supplies the reified form for the objects of collective
relations? Does 'female' substance not circulate? One riposte has already been given: female substance is
circulated already embodied, that is, in the persons of sisters and wives. And a consequence of this
embodiment is that the mediatory

                                                   page_248

                                                                                                       Page 249
objects at women's disposal comprise what they have grown within, the products of their own same-sex
relations. This holds true for the plants and pigs women grow, a capacity that may be abstracted as the
capacity for growth itself, as in the enterprises of Daulo women. In Daulo, it even looks as though women
deliberately 'appropriate' the products of cross-sex household relations in order to make them grow properly
in an exclusive all-female environment.
Sources of growth. The Eastern Highlands Daulo were introduced in chapter 4. Warry underlines the
different structure of women's collective wok meri activities from the ceremonial exchange networks of men:
   Men join together to give away massive amounts of food, money and beer in order to build group and
   individual reputations. Kafaina [wok meri] women gain public recognition by receiving and 'tightly
   holding' their wealth so that development and business will prosper. ... Men 'waste' wealth in search
   of political status; women gain status by guarding resources necessary for development. (1985:35,
   37)
The collective nature of women's activity has some precedence in women's horticultural cooperation and
former rituals involving their participation as a body. Warry emphasizes the cooperative as opposed to the
competitive tenor of women's and men's exchanges (see p. 86). Indeed, the new dogma of the wok meri
movement sustains a contrast between men's propagation by 'flow' and their own by 'growth'. But, then, on
Sexton's analysis the analogue of wok meri is men's initiation ritual not kinship-based exchanges as such. The
women come together on the basis of a same-sex tie, but their indifference to extant social relationships
between the participants (created largely through kinship) means that the mediatory possibilities of their
transactions are played down. They obliterate the mediating element by which wealth is seen to flow
between differentiated (cross-sex) social persons, and create instead a vast replication of same-sex relations.
There is a singleness about women's efforts, revealed in the ideas about retention. And in their external
relations this collective work by women to grow wealth gives evidence of itself in further 'internal'
enlargement, as in the model of proliferating daughter groups. 18
While momentary differentiation between wok meri groups is encapsulated in an affinal idiom, that they are
bride-givers/takers to one another, this potential cross-sex image is juxtaposed by the companion image that
redescribes that relationship as one between (same-sex)

                                                   page_249
                                                                                                      Page 250
mothers and daughters. Only on the occasion of public display, when they make their products visible, are
donors and receivers of money radically separated, and this occasion is cast into a cross-sex framework: the
mediating interventions of men (as bookkeepers, spokesmen) are required.
Until that moment, one group's growth is seen to lie in another similar group. As long as it grows, it is
emergent from but not yet detached from its body. The enveloping maternal body is thus perceived as
growing the daughters. It is in the anticipation of an eventual relationship between source and outcomeeach
of which is defined by the otherthat their interaction can be called one of unmediated exchange. For in being
grown, the daughter group also grows its mother. It does not look for autonomy until its own 'coming out'
ceremony.
In describing Daulo women's activities, I evoked the enveloping maternity of Gimi planters and growers of
crops. As long as the plant is in the ground, Gimi women claim a totalizing relationship: they are the plant's
caretaker; the plant is evidence of their capacity to grow things. In fact, this equation appears necessary.
Unless the woman is seen to take care, growth cannot occur. And the "silent growth of the human foetus
encompassed by its mother" (Gillison 1980:148) is an image upon which garden spells draw, in tender
encouragement of the young plants. 19 The milk and food she later gives her child have effects internal to its
body; the food is nourishing because it is the mother's food. But the mother's feeding role develops only once
she has externalized the child, and it exists as a thing apart from her. This separation seems to be a
prerequisite for the child's body to grow or swell from its own inside. Outside the maternal body, then, the
effects of growth are accomplished through the one person (mother) being seen as the origin of the other
(child). But the temporal sequencing is important: one person must exist in a form prior to the other.
This symbolization appears general throughout the Highlands, if not Melanesia. Indeed, the widespread
'identification' of women with the growing crops or with the pigs that they nurture is to be juxtaposed to
those rather few contexts in which women engage in (external) collective activity. The maternal relationship
between a woman and her products appears in an image of internal multiplication and replication. The image
is one of a body and its as yet undetached parts. It is the mother, as it were, who grows. Once grown,
however, the detached things (food and children) can be used in either a mediating or nonmediating manner.

                                                   page_250

                                                                                                      Page 251
Food which a mother provides may be regarded as a female version of male food, as in Sambia (where breast
milk is derived from semen), or it may, as in Hagen, be regarded as a distinctive product of maternal work
that is combined with but not identified with paternal work. The latter construct gives rise to the possibility
of food becoming a mediating object. These possibilities (mediatory and unmediatory) will be differentiated
by social context. 20 The food which, in being intended for a child, creates an unmediated exchange
between mother and child, acquires a potentially mediatory character at the moment mother and child are
seen to be distinct social entities.
Feeding and growing relationships do indeed have to be distinguished. For a further Eurocentric image to be
discarded lies in the idea, often imputed to Melanesian cultural practice, that food creates identity, with the
implication that food contributes directly to the substance of persons, and that substance is always an inner
condition. Rather, the relationship between the internal and external forms of a child depends on its location
internal or external to the maternal body, and one cannot assume continuity between the causes of fetal
growth and the causes of growth after birth. (They are separated in time.) The Sa-speakers of Pentecost
(chap. 4) certainly posit a direct connection between the intake of certain foods and agnatic identity in
images of internal substance. But there are other situations, such as paternal feeding on the Trobriands,
where substance remains on the surface. What is within has no substance. Or one might think of Muyuw
where a mother distributes her husband's food to their child. It is not the food as such that must be analyzed,
but the feeding relationship, the question of whether food is 'given' (mediated exchange) or 'shared'
(unmediated) (O'Hanlon and Frankland, in press). The effect of the food will vary according to the source
from which it comes. What will vary is its potential to cause growth.
Their assimilation to specific social sources is a correlate of the personification process by which persons are
made socially distinct from one another.21 The distinctiveness of the source rests on the anticipated
detachment of the outcome. Food, plants, people, and animals are all persons in this sense. They are
'identified' with others who provide a base or support for but who are not themselves equivalent in social
identity to what they nurture. The overall result of this partial or metonymical identification as far as people
are concerned is their location with respect to unique and particular social others. But in 'produced' form
they are also things, the outcome of these others' acts.

                                                    page_251

                                                                                                         Page 252
Propagating People, Propagating Clans. I return to the Western Highlands and to Hagen where, in their
different ways, both male and female parents are regarded as growing and feeding their child, even as their
substances combine in conception. A child grows in dual form, nourished by both. Although food produced
by the mother from the father's land has an androgynous character, each parent may also be conceived as a
separate and unique, unmediated source for the child's identity. But whereas the father establishes that
identity after birth, planting the child's umbilical cord in a fenced enclosure on his clan land (A. Strathern
1982b:119120; Bloch and Parry 1982:30), the mother establishes it before birth. The child grows her,
contributing to 'her' growth before it grows the father and his clan. The temporal distinction separates them.
A unitary identification between Hagen mother and child holds most powerfully while the child is as yet
unborn. Much as the harvesting of food activates multiple claims which extinguish the woman's exclusive
identification with it, 22 so birth extinguishes this prior conflation, bringing into the world a child with a
multiple identity. There is an analogy in the way pigs that have circulated as exclusive male wealth are
returned to the multiple claims of the domestic household. But by what devices is this unitary maternal
construction achieved?
The claims a woman has on the crops she has planted offer another analogy. A Hagen woman is not regarded
as a container to the plants, any more than she is a container for a child. Rather, her progeny become
identified with her particular contribution to its eventual multiple identity, the work through which she tends
the crops. It is with this part of her that a plant is unified as long as it is growing in the ground. The same-sex
identity between a Hagen woman and her plants, then, is an identity less with her total body (as their
'mother') than with the part she brings to the conjugal relationship (her work). In relation to that part,
however, her claims are total. This is explicit: a wife's exclusive connection is established by the very
activity of planting.
A Hagen wife is conceptualized as one of a pair: male and female work from a conjugally productive union,
an image repeated in the fertility ritual of Hagen Spirit cults that proclaim the productivity of pairing itself.
She encompasses her own capacity to create an alliance with her spouse. Her efforts are her partible
contribution, and it is as a 'part' that the woman's work is publicly celebrated. Women are not in a position to
create for themselves a self-contained domain of value like men's ceremonial exchange sphere. Rather,
women's autonomy is

                                                    page_252

                                                                                                         Page 253
exercised in relation to the parts which they thus have at their disposal, both mental and physical. This gives
their autonomy a political cast. Wives and husbands are like allies; wives exercise choice, their work is
voluntary, and there is always a question of loyalty and commitment and thus the internal relationship
between parts of their mind. If anything makes things grow in Hagen, it is a detachable component of the
'mind': the wife's effort as a matter of her intellectual and emotional commitment towards what she is doing.
It is with a part of her, then, that the growing object is (totally) identified. In the case of children, this
identification lays the basis for relations with maternal kin, who are so essential for its healthy growth: they
are only an element in an overall social identity, yet in relation to them the person experiences drastic bodily
dependence. This bodily dependence has its analogy in dependence upon clan paternal ghosts, who also
oversee health. Parallel to the maternal nurture is thus the 'part' contributed by the father. Clan land, clan
food, and clan ancestral support are all equally essential for growth, and kinship exchanges give these paired
sources of growth equal recognition. A component of kinship-based transactions is invariably pork (by
contrast with the circulation of live pigs in moka). Pigs intended for maternal kin are initially killed at the
donors' homesteads, an act that simultaneously involves sacrifice to their own, primarily paternal, ancestral
ghosts. 23
The political emphasis of the Hagen regime appears to foster men's fears about women's misdirected minds
or their succumbing to an overweening desire to consume what they should be growing (A. Strathern 1982b).
Such fears are perhaps produced by the contrived nature of the unifications. Unity only partially conceals an
anticipated dual or multiple identity. And it is only appropriate for certain stages in the development of the
child/food. Thus the Hagen woman's claims to the growing crops she has planted depend for their
effectiveness on the fact that her work is also part of the joint work of the spouses, and it is conceived as
separate only in relation to the husband's. If she simply 'took back' her own food, that is, reabsorbed it into
herself as though it were not joined with another's, she would negate her own capacity for growth.
A comparison can be made here with those Eastern Highlands peoples whose construction of the maternal
body as a container nourishes the eschatological fear that the mother will forever retain the products
within.24 There must be some guarantee that internal differentiation (between mother and child) will occur,
for there has to be an anticipation

                                                    page_253

                                                                                                          Page 254
of it. That guarantee lies in the contrivance by which enveloping maternal growth is in turn enveloped by a
male container. This is an analogue of the enveloping femaleness of the male body essential to the unitary
construction of males within the 'body' of a cult house.
Male containment of female nurture is, I suggest, crucial to its productive character: the external
differentiation ensures the internal one, that the outcome of the necessary unity between child and mother
will be the development of a necessarily distinct social entity. Its potential separation (maleness) is signalled.
The structure is evident in horticultural practices. ''Ideally", it is observed of the Gimi, "men organize and
construct the boundaries within which women care for children, pigs and sweet potatoes, while men alone
venture outside those limits .... men compare their freedom to enter the unfenced, outlying orchards of 'wild'
(semi-cultivated) pandanus with the confinement of women to individual plots inside fenced gardens"
(Gillison 1980:145146, transposed). The same device of enveloping the enveloper is found in Hagen. The
Hagen man who explained how women were on men's 'hands', indicated an image of a fence within which a
wife is enclosed and thus encompassed by the work of her husband. Containment is also implied in the social
identity of her husband's clan land on which the woman resides, where she grows her chief crops, and which
to the child is paternal land. Indeed, throughout the Highlands, territory is associated with men's collective
organization. Men's collective activities also serve to contain, then, and must be taken as a general adjunct of
maternal agency. Thus it is by virtue of the bridewealth he gave that a Paiela husband is said to have
'planted' his wife 'in the middle of the garden'"in that center of exclusivity the garden fence creates"
(Biersack 1984:126). 25
In Hagen, the male identity of the husband's/father's land is replicated: it is also thought of as his own father's
land. Whether a woman resides with her husband or is back at home with her brothers, the very territory is
conceptually agnatic. Her partaking of its products (via the food she grows) invests her own body with its
strength. For these 'patrilineal' systems, the idiom in planting is very clear: the wife's plants are enveloped by
soil classified as the husband's.26 The territorial source of nurture is specific (MacLean 1985:112). Like the
particularity of the tie with the mother, it would seem that the particular agnatic identity (this clan as
opposed to that clan) is critical. Hageners do not think of soil itself as inherently 'male'. What is significant is
its social identity,

                                                    page_254

                                                                                                          Page 255
and 'clan' claims are mediated through the gardens a man cuts on his own father's or immediate lineage's
particular land.
It has always remained something of a comparative puzzle that in Western Highlands societies such as
Hagen, where stress is placed on bigmanship and achievement, systems that seem to produce a heightened
sense of personal autonomy on the part of both men and women should also display the most firmly
established 'descent groups'. 27 Yet we tend to take as self-evident the equation of the clan with the male
person. We should also ask what kind of unitary identity this is. Like the unity established between a woman
and her growing plants/children, it makes a totalizing statement about what is only a part of a man's social
identity. A clan has unity in the context of its extraclan alliances and enmities. It is hardly fortuitous that
allies, like husbands and wives, are canonically paired.
Hagen clans compete in terms of the strength and resources they have drawn into themselves rather than
through the recitation of histories or knowledge of secret names or some aspect of apparently intrinsic
identity as is practiced elsewhere in Melanesia. Clans compete in numbers and numbers not just of born
members but of added members. To attract nonagnates is to swell the clan body by men whom it can 'take
and plant'.28 The autonomous, unitary clan puts things on its skin. Not only is the wealth that comes to it a
sign of its external relations with its allies, but it also regards itself as thereby enabled to propagate crops,
pigs, and women internally. All these are detachable entities, as we have seen, the clan being thus a source of
something that both stands for and is different from itself. In so far as men do the detaching, they instigate
the flow, and what they add and detach are 'female' things. Their external relations with allies and partners
may thus be envisaged, at certain points, in cross-sex terms. The returns as prestige come as 'male' additions.
One could say that prestige is female wealth in male form. By contrast, there is no hidden metaphoric
relation to be established between the clan members and the same-sex identity of the clan. That is overt. A
clan increases, accreting to itself entities not of its own origin, and its singular actions are thereby made
visible. This visibility is the revelatory process I have called 'production' or 'extraction'the drawing of one
form out of another. In the same way as a man depends on his exchange partner, a clan depends on its allies
to make itself visible.
The clan also regards itself as a source of internal growth, a growth

                                                    page_255

                                                                                                          Page 256
that swells its contours and replicates its form. The unitary construction depicts men as growers. Clansmen
display a homogeneous identity: they are a single man. The land they exist upon and the ancestors who
encircle them all replicate clanship. The specific identity of patrilineal groups means that the clan
specifically grows its own agnates. This capacity is also its capacity to create external relations, for it is as
agnates that its sisters and daughters are grown.
Hagen men thus grow women. And the men do it through the effort they apply to prepare the land to yield
food. Food is the product of a relation (husband's and wife's work), but in its encompassing male origin, its
source in the soil, can also be thought of as paternal. A cross-sex relation is converted to a unique
(same-sex) capacity. And this is the sense in which clans grow persons on its soil, sometimes referred to as
its bones. Hence the 'grease' in clan territory that nourishes plants and people is food in male form, though
the term itself refers to semen and breast milk alike (A. Strathern 1977:504507; 1982b:119120).
Although Hagen women may be thought of as 'things', like wealth, they are not overtly conceptualized as 'on
men's skins'. They are also persons 'to be looked after', especially so of incoming wives. And in being looked
after, the subject of her husband's work, the wife becomes through time herself planted. The term that
signifies a human being, a planted being (mbo), is also the term for a new shoot, a point of growth. Incoming
wives give their own clan names to the growing subclans as they differentiate themselves like so many
shoots from the homogeneous clan body; the women externalize them.
We must distinguish between two images of internal growth. Both rest on the replication of relations but
relations conceived from two viewpointsfrom the viewpoint of the overarching clan, and from the viewpoint
of what appear as its constituent subunits. The one viewpoint is of a body whose segments internally
proliferate, propagating themselves like so many daughter groups, to borrow an idiom from Daulo. Not yet
detached, in being grown these internal segments also grow the outer body. This one might call the view
from clanship. Its counterpart is a kinship view, that is, the celebration of the historical specificity of lineages
and subclans, already distinct and detached through their own extra-clan ties, named after incoming wives.
The former is of a contemporaneous collectivitythe men who count themselves clan members here and
nowwhile the latter is a chronological image of a series of particular events, of specific marriages and
external connections. The distinction is significant.

                                                    page_256

                                                                                                          Page 257
Clan relationships are formed on the replicability of ties. Clans are 'one shoot'; the singularity of this
construct being based on the replication of its individual male members. Clans do not have overarching
genealogies. They compose a series of single men. Same-sex ties in the context of collective behavior have
the potential to transform asymmetrical ('kinship') into symmetrical ('clanship') relations. Clansmen only
collect together on the basis of what they replicate, what they have in common. Scheffler's (1985:15)
comment that Highlands group members do not appear mutually substitutable for one another may apply to
the kinship representation of Hagen lineages, even subclans, but certainly not to clans. On the contrary, clans
are constituted as units and as composed only of units. Severally or together their parts are always 'one man',
'one name', 'one stock' (A. Strathern 1972:18). Above all, they are one on the basis of effective collective
action itself.
Scheffler argues that clan ideologies, the idioms of common fatherhood or the solidarity of brothers, appeal
not to descent but simply to differentiation and obligation through kin relations, that is, by kin class ("we are
all brothers") (1985:13). But indigenous rhetoric actually forces particularistic relations based on kinship to
serve the interests of collective action. A Hagen clan is not simply a kin group blown up in size. It is a
transformation of kin-based relations, an argument MacLean (1985) has offered for their northern
neighbours, the Maring. 29
Hagen clans are above all units of collective action, and clanship must be seen as a manifestation of male
collective life, a deliberate artifact that stands over and against the particularities of kinship ties. What
confuses us perhaps is the absence of domains. Kinship is not evinced in bilateral networks ('filiation')
against unilineal group formation ('descent'), one domain of ('cognatic') relations against those of some other
kind ('agnatic'). Rather, as has been true of so many contexts throughout this account, men transform their
own relations. The kinship particularity of agnatic lineage relations are turned into the collective uniformity
of agnatic clan relations. It is the rhetoric of collective action which presents the former as though they were
simply a subset of or at a lower organizational level than the latter, as though lineage were an internal
replication of clanship. The analytical conflation of descent and kinship, which Feil (1984a) noted in
Highlands anthropology, has simply responded to this rhetoric.
The rhetoric supposes a segmenting continuity. Hagen subclans 'divide' into smaller units (subsubclans,
lineages). Though lineage brothers are not formally differentiated as senior/junior siblings as elsewhere in

                                                   page_257

                                                                                                        Page 258
Melanesia, these lowest level groupings sustain genealogies that give everyone a specific place. The
particularity of these lineage relationships gives them what I call their 'kinship' aspect. Between fathers and
sons, between brothers and sisters, between older and younger, genealogical differentiation is sustained by
asymmetries of obligation and reciprocity; in the case of close patrilateral kin, asymmetries are imposed by
the contingencies of history (who helped whom when). Thus same-sex ties between brothers can be minutely
and internally differentiated in terms of their individual histories of cooperation and estrangement. And their
cross-sex ties (with affines and maternal kin) have a particularistic significance for their personal prosperity
and health. The idiom of 'one blood' is used for intimate intralineage connections, a deliberately ambiguous
construct, for the 'blood' so conceived may be maternal or/and paternal, and the phrase refers to close
cognates as well as close agnates.
There is thus an important disjunction between the clan, defined by the rule of exogamy, and kinship units
that organize marriage, normally lineages or subsubclans. This is not simply expediency or a question of
management. Rather we should see the exogamic rule as a creative transformation of kinship relations which
generalizes the asymmetry of kin-based relations into an attribute of clanship. As wife-giver or wife-taker
the clan can make itself asymmetrical and unequal with respect to other clans; that is, it can particularize
itself. This metaphoric transformation represents the clan as though it were a body of kin. And in that regard,
the 'clan' is seen as having partible sisters and daughters to grow.
In turn, being able to grow sisters and daughters depends on the exogamic rule, on their anticipated status as
wives and mothers to other clans. The clan turns the cross-sex ties of kinship relations into an aspect of its
own constitution, its capacity to make external alliances.
The rule of exogamy creates the clan in one of two forms, as its own relations with its allies and as 'itself'.
Like the effect of the dual flows of male and female wealth on Trobriand dala identity, on the one hand the
Hagen clan is composed of male and female members (brothers and sisters); on the other hand, it is a
homogeneous entity whose internal relations are same-sex. For internal difference is eliminated when the
clan body, divided into male and female agnates, externalizes one category of these (the female) in its pairing
relations with other clans. External relations, through the exchange of women, thus keep clans distinctively
separate from one another. They depend on this separation

                                                   page_258

                                                                                                        Page 259
for their distinctiveness and thus on those with whom they intermarry. Allies are regarded as paired, and the
productive parallel to the Trobriand brother-sister relation is that between the Hagen husband and wife.
Individual spouses form a pair in that they combine their distinct parts in a single enterprise. What is
analogous about the husband's and the wife's work, the semen and blood that mingles together to form a
fetus, is that each is derived from its own paternal clan. In turn clans can thus be seen as analogues of one
another. They are separated, as I have emphasized, only by the exogamic rule into potential marriage
partners, giving rise to the difference between links 'through men' and links 'through women'. The rule gives a
particularity to each agnate, bestowing on each his or her own external ties, which means that the wife's
agnatic identity is no more compromised by marriage than is her husband's. That dual social source
guarantees their perpetual distinctiveness in the same way as exogamy has already separated the destinies of
brothers and sisters. Consequently, as analogues of one another, clans are also seen to encompass within
themselves 'parts' of other clans.
Clansmen thus imagine themselves as a single same-sex man, the one figure simultaneously encompassing in
male form two types of agnates, male and female. The single man is a performance. If clans are
conceptualized as bodies of males, it is the arena of events in which they exchange with, compete with, and
fight one another which emphasizes their singleness of gender. We might say that they attempt to impose
asymmetriesas though between marriage partners and affineswhere none necessarily exist. For the maleness
of the clan shows in its own internal capacity to make external relations, and the growing of women who will
become wives/for whom wives will be substituted is a dramatic metaphor for its capacity and potential
power in general. 30 Each realization of this specific capacity depends, however, on a particular pairing
relation with the specific affines who will elicit the external relationship.
I defined encompassment as the encapsulation of another's viewpoint, a containment of an anticipated
outcome. The clan encompasses, as it were, the fact that from a kinship point of view its agnates are
externally differentiated as particular persons who will make connections with this or that other set of kin. It
claims these particularities for itself. In the same way, it is able to encompass the multiple exchange
achievements of its individual male members as though 'the clan' were a unit of exchange. It thus appears to
encompass 'its own' products, its things, the sisters and wealth it has grown. Appearance is all: the

                                                   page_259

                                                                                                       Page 260
construct consists in the aesthetic impact of the clan's performance on its audience. Clansmen must induce
potential recipients to elicit their wealth, as the allies on whom they depend for wives must be made to elicit
sisters. In the way men think about the clan, they thus anticipate the response of others. They encompass it
within themselves.
Hagen wives encompass within themselves the efforts that their husbands will elicit from them. Their work
can only have this outcome; yet its efficacy is construed as locked within their minds, their motivations
secret and inaccessible until that point. A husband's efforts do not carry the same weight towards his wife,
for his motivations are already externalized in relation to her in so far as his clan has its own claims on his
efforts. The parallel for him is his pairing with an exchange partner or his clan's pairing with its ally. Here
motivations are held secret until the moment of display. Indeed, if the Trobriand yam pole is a female womb
in male form, the Hagen 'one man' who gives away 'female' wealth on a ceremonial exchange occasion is
also an encompassing male form. But there is a difference in the images. The single erect man is not
supported by a triangular base; Hagen men paint red triangles on their noses. Rather, the upright body itself
is replicated shoulder to shoulder, a horizontal line of vertical dancers bobbing up and down and swaying
back and forth. The amount of movement always gives an impression a little short of unison. But as a
collectivity of men, the 'one man' thus contains within his singular form a multiplicity of external
connections. To meet the aesthetic criterion of success, the clan must show its contours as a straight line, 31
and it so composes itself in front of a heterogeneous and disparate audience who will include the very
persons so connected.

Making More Relations
Differences exist between the several societies to which I have been referring. I have used a sketchy
Western Highlands/Eastern Highlands contrast to keep the sense of difference in mind. The general
propositions about personification and reification seem to hold, and all these Highlands peoples make a
distinction between mediated and unmediated exchange. But this should really be put the other way round.
Thus I have discussed mediated constructions in a specific social environment in which they can be
indigenously compared to and distinguished from unmediated ones: exchanges between kin take place in the
presence of cult or clan or political activity of a collective nature; that is, the meta-

                                                   page_260
                                                                                                         Page 261
phors available for thinking about particular kin interactions include collective, 'non-kin' activities, and vice
versa. There are interesting consequences here for comparative analysis.
Between Highlands societies, what seems to differ is what is taken for granted. The compulsion of the
anticipated outcome means that one set of relations can always be envisaged from another point of view, as
an outcome of another set. Anticipation is a preemption of what will happen. And with respect to the
production and reproduction of children, of food, of artifacts, people seem to start with different premises
about what has already happened (chap. 5). 32 Thus Hageners take for granted an established distinction
between a husband and his wife's father, where Gimi work to create that distinction between them. One
organizational consequence lies in the emphasis placed on kinship in collective and ceremonial life.
In chapter 3 I made a broad comparison between societies, as found among Eastern Highlanders, where
collective life appears an adjunct to the way in which kinship produces more kinship, and those Western
Highlands systems where male collective life appears to create (political) forms of its own.33 Or one could
put the comparison in terms of the incremental possibilities in the organization of relationships; or simply
whether differentiation between kin is or is not taken for grantednot kin relations as an entire universe,
because one specific set always has to be established vis-à-vis another, but at the point of their chief
productive potential. By this I mean how persons (relations) are propagated as things. Highland metaphors
generally seem to focus on the procreation of children; in the Massim people attend to the production of the
'finished' thing, the person at the end of her or his life.
However, within any one society, what is taken for granted may itself be questioned at certain moments, and
the issue of increment is rather more complex than it looks. A summary of observations on kin exchanges in
Hagen, in the Western Highlands, will remind the reader that the form in which I conceive the comparison is
prompted by the internal manifestations of Hagen sociality.
Hagen work is unmediated evidence of the extent to which the person's mind is directed towards his or her
own activities, and towards the part he or she plays with respect to another party. A person can show a
greater or lesser commitment ('mind') towards the ensuing relationship, but its essential definition is taken as
given. While domestic work thus makes relations of kinship and affinity visible, the effort appears to entail
no social increment; it cannot add to the form of rela-

                                                    page_261

                                                                                                         Page 262
tions: it simply affirms or denies them. When such work is terminated at death, compensation is due to the
person who has lost part of her or himself in the relationship that has 'died'. (The loss is of social
engagement, of a source of identity.) Domestic reciprocity contrasts with the social productivity of
ceremonial exchange where wealth mediates new relationships. Consequently kin-based transactions in
Hagen simply confirm the multiple origins of persons, primarily in reference to their maternal and paternal
kin. The duality of their immediate procreative origins is replicated in the origins of their parents, or through
the marriages of siblings and children and the multiplicity of a person's dealings with particular kin.
However, this leads to the counterfactual possibility of creating a unity or singleness of purpose, the sense of
unity working against the multiple orientations of a person's mind; people impress themselves with this fact.
Bodies as well as minds are multiple. A Hagen child is created through a metonymic transaction between
parents, each contributing a part of their substance while retaining their distinctiveness. The relationship is
reified in the child who substitutes for it, and who duplicates the identity of neither parent but combines
them both within itself. Its androgyny symbolizes a completed transaction. As an inert objectification of a
relation, it cannot be further reproductive, but it can be added to a male or female person/collectivity. A part
is thus also conceivable as an increment. Under agnatic regimes of the Hagen kind, wealth, children, and
persons in general, incorporating an internal relation between maternal and paternal kin and thus in
themselves androgynous, become visible as increments to others with whom they are related. Yet the
conceptualization of the child as though it were wealth holds only to a limited extent.
The propagation of children in Hagen is also like the propagation of food. The result of an interaction
between mother and father, the child does not mediate further relationships: it is not an item which can 'flow'
between persons. The child exists only 'between' the particular affinal kin involved, fixed by the history of
their relationships. Its fixity is established in the fact that, by contrast with ceremonial exchange
partnerships, there is more to the separation of its mother and father than is created by the transactions
between them. They are not reversibly differentiated simply as donor and recipient; they are irreversibly
differentiated by their own paternal clans of origin.
The conjugal relationship is in turn both like and unlike that between exchange partners, a source of its
metaphoric power in the way people

                                                    page_262

                                                                                                         Page 263
think of ceremonial exchange itself, as we saw in chapter 8. On the one hand, marriage is contingent on the
performance of both partnerstheir commitment determines whether or not the relationship will endure. On
the other hand, the commitment indicates not their exchange autonomy but the fact that through nurture
each partner has made the other asymmetrically dependent on him/her. Thus, at times, stress appears to be
on how spouses 'give' to each other, and sustain a relationship of reciprocity; at other times, that gifts cannot
flow between them, for they 'join together' or one 'helps' the other in production and consumption. From this
point of view, the Hagen child does not mediate between them, for it links two irreversibly unlike entities.
Transactions focused on the child are transactions to make it grow.
Yet that historical fixity is compromised. And it is compromised by the very acts which celebrate itwhen
wealth is given at marriage or in the form of childbirth or mortuary payments to maternal and affinal kin.
Maternal kin hold a special place as reifications of that element of the Hagen person which derives from
his/her mother; matrilateral connections may be envisaged as external additions to the agnate. And whether
neglected or fostered, they are not to be disposed of. When agnatic identity is in turn considered as a
contributory part of the person, matrilateral connections appear not as additions but as a comparable
counterpart. Maternal and paternal parts are paired as sources of growth and health to be dually maintained
to sustain future well-being. Ancestral ghosts on the mother's side are particularly significant for the delivery
of the child at its birth, and they privately continue to oversee its health. Indeed, unmediated transactions
between kin are ordinarily covert. Persons have direct influence upon one another as far as both their
intentions and their bodily health are concerned, but only the effect is visible. When intention is made
explicit, however, when nurture is acknowledged through gift exchange, the interactions assume an overt
form. Maintenance of fertility now becomes subject to successful exchange, one of the victims of this
transformation being parturient mothers who fear that inadequate transactions will jeopardize the child's
emergence.
In other words, relatedness ceases to be taken for granted. Kin relations come to be the subject of
transactions, and people engage in expanding them in the only way possibleby making 'more' kinship. They
increase the velocity with which items circulate and the intensity with which people interact. A child must
maintain good relations with its maternal kin for its growth and health; mother's milk, the work of

                                                    page_263

                                                                                                         Page 264
nurture, becomes a Hagen reason for exchange between affinally connected clans; a poor bridewealth may
lead to an annulment or divorce, and a failure to make proper mortuary payments to accusations of neglect
or treachery.
Kinship is transformed under these circumstances of overt communication. A transactional risk enters into
the continuity of relationships; for the penalties for failure are not simply the termination of relationships as
between exchange partners, but damage and ill health to the person. Perhaps it is not surprising that such
transactions are subject to further activity. Through sacrifice, people attempt both to maximize the mediatory
possibilities of gift exchange, thereby molding kinship relationships in terms of interest and advantage, and
to restore the domestic presumption that kin persons axiomatically depend upon and care for one another.
Apart from the strongly sacrificial element in Hagen kin-based exchanges themselves (killing pigs to
celebrate stages in a child's progress for instance), engagement with ancestral ghosts mobilizes domestic
sociality (chap. 5), as is possibly also true of the performance of ambulatory Spirit cults. Earlier, I pointed to
the relations of dependency at the center of Paiela puberty ceremonies and the initiation rites of the Eastern
Highlands as well as to their collectivized nature. The collective context of such cult activity stimulates a
flow of messages about the caliber of the relationships in question, through what appears the vehicle of
mediating items. But in communicating with ancestral ghosts and spirits, people may leave transactions
incomplete: there is an asymmetric transmission of messages, a covert return desired for an overt act.
Indeed, the incompleteness may actually guarantee the 'domestic' productivity aimed for. The sacrificing
congregation do not want an exchange of messages; they want to be made healthy, to experience the effects
of ancestral blessing in an unmediated form. The last thing they require is a return 'gift' from the spirits. This
asymmetry partly explains the destructive element in sacrifice: the gift is properly destroyed, for it is not a
gift which is sought in return.
In societies where initiation and marriage rituals take center stageoften demanding lengthy periods of
timepeople make 'transformed kinship' their chief problem. They work at making visible what works by
being kept hidden; and they work at 'reproducing' themselves, at making more kinship. Sources of growth
and the possibility of substance loss become hazards of the interchanges. By their own recursive acts,
Sambia men find themselves having to feed the food they impart. What

                                                    page_264

                                                                                                        Page 265
Hageners construct in clan formthe male body separated from others by its detachable sistersmay have to be
constructed within the individual bodies of men (Sambia) or of women (Gimi). Men and women must show
an internal separation of parts. 34 Differentiation between father and daughter or husband and wife is
created in the course of their encounters, between themselves and in relation to specific external others, as a
matter of deliberate contrivance.
In Hagen the exogamic rule combines with marriage dispersion to guarantee the axiomatic separation of
spouses. This creates the possibility of mediatory exchanges between kin themselves. In mediated
transactions, separation bestows a particular value on the part of himself that the donor gives away; as I
have argued, he is able to reappropriate that value, so that he is personally augmented by all the relationships
through which the objects have flowed. The idea of persons so bestowing parts of themselves on others
entails political possibilities. Rosman and Rubel (1978) have documented generally for Melanesia the extent
to which kin-based exchanges have overt political functions, and kinties are or are not the basis of other
partnerships.35 In Hagen, gifts between kin celebrate their dependency upon one another; the relationship is
already defined and in that sense taken for granted. Although the parties to the transaction may be donors
and recipients, they are also other social persons (sister's sons and mother's brothers, say) by virtue of the
one relationship between them which is the rationale for the gift. Thus, when a sister's son gives items to his
mother's brother under the rationale of a return for maternal nurture, a prior and asymmetric relationship is
evoked. But the Hagen case is interesting for the extent to which kin-ties are staged to be transformed into
political ones. Here nothing is taken for granted.
The Hagen maintenance of good relations with maternal kin shades off into political expectations, and these
come to include the making of good wealth exchanges themselves. Child payments to maternal kin,
bridewealth, and certain aspects of mortuary payments all have the capacity to be expanded into incremental
moka: indeed, beyond initial gifts under these rubrics, moka is their enduring form. Nevertheless, between
kin, the items also continue to refer to the values which persons have for one another not present in ordinary
exchange partnerships. 'Actual' kin are involved in these transactions, a contrast with systems centrally
focused on kin exchanges, where substitute kin often become channels for the flow of wealth. This is not the
paradox it seems. When Hagen men expand relations beyond an immediate circle of kin, they

                                                    page_265

                                                                                                        Page 266
turn them into generalized moka partnerships; elsewhere, 'kinship' itself may be generalized, and
classificatory relatives stand in as recipients of kin gifts. 36 The domain of kin-based exchanges thus remains
strictly limited in Hagen. It is less that kin debts are settled through ceremonial exchange than that a new
class of debts is created, since affines who do not press their relation into the service of ceremonial exchange
may feel cheated of the political benefit their relationship might have brought.
It is no paradox either that to liken marriage exchange to moka in general, as Hagen men do, is part of the
separation of domestic kinship from political life. The rhetoric does not simply model moka on the
asymmetric dependencies between affinally and maternally related kin. That visible part of men's activity in
marriage negotiations which involves their public presentation is assimilated to the kinds of political
confrontations which characterize participation on other occasions. Male affines can behave as though they
were exchange partners. Conversely, by contrast with the enduring asymmetries created in other Highlands
marriage systems, asymmetries between the givers and recipients of brides are played down. Once the initial
affinal prestations are over, relations between them tend to equalize. Inequalities remain in the background,
taken for granted.
I return to an observation made in chapter 5: Paiela men have to compel women to grow them, to force a
transaction between entities already differentiated. Gimi, who take growth for granted, have to force the
differentiation through establishing the distinct social identities of encompasser/encompassed,
source/product, grower/grown; creating the difference between these two identities makes the one yield the
other and separation is accomplished. The 'problem' generated by the former compulsion is that even if
children are separated from the identities of their male and female parents, they must still be made to grow.
Where children are regarded as implanted within the mother, as in the latter, they must still be detached from
her body. As long as a product is encompassed within its source it grows; but evidence of it having grown
can only be given when it separately embodies the growth in an independent form. It is such visible evidence
of separation and growth which both ceremonial exchange and initiation cults seek to display.
Consequently, mediated transactions of the ceremonial exchange type define the quality of a relationship (its
history of debts and credits) during the course of the transactions themselves. Transactions then ap-

                                                   page_266

                                                                                                       Page 267
pear incremental; they appear to propagate more transactions. Unmediated exchanges typify parent and
child ties or ties with kinsfolk based on asymmetry and dependence, source and product. These transactions
appear nonincremental, yet there is a creative (productive) element to them, namely, the possibility of kin
implanting their own condition in others who thus come to substitute for them. They propagate more kinship.
One might encapsulate these different techniques or practices of objectification in the anthropological
contrast between generalized and restricted exchange. However, as Damon (1980) says, appearances are
deceptive. The former technique seems to create endless potential for new relationships, for expanding the
circle of partnerships before it comes back to oneself, evinced in the replication of same-sex ties. But in the
end like does produce likemen only create more men, more partners. Despite the inflation of particular,
kinship-derived values and loyalties to a collective (group) dimension, ultimately speaking, women and men
remain locked in the restricted oscillation of debts between donors and recipients. The latter technique
appears to engage people in an everlasting round of cross-sex substitutions, always reproducing the same
relations, parents producing children who will become parents. But in the short term, it transforms one set of
identities into others, creating new social persons, children who are not their parents. Despite the
collectivization of kinship transactions, proximately speaking, men and women are locked into the
nonreversible displacement of each generation by its successor. We might put it that people thereby borrow
these two practices as metaphors for each other, so that each in fact participates in the other's form.

                                                   page_267

                                                                                                       Page 268


10
