4
Domains: Male and Female Models
Whereas in the Eastern Highlands male collective life outside warfare once focused on cult activity of
various kinds, including the all-important initiation of boys, ceremonial exchange takes that place of
prominence in the Western Highlands. In opening his study of Wola, 1 Sillitoe refers to exchange as "the
sociological principle which forms the backbone of Wola society" (1979:1):
    The premise of this study is that to understand Wola society it is necessary to appreciate how these
    people resolve a universal paradox which faces mankind. This paradox concerns individual freedom
    and the restrictions which society places upon this freedom. That is, how does society curb the
    self-interested drive of the individual, and control behaviour so as to allow social co-operation
    between people, without detracting too much from the individual's freedom of action. (1979:4)
Exchange mediates the paradox, he says, because it contains within it two opposing features that
complement "the opposed forces inherent in man's nature," namely "individual interests versus community
interests" (1979:5). It both encourages sociability, as he puts it, and rewards self-interest. It enables men to
act at once considerately and competitively towards one another. This he presents as true of exchange in
general and of ceremonial exchange in particular.
Sillitoe's account is interesting as an attempt to get away from an equation between social structure and
groups. Indeed, he criticizes those writers who have argued that ceremonial exchange in Western

                                                     page_66

                                                                                                           Page 67
Highlands societies such as Hagen "functions to maintain the integrity of groups" in competition with one
another (1979:293). But substituted for groups in his account is simply the other half of the societyindividual
antinomy. His explicitly individual-oriented approach places emphasis on exchange as the key principle of
"social organization" (1979:292). Relations between individuals sustain it, and it in turn sustains them. Social
life is thus recognizable in the balance between individual autonomy and social order, to use Sillitoe's
phrases. It consists in this account in the manner in which individuals manage relations between themselves.
In similar vein, Feil closes his analysis of the tee system of ceremonial exchange in Tombema Enga with a
paean to its role in connecting individual persons to one another (1984b:240):
    the tee for Tombema people and society ... is a model of and a model for their humanity. Without the
    tee, there is no community, no sociability, no reason for people to congregate. The mutual, reciprocal
    interests of the tee bind men into secure, cooperative partnerships of trust. Without the tee, Tombema
    believe such relationships are impossible.
One has to understand that Feil subsumes under exchange relationships the work of production and the
domestic economy: "all production and exchange decisions have the tee as a backdrop" (1984b:7), and I
return to his arguments on this point in chapter 6. He stresses that the tee is carried by individual
partnerships, and indeed is opposed to warfare which mobilizes group behavior. 2 Since these individual
relationships are constituted by ties through women, and since production is, as he puts it, geared to extra-
domestic exchange, women are in his account crucial participants in both production and exchange. Feil
purposely takes women's affairs as seriously as he does men's. But his emphasis on women's participation
seems to incorporate an assumption, like Sillitoe's, that sociality is (collective) sociability. Hence the tee is
"the central institution of Tombema society" (1984b:237).
Identifying a key institutional backbone is itself a theoretical residue from older anthropological analyses of
'social structure' as the bony articulation of 'life' and other processes. It thus leads to a dichotomy, as became
apparent in the previous chapter, between what is social structure and what is not. A consequence of having
identified a central institution, then, is that in order to pay attention to women as well as men, one is required
to show how women as well as men 'participate' in this institution.

                                                     page_67

                                                                                                           Page 68
Consequently Feil must argue that we should not be taken in by group rhetoric, as he also argues that we
should not be taken in by the kind of dichotomous categorization into domestic and political domains as is
found in societies such as Hagen (Feil 1978). In order to bring to the fore the preeminence of women in
Tombema Enga society, he states that the politics of individual exchange partnerships obviates any such
dichotomy, for politics penetrates every domestic decision: "the political is inseparable from the private"
(1978:268). Valuable as this criticism is, it fails to broach the issue of where and how Tombema, or any other
Highlands people, deploy gender difference as constitutive of other differences.
   Tombema say that two men 'come together' or are 'joined' in the tee by a woman, that they base their
   relationship on a female link, and that when it no longer exists, the incentive to maintain the
   relationship disappears. This view is, I think, a recognition that women alone can guarantee the
   integrity of men in tee dealings, and without that guarantee, the relationship may flounder. (1984b:
   103)
Tombema say that two men come together linked by a woman; they do not say that two women so come
together. As he notes subsequently, the chief channels for prestige "distinguish and elevate the names of
men, not women" (1984b:117). Quite aside from the respective powers or influences that each sex possesses
lies the unexamined nature of the opposition and exclusions symbolized in the Tombema difference between
men's and women's activities.
However unfortunate an analytic idiom, the image of 'domains' captures part of a global categorization that
(in the case of Highlands people) extends a difference between the sexes to differences in their scope for
social action. Showing that men and women both participate in political and in domestic activity does not
negate the gender categorization itself: it simply relocates its focus. In the Tombema case, it seems rather
clear that 'men' are exchange partners, while 'women' guarantee or are in some sense a cause of their being
so linked. We need to know how 'men' and 'women' are so categorically and so differently placed vis-à-vis
each other.
If there has been a single advance attributable to feminist anthropology, qua anthropology, it has been in
bypassing questions about the essentialism of sexual identity and opening up an adjacent range of issues
widely known as the social and cultural construction of gender. What is laid open to scrutiny is the
relationship between constructs of

                                                    page_68

                                                                                                         Page 69
maleness and femaleness. This goes beyond considering how the experiences of individual persons are
molded by cultural prescriptions about male and female behavior. Where whole areas of social life
('domains') become the apparent concern of one or the other sex, then their relationship or articulation must
be investigated. This position constitutes a significant critique of analyses that take the coexistence of such
different areas for granted.
Those dealing with the social or cultural construction of gender are not required to take a decision as to the
prior or derived sexing of the body, in terms of the debate briefly mentioned in the last chapter. Their
concern is rather with the relationship between the very categories male and female. The concern itself
derives from specifically anthropological interest in elucidating the metaphoric basis of classification
systems. A presumption of social or cultural holism is thus combined with a demonstration of the plurality of
interests at work. Let me give a sense of this intertwined history, which will put some of the observations
made in the previous chapter in a rather different light. At the same time, it will also traverse similar ground.
The feminist-anthropological critiques about domestic and political domains which dominated the 1970s
originated in premises similar to those that informed the earlier sex-role model of gender identitytaking the
'relationship between' male and female as the focus of inquiry takes these entities in turn as fixed points of
reference. However they are defined in respect to one another, the task is seen as connecting two terms or
concepts that can also stand independently of that relationship. 'Male' and 'female' become reference points
for its elucidation, despite the interdependency of the cultural characteristics associated with each. The
strategy was inevitably to fall foul of the previous accumulation of ethnographic data that interpreted
maleness and femaleness as referring to what men and women are and do. It also joined with general
anthropological thinking of the time in its interest in models of society, in which one can discern the tension
between holistic and pluralistic premises about the nature of interrelations between the sexes.
I wish to draw attention to two features in the social constructionist formulations, versions of some of the
assumptions already encountered, and presaged in the citations from Sillitoe's and Feil's works. One concerns
the axiomatic way in which the individual, like the categories of male and female, is taken for granted as an
autonomous reference point. Sociality is uncovered in the investigation of relations between individuals,
even as social and cultural constructions are uncovered in

                                                    page_69
                                                                                                           Page 70
the investigation of relations between male and female. Second, to see male and female attributes as
reflecting men's and women's positions establishes a further parallel with the way in which the individual is
also presented, in that these suppositions rest on an intriguing presumption about the boundedness of such
entities. Individuals are imagined to have boundary problems similar to those that afflict 'groups', almost as
though sociality consisted in substituting group boundaries for individual ones. If men, women and
individuals qua individuals are seen to be subject to the kinds of 'socialization' processes sketched in chapter
3, then they also appear to have autonomous interests of their own that they must negotiate. In the case of
men and women each acts with respect to the opposite sex, and in the case of individuals each must maintain
relations with other individuals.
Indeed, the feminist-inspired concern with women as 'social actors', as persons in their own right, can be
directly attributed in anthropological accounts of the period to the conceptualization of male/female as the
social or cultural construction of 'men' and 'women' on the one hand and to the haunting equation of sociality
with collective life on the other. Both were caught up in the arguments about public and domestic domains,
and in Melanesian ethnography both belong to that same intertwined, though not completely merged, history.

The 'Social Construction' Of Male And Female
Studies of gender symbolism over the last two decades have been dominated by the concept of gender as a
social or cultural, that is, 'symbolic', construction. What is being constructed is understood as sex-roles
themselves, and as the everyday world which normalizes them as well as ideal or stereotypical images of
relations between the sexes. In Melanesia, one might start the historical account with Mead's (1935) and
Bateson's (1958 [1938]) works. They saw cultures as variably determining what was acceptable male or
female behavior in men and women. This was the beginning of an explicit social construction theory, though
the object of study remained the sexing of personal identities. It was Mead who enunciated so clearly, in her
overview of New Guinea initiation rituals, that while women make human beings, only "men can make men"
(1950:103). Thus, the great problematic for her was the relationship between sexual stereotypes and people's
personalities, and from this approach came an analytical vocabulary of normalcy and

                                                     page_70

                                                                                                           Page 71
deviancy. Bateson focused on the way in which Iatmul culture promoted a conventional ethos that affected
the sexes' interaction with one another: each sex had its own ethos, experienced as a range of emotional
responses. Nevertheless, his classification of types of relationshipcomplementary and symmetricaland his
concern with the 'cultural logic' of pairing, opposition, and divergence, made modes of relating a theoretical
problem.
As a category term carving out the study of male-female relations, 'gender' in its modern sense came to
embrace more than the sex stereotyping that interested Mead. The popularity of varieties of structuralism
within anthropology generated techniques for the decoding of symbols. Sexual symbolism could be
understood not just as stereotype or preferred personality but as metaphor. 3
We have seen how Read's early papers connected the symbolism of inter-sexual conflict to the demands for
male solidarity, and that sexual antagonism was interpreted largely in behavioral terms, as a matter of
relations between the divergent situations of men and women. Malefemale relations, in the phrase of the
time, thus encompassed attitudes and stereotypes about the sexes, but it also broached the symbolism of
community ('male') life itself. It is of a piece that in addition to its interest in solidarity and group structure,
Meggitt's (1964) article was an exercise in symbolic analysis (after Needham). Meggitt laid out the
relationship between a series of terms by analogy to the underlying logic of male-female opposition. 'Male-
female relations' now covered a symbolic universe of polarized equations, a social classification, and when
'gender' gained currency, the constructions were grasped as 'metaphorical' ones (see Buchbinder and
Rappaport 1976:33; see also Kelly 1976; M. Strathern 1978). Relations between the sexes were images for
the organization of ideas about other things, about life-forces or general values. Categories constituted a
social classification, and the modelling (in the term of the times) of the relationship between male and female
was there for decoding. The concern was with processes of signification and the relations between terms.
Feminist theory of the 1970s, as it entered anthropology, did not take these classifications at face value but
further regarded the lexicon as part of the power positioning of the sexes in relation to each other. It thus
took as axiomatic the reference of male/female symbolism to the affairs of men and women. Its own critique
addressed gender as an ideological construction and addressed the issue of whose models the analytical
models appropriate. This critique was particularly pertinent
                                                   page_71

                                                                                                       Page 72
when a divide between public and private or between politico-jural and domestic domains became
represented through a male/female polarization. The pertinence of feminist theory lay in its implications for
the definition of society as somehow first and foremost structured as the social world of men.
In Britain and the States these interests defined the emergence of a feminist anthropology through the
publication of Perceiving Women (S. Ardener 1975), Woman, Culture, and Society (Rosaldo and Lamphere
1974), and Toward an Anthropology of Women (Reiter 1975). 4 Many of these collected essays illustrated
the contemporary concern with models, and the bias of models, and began the debate on the universal nature
of the dichotomy between 'domestic' and 'public' domains.5 The spheres were presented both as demarcating
domains of action and as corresponding to people's evaluation of the significance of men's and women's
activities. By focusing on these constructs as embodying cultural evaluations, it seemed possible to
distinguish between differently structured systems. In some, men and women participate equally in public
and domestic matters; in others, boundaries must be crossed or subverted. Rosaldo suggested that women
gain ''power and a sense of value when they are able to transcend domestic limits, either by entering the
men's world or by creating a society unto themselves" (1974:41). With its implications for the study of
kinship and politics, Rosaldo's was a powerful holistic formulation that seemed to allow comparative analysis
across a range of situations.
Gender thus was taken to comprise an indigenous model of duality, discriminating between categories and
constructs of all kinds, often to asymmetrical effect (one of a pair valued, the other denigrated). Such
symbolic asymmetry seemed to resonate with perceived inequalities between the sexes. At the same time,
then, a dualism was also identified between their interests. The ethnographer had to look for dual models of
the world, reflecting the differing perspectives of men's and women's lives.6 This meant that the asymmetry
could not be taken for granted; it might well turn out to be a property of a dominant model, creating an
ideological hierarchy of values. It could reveal an indigenous bias. To avoid replicating such bias, the
ethnographer's task had to rest on a dual approach of his or her own, both taking into account the sexes as
interest groups likely to have their own visions of the world, and showing up sexual stereotyping for the
ideology it was. The significance of the public/domestic debate was derived, in part at least, from this
contemporary concern with male bias (indigenously and as part of the

                                                   page_72

                                                                                                       Page 73
ethnographic account) in the description of social structure (Quinn 1977:183; Milton 1979).
That less than ten years on the debate should be dismissed as having outgrown its usefulness, or as
addressing "anything more than an ideological distinction that often disguises more than it illuminates"
(Atkinson 1982:238), is testimony to the scrutiny and theoretical 'work' the capture of domains engendered.
What had been captured was the interest-based dimension of cultural categories, and thus an internal
pluralism. Where men have a special interest in seeing themselves as the authors of collective life, the
argument goes, then it also becomes their interest that the nature of this life be described through sexual
differentiation. If what men do becomes public and visible, a counterpart domestic domain becomes
identifiable with a noncollective and female realm. It was turning these categories to analytic use in
describing men's and women's spheres of action that proved troublesomethe extent to which women were
made invisible via this very categorization. The debate foundered on the tautology of the association
between women and domesticity: domesticity could only be identified by the presence of women (Harris
1981:64). 7 Indeed, feminist commentators complained about the way in which those who interpreted or
incorporated into their accounts an explanatory division of this kind ran together distinctions between
public/private, political/domestic, social/individual (e.g., Tiffany 1978; Rogers 1978; Yanagisako 1979;
Sciama 1981; Yeatman 1984). Yet in terms of Western classifications, of course, these form coherent
ideational sets.
The same is also true of the equivocations themselves. We might contrast the tension between the holistic
and pluralist critiques in terms of their own (Western) symbolic devices. On the one hand, the domains are
interpreted for other cultures as their symbolic device for the internal ordering of society, the male capacity
for 'group' behavior being set against the refractory individualism of 'family' life symbolized as female
(Rosaldo 1980:394: "Male dominance ... seems to be an aspect of the organisation of collective life"). On the
other hand, they may be taken as revealing that in actuality men and women themselves constitute 'social
groups', each with its own spectrum of interests. Indeed, the symbolic domains may cross-cut 'real'
oppositions between these groups. (Commenting that gender symbolism in Hagen male cult activity should
be viewed as a discourse on the state of power relations, Hawkins refers to women as a group: "The
interdependence of male and female as expressed in the ... cult is thus an express rationaliza-

                                                     page_73

                                                                                                          Page 74
tion, an orthodox view, of the state of power relations between men and women ... between two groups for
the monopoly of power" (1984:222).)
Although the debate might have exhausted itself, one of its highly ethnocentric motivations remains. This
was an insistence, in the face of a frequent cross-cultural association between women and domesticity, that
women should be treated in the anthropological account as full social actors. 8 The equation with
domesticity suggested that without a degree of conscious effort then women might not be so considered. At
an early stage in the debate, Rosaldo located the problem in cultural evaluation:
   I have tried to relate universal asymmetries in the actual activities and cultural evaluations of men
   and women to a universal, structural opposition between domestic and public spheres. I have also
   suggested that women seem to be oppressed or lacking in value and status to the extent that they are
   confined to domestic activities, cut off from other women and from the social world of men [my
   emphasis]. (1974:41)
Interesting in this formulation is the perception noted by La Fontaine (1981): the possibility of classifying
some areas of life as 'more social' with respect to others that are 'less social' (cf. Ortner 1974).9 Continuing
insistence by feminist anthropologists that women appear as social actors in their accounts responds to a
similar tension. It is an important political tenet of scholarly practice; at the same time, the tension must also
be understood as belonging to the anthropological interest in models of 'society'. The point is worth
comment.
The accounts of the 1970s treated the public/domestic divide as a tool for analytical discrimination with a
universalizing potential. What had been advanced at a previous stage of anthropological theory10 as an
interpretation of the manner in which jural authority is constructed, and the relationship of politico-jural
citizenship to authority within domestic groups, appeared analogous to the manner in which men claimed to
be responsible for 'society'. For feminist commentators, the politico-jural domain was the place where social
values were promulgated, from which social power was exercised. As we have seen, criticism (as in Feil's
1978 article) was also made of those who adopted the essentially normative division implied in such ideas as
an analytical one. It was regarded as an ideological instantiation, in so far as the very modelling of a divide
perpetuates a claim, viz. that certain areas of social life necessarily subsume and thus regulate other areas,
which are consequently characterized as requiring regulation or as not having in-

                                                     page_74

                                                                                                          Page 75
dependent interests of their own. This critique led to attempts to rewrite a political dimension into
domesticity itself. Indeed, it was rapidly accepted that the study of 'politics' should be separated from the
study of 'public' life. As a recent summary puts it,
   No longer does it seem useful to equate politics with 'public' institutions, statuses, and social groups
   previously considered as a predominantly male 'domain'; instead, politics should be seen as a system
   of power relationships and value hierarchies, which necessarily includes both women and men. When
   male activities, groups, and ties are studied .... it must be recognized that these are gender-marked
   phenomena and do not constitute the 'human' social universe. (Tsing and Yanagisako 1983:512)
That there was reason to question these constructs arose from the parallel conflation of domesticity with the
affairs of women. In so far as the domestic domain was interpreted as inward-looking and removed from the
wider society, so too, it was objected, were women regarded by prefeminist ethnographers.
In their critiques, feminist anthropologists remain divided among themselves. In some cases they are
concerned to analyze how these cultural constructs work 'really' to contain women; in others to show the
inappropriateness of mapping what they claim are Western-derived concepts onto systems that do not
discriminate along these lines. Even where it is regarded as analytically appropriate, the fact of so organizing
social life to the exclusion of women and to their domestic containment is interpreted as an instrument of
power on men's part. The construction of power, it is argued, depends on promoting values that underline the
axiomatic nature of the division. The divide thus incorporates a partisan self-description, a particular
representation of society. This may be understood either on the holistic premise that one is dealing with a
coherent ideological set that confines women to a particular position or on the pluralistic premise that
women are not really to be encompassed by such categorization; evidence for their models of the world have
to be found elsewhere.
These equivocations were in the end dominated by an idea feminist anthropologists shared with other
anthropologists of the timethe assumption that symbolic strategies such as domaining afforded a model of
'society'. Yeatman regards this assumption as intrinsic to modern social science:
   Because the [Western] gender ascription of the differentiation of public and domestic socialities
   operates to make these socialities appear not as a difference within the same kind of life, but as a
   difference of kind, between

                                                     page_75

                                                                                                           Page 76
   different types of life, the equation of 'society' with public sociality tends to exclude domestic
   sociality from 'society'. (1984:135)
The anthropological compulsion to identify what is crucially 'social' in indigenous representations assumes
that the indigenous models promote a split between a society so perceived and elements that might be
regarded as asocial, antisocial, subsocial.
For the inherently plural character of Western images of society underwrites the identification of collective
life and the public/political world of men such that a domain metaphorically categorized as male is taken to
reveal men equating themselves with society tout court. In this Western view a 'male' domain must speak to
men's interests. And a domain conceived as public and collective in character is assumed to oppose
individuating, noncollective areas of life as society opposes the individual. When such domaining activity is
encountered in non-Western gender symbolism, it is easy to imagine that it speaks to similar concerns.
Instead of arguing it away, I suggest it will be important to the Melanesian case to investigate the distinctive
nature of domestic sociality, that is, to take seriously the distinctiveness culturally attributed to it. One might
thereby avoid doing violence to indigenous differentiations. The important aspect of the debate to pursue,
then, is the realization that boundedness between areas of actionprivate set off against public affairsis itself
an image (La Fontaine 1981). This image creates a value difference between types of action. Where the
values are mapped, as they appear to be, onto a distinction between things to do with men and to do with
women, an ideational boundary between the sexes becomes the medium through which the possibility of
action itself is presented.

Models Of Social Life*
I turn briefly to three studies carried out in the 1970s, two from the Western and the Eastern Highlands with
a third illuminating study drawn from right outside this area. They all reveal a boundary that appears to run
contrary to expectations. It is not men who emerge as specifically 'social' in their orientations but women.
The ethnographers who have documented these cases have made a point of consid-
   *These accounts are adapted from material I have presented elsewhere: the Hagen case from O'Brien
   and Tiffany (1984); the Daulo case from Hirschon (1984).

                                                     page_76

                                                                                                           Page 77
ering women's perspectives; however, these are not simply negative instances. On the contrary, the cases are
drawn from societies (including Hagen) whose traditional 'public' institutions were male-dominated. But
changes that have been taking place in these societies in recent years are revealing.
The spread of wage labor and cash crops in Melanesia has had an effect upon subsistence work. By and
large, horticultural activities continue intact; yet with men becoming involved in migrant labor or 'business'
of one kind or another, women are more prominently concerned with the subsistence base. In this context
they come to be associated with a range of public values. As men move into a world opened up by colonial
and postcolonial trade and politics, women become visible reminders of enduring norms of social conduct.
For all three instances, women's past activities were confined, by contrast with the wider activities of men
that set the definition of public life. It looks almost as though women now come to stand for 'society' itself,
as it appears in the contemporary world. However, the question shows up the construct of society for what it
is: an anthropological equation between collective activities and the society of Western discourse. What is
revealing about these ethnographic examples is the challenge that they offer not only to an association
between 'social' values and public, collective activity but to the characterization of domesticity.
Internal migrants: Hagen. The system of ceremonial exchange between political groups, involving each man
in a wide network of exchange partners, has expanded and escalated in Hagen since contact, absorbing
monetization and with the then (1970s) abeyance of warfare being a focus for men's public displays. Men's
collective endeavors continue to be highly valued as such. In drawing a contrast between ceremonial
exchange and things concerning household production, men hierarchize what in other situations they value
equally. Thus they may claim that renown and prestige are to be found only among men in the sphere of
public life, concretely presented as a matter of men being prestigious, women rubbish. Men's prestige comes
from their collective activity, which includes travelling to exchange partners and drawing in wealth from
exotic places, whereas women are confined to a restricting domesticity, to 'the house'. Production is not
publicly valued in this context: certainly it is not presented rhetorically as the basis for building prestige. And
men constantly use the contrast between male and female as a metaphor for the difference. Thus men
encourage one another not to

                                                     page_77

                                                                                                          Page 78
behave like women but to invest in public life. Women's exclusion from this sphere is also read as a kind of
irresponsibility (which it would be if it were men withdrawing themselves). They are portrayed in dogma as
wayward, capricious, with small, private concerns at heart. In other situations, men also make positive
evaluations of productive work, including their own and women's work. But when men state that women are
'strong things' on whom they depend, this acknowledgment is muffled by all their other assertions that men
alone are strong because of their public presence. It is, therefore, illuminating to note what happens when
men remove themselves from the arena of local politics and ceremonial exchange.
Hageners, mostly young and male, have been migrating to the coast for some years (see M. Strathern 1975).
Urban migrants recreate an adolescent culture: they avoid ceremonializing public occasions; they downplay
oratory, the supreme political art; and they reject any serious application among themselves of the epithets,
'prestigeful' and 'rubbish'. In removing themselves from the world of politics they may jokingly say they are
'all rubbish' by contrast with people at home. But they would never use the image frequently used of rubbish
men at home, that they are 'like women'.
To those left at home, the absent migrants show much of the irresponsibility said to typify female behavior.
Yet in terms of the framework crucial to such evaluations, migrants confound other aspects of femaleness:
far from being confined to the house, they are mobile and free. Yet mobility is prized only when it is to a
purpose. Ostensibly the migrant travels to gain money; it is when he fails to return or to send money back
home that kinsfolk start to label him rubbish. Like the migrants themselves, however, they do not resort to
male-female metaphors. People at home continue to judge migrants' behavior in terms of prestige, but they
too abandon female/male idioms. The reason, I suggest, is that with the passing of time, the most crucial
issue becomes mutuality. Relatives become increasingly restless as the optimum moment for the youth's
marriage comes and goes, and they are unable to discharge their obligations. This feeling is matched by
concern at the absentee's lack of feeling for them, the inadequacy of the gifts he sends. Interdependence is
gone, and its restoration emerges as the first need. Interdependence may be thought of in terms of reciprocity
embodied first and foremost in successful domestic relations.
For their part, if migrants de-politicize their urban affairs, they also de-domesticize them. They ignore the
passing of time which at home

                                                     page_78

                                                                                                          Page 79
turns a feckless adolescent into a responsible adult. And where a contrast between male and female is not
used to evaluate public and non-public orientations, the female comes to stand for something quite different.
To the migrant, womensisters, mothers, potential wivesrepresent adulthood and its demands, social
responsibility, the return to relationships formed through reciprocity and interdependence.
Youths at home enjoy considerable freedom. Most migrants are unmarried or only newly wed and continue
to think of themselves as untrammelled by social obligations. They constantly remind one another that they
are free to do what they like. Some say they ran away from home to escape marriage, for the idea of
matrimony is bound up with a man's feelings towards his elders, foreshadowing an explicit interdependence
with the woman who will be his wife. Much more potently than other Hagen men, women visitors who travel
to town or female relatives who send messages, remind the migrants of the binding nature of relationships
they pretend to have shaken off. Indeed, migrants become excessively embarrassed by the presence of
female visitors, apologize when they give them gifts, and may express bad feelings at having abandoned their
mother or sister. Women's requests lead them back into the responsibilities they have half discarded. Here,
then, we have women associated with responsibility, with social obligation, as people who direct the youths'
thoughts not only towards themselves but towards home society in general.
Overseas migrants: Vanuatu. Exhortations to participate in public activities or to meet domestic obligations
are appeals to action. They do not also presuppose a sense of a particularly 'Hagen' way of doing things. The
next example, however, reveals an ethnic-like modelling of a culture or society as a holistic entity,
conceptualized through a contrast between places that adhere to 'custom' and those that follow new ways. It
comes from a region that has experienced migration for a much longer period and on a much larger scale
than is true of Hagen.
The Sa-speakers of Pentecost Island in the Vanuatu archipelago inhabit an area that has known European
influence since the 1870s; Pentecost had its own first ethnographer in 1916. Villagers nowadays divide
themselves into custom (kastom) and into school (skul) villages, signalling their orientation to the now
postcolonial world. The polarization is clearly a politicized one and affects a range of activitiessubsistence
patterns, ceremony, knowledge, dressso the alternatives are total. Sa-speakers perceive a connection
between reliance on subsistence

                                                    page_79

                                                                                                         Page 80
production and the performance of traditional ceremonies in the same way as securing money by cash
cropping or wage labor and diminishing traditional ritual by substituting Christian worship are also held to go
together. In appearance and habit, persons are identified with one social order or the other.
Jolly, on whose account I draw, worked in a kastom village. 11 The Vanuatuans here contrast themselves
with Europeans. Europeans are regarded as floaters, like driftwood, stringy and flabby because they have no
enduring relation to the earth but are compelled to move about in search of money. Vanuatuans describe
themselves as belonging to ples (having a home), rooted to the earth, and their persons in self-evident good
health, for they are strong by producing, exchanging, and eating their own food. Kastom does not just depict
tradition, then, but a moral and material order.
Enduring sociality is traditionally symbolized in things to do with men. Thus the rootedness they see as
characteristic of their whole society is modelled in the rootedness of men. Rights to land are held by male
agnatic descendants of a founding ancestor. "Land is not so much owned as part of one's human substance,"
the "precondition of human culture" (Jolly 1981:269). Attachment to land is conveyed in the Bislama
(Pidgin) term man ples ('man place'). The form of the generic man resonates with the fact that men who are
typified as having enduring rights to the land also relate to it collectively.
Sa grow two main crops, taro and long yams. Taro is cultivated continuously, production being by the
household; all household members, male and female, may cooperate to grow it. There is no rigid division of
labor: if necessary, a person could complete the whole taro cultivation on his or her own. But with yams it is
very different. The seasonal growing of yams is part of a male cult, and they are eaten as sacred food. Here
there is an explicit division of labor between the sexes, men's and women's deliberate cooperation being
likened to sexual intercourse, an image in which the yam is equated with man or with penis. Yam cultivation
is communaloften entire villages work togetherand in this collective work men have a dominating role. They
organize the labor, possess the magic, and it is in their name that yams are circulated as gifts in exchange. In
short, the organization of yam production and distribution is in the hands of men. In fact, they control all
public prestations of food. In the process, Jolly reports, women's work is systematically devalued. Men
appropriate the yams (and pigs), treating them as their own rather than as "shared creations" (Jolly, in

                                                    page_80
                                                                                                        Page 81
press). As with a number of similar cases reported by Rosaldo (1974: 3435), the manner in which men's and
women's activities are allocated establishes a distinction between a collective public life focused on male
cult and male exchange and the private life of the joint household.
Although Sa in the kastom villages maintain an ideological opposition between themselves and the followers
of European ways, this does not mean that they ignore everything European. They turn European things to
their own ends rather than seek to encompass European ends; in other words they Vanuatize things derived
from the European world rather than Europeanize themselves. Sa have been synchronizing labor migration
with yam production for the fifty years that men have been leaving the island to work on plantations
elsewhere. Men go off in groups, rarely alone because leaving the island to work abroad involves risks,
especially to men's health. An important element in the link between people and the land is the food they
eat; indeed status differences between social categories are marked by rules of commensality. Taro, for
instance, is regarded as a female food and is specifically fed to a newborn baby, whereas yams are the food
fed to boys at circumcision to signify their masculinity. There is thus an intimate equation between the food
one eats and one's bodily and social state, as there is with the circumstance of eating 12 and the
classification of foods with parts of the human body. The contrast with Europeans is made in terms of the
way lifestyles, including the kind of relationship involved in the production of food, are evinced in body
substance. Yet migrant laborers have to subsist on imported rice, tinned fish, and corned beef. Men are
thought to be weakened by this exogenous food. But the weakening effect is apparently limited to the
personal body (that can be replenished in the yam harvest); they do not see themselves as also compromising
traditional society, the kastom through which their village defines itself. And how can they sustain the
paradox of moving away like Europeans and eating foreign food when kastom is founded on rootedness to
land? By having women stand for rootedness?
Jolly tells us that men actively discourage and prevent women from seeking migrant work. They thus inhibit
women's contact with outsiders. This action sustains claims to male dominance (men are regarded as more
able to withstand dangers than women); and men appropriate access to the outside world just as they do a
leading role in ritual and exchange. Yet there may well be a further dynamic to the relation between gender
and the conceptualization of traditional society. Thus in the context of male migration, not in others, women
at home can repre-

                                                   page_81

                                                                                                        Page 82
sent the enduring relationship to land that is held to characterize a kastom way of life as a whole. This
possibility perhaps lies behind the novel paradox noted by the ethnographer that the ideological commitment
to kastom and to kastom food has become predicated on women: ''in the end, the tenacity and rootedness of
man ples depends on the tenacity and rootedness of woman ples" (in press).
The modelling of a social life on notions of male rootedness or the mobility that has displaced it, and on their
superior organizational skills, could be taken as an ideological set fashioned by men to further their own
interests, including the domination of women. Indeed, in striking comparison with Bloch's (in press)
description of circumcision among the Merina of Madagascar, Jolly (in press) suggests that in the manner in
which the contrast between taro and yams is engineered, these tubers do not merely mark difference
between the sexes but convey the mastery of men over women and the encompassment of female by male
symbols. Or one could argue that the differentiated spheres of male and female activity afford a framework
for the conceptualization of dual processes in social life. In truth, these are not necessarily alternative
approaches: the latter models motive, as well as justification, for domination. I return now to the Eastern
Highlands of Papua New Guinea where, as we saw, male domination is frankly asserted in the interests of
promoting public benefits.
Business: Daulo. Eastern Highlands male cults were described in the last chapter as asserting masculine
superiority. They not only promoted social solidarityon the single sex model of male cohesion in the face of
female threatbut were, according to the ethnographic reports, an instrument of domination. Numerous
constraints were put on women's behavior in the name of men's various cults. But the cults have since
disappeared, as has warfare in its traditional form. What effect has this disappearance had for men's
proclaimed domination over women?
Read (1984) suggests that giving up the cults and the symbols of male community (the flutes) has released
men as well as women, that men in the old days were traumatized by their painful initiation into manhood,
and that the present regime is welcomed with relief. Men have also abandoned their fears of biological
inferiority: they are no longer afraid of female pollution and no longer attribute superior physiological
powers to women. Although they still control the basic sources of production, interpersonal relations are
reported to be freer and easier.

                                                   page_82

                                                                                                      Page 83
Men still sustain, however, a distinctive domain for themselves. Over this period, modern business
enterprises have developed with great vigor, and there is no doubt that it is men who are dominant in this
sphere. Yet although they continue to rely on women's domestic labor, it is hard to see their dominance as
geared simply toward the domination of women. The involvement of Eastern Highlands men in development
projects has to be interpreted more generally as a manifestation of their visible agency. They are seen to be
active in the new world. It is interesting, therefore, to record the emergence of a kind of 'business' run by
women, on a smaller scale than men's but often with male assistance for skilled work. Men's commercial
involvement has produced a response from women not to participate directly in men's enterprises but to
match what they see men doing.
The Eastern Highlands are entering a phase of incipient stratification. Development projects have created a
local elite, and what began as collective commercial enterprises by groups of clansmen have become in the
last decade the empires of individual men. To some extent, these empires are built on a traditional
subsistence base where women's work is still very significant. These male projects are also, it would seem,
devoid of much ritual content. Indeed, it is arguable that when the male cults were abandoned, they did not
simply remove men's fears of women and men's domination of them: they also removed certain avenues to
collective life and to social and physical regeneration. Breathe more easily women mightthe extraordinary
thing is that women have taken up the ritual slack. They have created new rituals of regeneration. And this
they see themselves doing in the name of general public welfare, since at the center of their endeavor lies an
equation between nurture and the production of money. Money is now essential to the reproduction of life,
Sexton argues, and women have made themselves the ritual nurturers of it.
Sexton has described such women's rituals for the Daulo area in a northern region of Eastern Highlands. 13
The major source of cash is the locally grown coffee. Partly in response to men's control of cash at the
household level, women here have developed their own savings and credit system, with features deliberately
adopted from what is known of banking procedure. The system is called in Pidgin English wok meri
('women's work/enterprise'). Groups drawn from the co-resident lineage wives of a village protect their
savings from the depradations of their husbands by banking them collectively and using the capital for
business ventures and for lending to similar women's groups. The or-

                                                   page_83

                                                                                                      Page 84
ganization of a wok meri group is based on a preexisting collectivity (the wives of patrilineage mates) that
cooperates on other occasions also. Established groups sponsor 'daughter' groups in other villages by making
them loans that are eventually repaid when the latter become 'mothers' themselves. A complementary set of
symbols turns on affinity, so that mothers and daughters also see themselves as bride-givers and bride-
receivers to each other, the bride being the wok meri expertise itself.
An important point to be drawn from Sexton's analysis concerns the idioms in terms of which this activity is
conceived. Women emphasize the collecting together and saving of wealth but not as a form of gift exchange
in the ordinary sense; instead, debtors and creditors may remain unknown personally to one another. Women
regard themselves as safeguarding their cash incomes, while men are cast into the role of spendthrifts,
concerned only with individual goals and short-term consumption. 14
Despite competitive demands on household income, men respond to the women's efforts; many husbands
respect wives' claims to dispose of some of the cash crop income and support the groups with expert advice,
acting as bookkeepers and truck drivers. A man ('chairman') may also act as a group's spokesman on public
occasions. The focus of such occasions, however, is the women's transactions, and money is given and
received in their name. Although some women's groups disintegrate in the face of male disapproval, Sexton
(1982:190) reports that after one women's ceremony in which thousands of participants and thousands of
dollars were mobilized, men of one clan were so impressed that they urged all their clan wives to join the
movement. From time to time in such ceremonies, a group calls in its loans, and with the accumulated capital
may purchase wholesale trade stores to supply small local trade stores or trucks licensed to carry passengers.
These women save and invest considerable sums of money, then, through operations staged from time to
time on a public scale. The concept of nurture is central to this organization. Each new group stands as
daughter to the mother (oraho) sponsor. In wok meri mothers give loans to make the work of their daughters
grow, and the transactions are accompanied by birth and marriage rituals. Sexton gives the following
account:
   As a mother cares for her child, so does an owner look after her property; as a child grows, so ideally
   does property. Pigs grow and reproduce; coffee trees mature and bear fruit; money is invested to earn
   a profit. By the use

                                                    page_84

                                                                                                        Page 85
   of the term oraho ('mother, owner') Wok Meri women not only base their relations with other groups
   on fictive maternal ties but also claim control of money by describing themselves as its 'owners'.
   (1982:173)
The ownership exercised by mothers is a special kind, with parthenogenetic overtones reminiscent of
Gillison's description of the Gimi far to the south. There "the vigour and fruition of all nurtured life is
believed to depend upon exclusive attachment to, or symbolic incorporation by, individual female
caretakers" (1980:147). The identification between the nurtured thing and its maternal source leads to Gimi
men both separating themselves from the female body and sustaining the depiction of women as cannibals
who will envelop them. Possibly the attitude of Daulo men towards these investment associations revolves
around a similar tension between extracting the products of nurture and actively encouraging women's
continuing nurturant role.
Since money invested is seen to grow, it is appropriate that women, promoters of growth, should see
themselves as nourishing and guarding their money that is both evidence of their work and part of the
productivity of the lineage. Sexton writes:
   In rituals like the symbolic marriage ceremonies ... Wok Meri women claim responsibility for the
   communal welfare. An accepted interpretation of traditional male cult activities in the Highlands is
   that they enable men to take on symbolic responsibility for the fertility of women, crops and pigs,
   and for the well-being of the human and animal populations. ... In the Daulo region ... male cults have
   not been practised for some time. It is of major importance that women have developed Wok Meri
   rituals in which they symbolically shoulder the burden of insuring the 'fertility' or reproduction of
   money which has become a requisite (as a major component of bridewealth) for the reproduction of
   society. (1982:197)
This is no narrowly conceived image of maternity. In the context of men's withdrawal from collective rites,
Daulo women have taken over the modelling of a productive, public life, on the whole with men's support.
Important to this promotion is the exploitation of single sex ties, the all-female character of the internal
rituals. At the same time, the particularity of the integrative idiomsmother/daughter ties across
groupsindicates that these women are not simply imitating men's rites; they are drawing on other symbolic
sources for the representation of social welfare and productivity. By recreating the rituals of marriage and
bridewealth, Sexton argues, wok meri women reaffirm that women are the source of wealth. More than this,
they give birth without assistance; they "create and reproduce society by themselves" (1982:197).

                                                    page_85

                                                                                                        Page 86
Warry's (1985) account of similar rituals in the nearby Chuave area emphasizes the potentially subversive
character of these claims. Women's fabricated transactions do not sociologically replicate the structure of
traditional exchanges between kin and affines; the fictive relationships created among women often link
strangers, and actually disrupt the interpersonal networks men sustain. 15 Kin-based prestations revolving
around births, marriages, and deaths were formerly channelled through what Warry calls men's corporate
and competitive efforts, an engagement of their group identity. The new women's activities do not respect
these boundaries. On the contrary, Chuave women's complaints about men's wastefulness include male
investment in ceremonial exchange activities that promote the clan or lineage prestige. Women construct a
new collective dimension to their 'growing' activities. In their creation of female to female ties, they endorse
collectivity but challenge the group formation on which men's collective activity was based.16
Social Actors
One question presents itself: is it simply that a boundary between public and private or political and domestic
domains has been redrawn? In each case, is it men's encounter with the encompassing world of
'development' and commerce that has led to women taking on the values of 'traditional' life? Perhaps the
whole of traditional society thus becomes encapsulated, its central values represented by the category of
persons traditionally encapsulated by men's collective efforts. But if this is so, there are some interesting
qualifications to be made.
Most important perhaps is the highly contextualized nature of women's association with social responsibility,
rootedness, or ritual regeneration. Indeed, in the first two studies, the association appears a matter of
situational rhetoric made explicit only in certain circumstances. Nor is it true that the whole of 'traditional
society' is conceptually located in an external world like a domestic as opposed to a public domain. Men's
own external relations do not necessarily provide scope analogous to the dominating part they played in
home politics. On the contrary, local political action remains a largely male domain. For all the public,
cultural, collective nature of women's new activities, in none of the cases here do they also come to signify
active political engagement, neither in the sense of promoting the solidary interests of groups in
confrontation with one another nor in exclusive claims to the avenues of prestige.

                                                    page_86

                                                                                                        Page 87
Western spatial idioms that depict a public/domestic divide in terms of geomorphic external and internal
orientations would be misleading if one used them to suggest that values internal to indigenous society were
now somehow set off against those of the external world. Indigenous politics certainly have not been
domesticated in this way; on the contrary, men see their activities here and in the external world as
continuous evidence of their public efficacy. Hagen women may be regarded by migrants in town as the
repositories of all social obligation, but that does not mean that at home they are more prominent. The
Vanuatu women on Pentecost might stand for rootedness in relation to men's going away, but that does not
mean they actually take over men's ceremonial life. The Eastern Highlands women may mount collective
rituals of regeneration but that does not mean they have shifted the basic structure of control over household
resources. I say new activities, but what is new in these accounts is the way in which a certain kind of
sociality becomes visible. What is made visible is that special sociality characteristic of domestic kin
relations.
This generalization holds across the differences in the three cases. Hagen women embody 'public' values in
so far as the responsibilities and duties of which they remind the migrants receive general acknowledgment
and are openly recognized. They are not 'private' values in any sense. Yet at the same time these are not
values related to concerted, collective action but are embedded within the interdependencies of close kinship
relations. From men's point of view, relations with women stand for particularistic cross-sex ties, including
domestic relations with other men. 17 On Pentecost, it is arguable that a holistic model of both 'society' or
'culture' is being built; not only does kastom (culture) comprise habitual ways of doing things, but certain
productive relations internal to the community are seen to uphold a general sociality by which Sa-speakers
identify themselves. This holism seems to be a specific ethnic artifact: Jolly describes kastom as a strategy
for responding to, modifying, and sometimes resisting European 'custom'. In Daulo, women are involved in
concerted activities, at certain points private (internal to themselves) and at other points public (brought into
the open) but throughout of an emphatically collective nature. The all-female ties parallel all-male ties, in
other contexts. At the same time, the crucial relations between wok meri groups are modelled on
interpersonal kinship among women.
The fully social nature of women's involvement in local affairs is made visible. Yet these formulae do not
obliterate differentiation be-

                                                    page_87

                                                                                                        Page 88
tween men's and women's activities. Women come to occupy a public space but still do so in
contradistinction to men. The resultant divide may not be satisfactorily matched with all that is connoted by
the Western formula of public/domestic domains and its variants; but that realization does not take away the
divisions that exist in indigenous life. At the same time, the divisions cannot possibly be construed by the
outsider in such a way as to suggest that Melanesians associate one sex with sociality and the other with
some lack in this regard. Chapter 3 queried the description of Highlands men's attitudes that suggested these
men saw boys as incomplete in their biology; the corollary of this Western-derived suggestion that women
completely endowed by nature must somehow always be seen as socially incomplete does not follow either.
The public/domestic issue has figured so large in the debate taken up by Western anthropologists interested
in gender relations because of the extent to which apparently similar evaluations are encountered in the lives
of other people. All three cases here provide a patent disjunction between men's and women's activities. But
I have been arguing that what must be examined is the form of the disjunction not only the fact of it. There
was ever only a limited point to asking if women 'really' are confined to a domestic sphere, a strategy that
inspects the terms of a dichotomy and ignores the relation. Perhaps these cases can assist in understanding
the further general problem, that so often the symbolized activities of women appear to be focused on
physiological reproduction or on involvement in household provisioning, to the extent that these appear to
constitute female domains. Is not domestic sociality still a diminished sociality?
The question of households invites return to the Hagen materials, for it seems the weakest. It looks as though
women simply remind migrants of their limited 'family' duties. Yet if this appears derogatory from a Western
viewpoint, it is because of Western assumptions concerning domesticity. At their base is the notion that
domesticity makes women less than full persons, so that they do not qualify as proper exemplars of social
actors.
Hagen domesticity. Within Western society, it is possible to conceive of certain categories of persons being
rather less than persons. In an early paper, Ortner thus suggests that women appear closer to nature than men
in societies where they are associated with children who must be moved from "a less than fully human state"
(1974:78) to full human-

                                                    page_88

                                                                                                         Page 89
ity through the offices of men. 18 The acknowledgment of reproductive power might compensate for lack of
cultural creativity, but domesticity confines women to a low order of social integration. Whether or not such
formulations can be found in the thought systems of other cultures, they certainly are in our own.
Western women run the danger of appearing as less than full social persons, either because their creativity is
in natural rather than cultural matters or because they belong to the narrower world of the domestic group
rather than the wider 'social' world of public affairs. We entertain the idea of incomplete social orientation,
insofar as Western notions about personhood evoke ideas about evolution (see chap. 1). Industry and culture
are conceived of as a break away from nature and suppose domination over it. Within these terms, to be a
full person one must be culturally creative. Such notions are also set within a politico-economic formation
that assigns autonomy to the workplace, to a public sphere away from the infantilizing home. At home, the
nonwage earner is dependent upon the wage earner, even as the whole household depends for subsistence
upon institutions outside it. To be adult, one must break out of the domestic circle.
The Hagen view of the person, by contrast, does not require that a child be trained into social adulthood
from some presocial state nor postulate that each of us repeats the original domestication of humanity in the
need to deal with elements of a precultural nature. Society is not a set of controls over and against the
individual; human achievements do not culminate in culture. And to whatever extent female domesticity in
Hagen symbolizes affairs opposed to the collective interests of men, it does not thereby entail the further
denigration that women are less than adult. For women's identity as persons does not have to rest on proof
that they are powerful in some domain created by themselves nor in an ability to break free from domestic
confines constructed by men. The Hagen denigration of domesticity is located within a specific evaluation;
only with respect to activities that lead to prestige are things 'of the house' rubbish. That female concerns are
thus denigrated does not touch on women's stature as social persons.
Hagen women exert an influence more limited in range than men; at times they are forced into humiliating
positions of powerlessness; they are 'political minors' (M. Strathern 1972:293). Yet it is also true that women
are credited with will, volition, and the capacity to put things into a social perspective. Elsewhere I have
glossed these as autonomy, in the sense that the self and its interests are acknowledged

                                                    page_89

                                                                                                         Page 90
reference points for action. Hagen women are always held responsible for their actions, and it would be
inappropriate to conceptualize their status as child-like. Women quite as much as men are credited with
minds, a capacity for judgment and choice, an ability to entertain as points of reference both a consciousness
of selfhood and a consciousness of social relationships. There is no single term in Hagen to describe these
attributes, unless it is that of being human, but if we regard them as amounting to a concept of personhood,
then it is clear that the public power women exercise (the political content of their decisions) is irrelevant to
their definition as persons. Indeed, women often go their own way, following the dictates of their minds, in
the very act of refusing to acknowledge what men would classify as appropriate public goals. But this
connotation of autonomy must not be overstressed. Women are also credited by men and believe themselves
able to set their minds on ends that benefit both sexes. The most regular context in which women's minds are
engaged in social endeavor is household production, domesticity itself.
The mind (will, awareness), I was told in Hagen, first becomes visible when a child shows feeling for those
related to it and comes to appreciate the interdependence or reciprocity that characterizes social
relationships. The relationships always take a particular form. They present themselves initially in a domestic
context, for example when the child acknowledges that its mother needs sticks for the fire quite as much as
the child needs food to eat. A gloss of mutuality is put upon the unequal, asymmetrical relationship. The
child is held to have a further model of interdependence in the figures of his parents. As adults, husband and
wife are portrayed as mutually dependent upon each other, and because of the difference between them. The
difference is absolute. This interdependence turns upon the value put on work, in both the productive sense
and as an index of intentional endeavor, a mark of maturity. Reciprocal activity within the household comes
to symbolize other-directed intentionality. Husband and wife each contribute their work and effort to the
household; such work is particular to the relationship and is not given measure by the outside world. The
male preparation of gardens is not esteemed more highly than the female tending of crops or cooking of
food. The domestic context of women's efforts does not reduce themas it does in industrial societiesto
something less than work.
The transformation of work into prestige belongs to another realm of discourse, for it remains true, as we
have seen, that labor (production)

                                                    page_90

                                                                                                          Page 91
is devalued in relation to activities surrounding ceremonial exchange (transaction). This should not be
confused with the status of domestic work in a capitalist, wage-earning economy. The domestic unit is not
seen to depend on wider institutions, as the Western household depends upon an outside workplace, but is in
the local view viable on its own. Men's public affairs and the pursuit of prestige among themselves may
belittle the value of domestic work in the rhetoric of collective interests, but this only reminds them what
they also knowthat as men they must be effective in their own domestic obligations. Above all, then, the
domestic household is the place where people show themselves to be proper persons engaged in reciprocal
transactions. The converse, as later chapters will make clear, is that persons are also created in that context
as the object of their relations with others. Crucial to this conceptualization is the construction of differences
and asymmetries between those so related.
The male migrants who went from Hagen to Port Moresby not only de-politicized their view of their own
position but also de-domesticized it. In the general Hagen view, they were not shaking off the confines of an
infantilizing home. These actions held a profound threat: male migrants forego the framework of mutual
interdependence, established within the domestic sphere, which creates the mature person. They in turn
might be able to ignore the politics and rhetoric of senior men, but find it much harder to denigrate the
claims of women. It is easier for them to cast themselves sardonically into the role of rubbish men than it is
to deny appeals to that interdependence with others which both constitutes and symbolizes sociality itself.
In Hagen eyes, women's association with procreation and children renders them polluting and weak, yet
these symbols are to be distinguished from Western symbols of social evolution that classify the
house-bound woman as child-like and dependent. As agents of socialization, in this latter view, women are
associated with its earliest phases, especially the preverbal training of infants in whom must be instilled
certain habits. Socialization reproduces the social evolution of man and the creation of culture: children
become persons as they begin to manipulate artifacts and learn social rules. The mother, in the Western
world view, is gatekeeper to the outer worldhence our paradoxical concept of independence to refer to entry
into this world. The mother is tainted by this state of dependency, reinforced in her role as wife.
This rendition of Western stereotypes is spelled out in order to dislodge Hagen notions of domesticity from
such a matrix. Those con-
                                                    page_91

                                                                                                         Page 92
fined to the domestic domain are not in Hagen regarded as less than adult, as incapable of autonomous
action. A woman's contribution to the household is seen as a matter of her emotional and rational
commitment. Hagen notions of human nature posit that self-identity and social consciousness mature over
time, so that the mind is nurtured, showing evidence of itself in a child's growing self-determination and its
awareness of others. There is no concept of childhood prolonged through continued dependency, because
there is no equation between adulthood and independence. On the contrary, rather than grow away from
them, the child grows into sets of particularized social relationships, predicated on that asymmetrical relation
between itself and its parents. Childhood dependency upon parents is imaged as a matter of mutual feeling
between them. Finally, these ideas of personhood do not turn directly on dominance. It is not the case that a
person can be him or herself only through freeing the self from constraints imposed by others, an idea that
shadows certain Western constructs.
Whatever use is being made of maleness and femaleness in ranking activities of one kind or another, for
Hagen it is not necessary to erect a model of personhood predicated either on extradomestic domains of
power or on a politicization of domesticity. In so far as the division of labor between spouses stands for
mutuality in general, it is the domestic domain that produces full persons. Under no definition of the term
could an anthropologist working with a concept of 'society' regard Hageners as supposing this domain to be
infrasocial or outside society.

Two Types Of Sociality
The analysis of initiation ritual in the Eastern Highla nds can be subjected to similar scrutiny. If we label as
social the kinds of relations people establish with one another, their capacity to influence and be effective,
the obligations and constraints and powers these interactions set up, then from our point of view men and
women emerge equally from these studies as social actors. And from the Papua New Guinean point of view,
they equally impinge upon one another. It would be false to read off from the ritualization of physiology a
symbolized contrast between social actors and natural individuals. There is no reason to suggest that, any
more than in Hagen, Eastern Highlands peoples imagine a 'nature' upon which society and culture work to
impose their rules and classifications. Indeed if social relationships are taken for granted, a Melanesian
model of the person would already incorporate

                                                    page_92

                                                                                                         Page 93
the fact of connection or relation. The person is not axiomatically 'an individual' who, as in Western
formulations, derives an integrity from its position as somehow prior to society. We cannot then argue that
what males claim to dominate are female elements conceptualized in extra-social terms, viz. physiological
powers as attributes of an external nature. On the contrary, their concepts of collective and bodily activity
are more simply understood as tantamount to a theory of social action. 19
When powers are defined in an oppositional way such that one set seems lethal to the other, a consequent
rhetoric of antagonism may become attached to a perceived asymmetry between actors. Thus it may seem to
be 'men' who feel threatened by 'women', that is, their collectivity by the particularity of dependency
relations. Antagonism consequently appears, as the early fieldworkers argued, to involve unilateral
domination and anxieties about domination. Yet the apparently inexplicable question of motive dogs the
question of male domination.
An institutionalized desire to dominate implies the construction of concepts that link domination to a
perceived benefit. As Ortner (1974) observed, there has to be a grounding imperative to categorize
difference before the differentiated 'other' is constructed as an object to be subdued. This remains
unexplained in the sex-role models of gender relations that suppose women present themselves to men as a
self-evident ('antagonistic') category. Nor can this model account for the kinds of shifts, described earlier in
this chapter, which lead to the positive association of women with the responsibilities of ritual life. The
formula that I prefer is that gender demarcates different types of agency.
Persons differentially impinge upon one another, and imagining 'male' or 'female' ranges of efficacy becomes
a way of eliciting these diverse types (Wagner 1974:112). On the one hand efficacy derives from collective
action, based on the sharing of identity, and on the other hand from particular relationships, based on
interdependency and difference between persons. Gender imagery thus differentiates sociality,20 which is
consequently conceived as always taking one of two forms.
Biersack offers a comparable argument for the Paiela, a Highlands people to the far west of Hagen and
Enga. She analyzes the gendering of a public/domestic dichotomy as a reflexive discourse on social life. The
most salient feature of human life is diversity and variability, and ''Paiela use a very simple discursive device
for talking about diversity and variability. They employ a physical difference, ... sexual dimorphism, to
signify a polarity that is thought to characterize the species as a type of moral and social being" (1984:134).
The superior/inferior

                                                     page_93

                                                                                                          Page 94
axis of gender ideology she relates to its reflexive character: it could never be nonevaluative. It is the
question of evaluation that triggers what I earlier described as Western theories of social constructionism.
The Western European notion of society, as it informed anthropological and feminist accounts of the 1970s,
grasps collective action, whether in an integrative or competitive mode, as binding entities different from
itself. Sociality is seen to rest in relations between individuals, in the social and cultural constructions of the
individual or of sexed persons (men and women) whose individuality or sexing lies beyond the construction.
21 Elevated to academic discourse, we may call such a concept positivist or bourgeois. It by no means has a
monopoly on Western ideas of society, but through its counterpart in widespread folk models (e.g., Schneider
1968), with their own gender symbolism, in this sense enjoys hegemonic status. The power of society is
shown in its control of the extrasocial individual. Subordinating 'nature' or socializing the 'individual' provide
images for one another. In the same way as descriptions of systems produce the idea of events, such a notion
of society produces the concept of presocial (biological) entities, like so much raw material, and the
relationship is forever a source of speculation. This particular model of society employsas do similar versions
in the history of European thought (Lloyd 1984)a distinction between male and female to symbolize that
relationship. The model cannot keep the polarization steady but switches between suggesting that society is
the source of creativity and energy and that the individual is, or between seeing females as instinctual,
natural beings and seeing them as refined end products of civilization. Such concepts have profound
consequences for the way in which Western Europeans think about relations between men and women.
However much willpower is applied to reversing the terms of evaluation or adjusting them in favor of one
sex rather than the other, the fact of evaluation remains. This, in Rubin's (1975) words, is our political-
economy of sex.
The implicit culture-nature dichotomy becomes highly relevant to the hegemonic Western formulation of
public-private domains not only as a matter of content (the domestic domain is regarded as the site of
biologically based activity) but in terms of the structured relationship between intractable, given units and
the working of social forces which (through exchange or the division of labor between households, for
instance, see Harris 1981) creates superordinate ties and thus sustains sociality between otherwise
autonomous entities. Thus the domaining activity itselfthe separation of public ('social') affairs from private,

                                                     page_94

                                                                                                          Page 95
domestic onesholds an analytical place like that of the incest taboo, a separation that creates 'culture'. The
division is posited as a model of the creation of society itself.
This kind of argument further takes for granted a reflexive function in social classification; people are bound
to describe their relations to one another in such a way as to create a second-order modelling that subsumes
a first order one. There is the double imputation here that the operation of ordering, the indigenous
organization of ideas about social life, will show in the product of such reflection, viz. as an internal analysis
of social life into more ordered and less ordered parts. Thus, the public domain may be understood as an
exteriorization of or a socializing process brought to bear upon familial atomism. For significant to the
constellation of Western concepts concerning the notion of society is consciousness. Gatens (1983)
remarked that socialization theorists had to work with a body-consciousness split. Gillison makes the point in
relation to specifically anthropological theorizing about the construction of models as acts of consciousness:
"The opposition between culture and nature represents an externalization of the relation between mind and
body or between consciousness and instinct" (1980: 171172).
The terminology of 'construction', as in the social and cultural construction of gender, reminds us of the close
conceptual relationship in Western thought between consciousness and reason, with reason evincing itself in
system and systematics.
    The ideal of an ordered realm of thought to which intellect can retreat from the confusion of passion
    and the sensuous has dominated Western intellectual aspirations from the time of Plato. From their
    earliest origins in Greek thought, our ideals of Reason have been associated with a flight from the
    particular; and associated, too, with the idea of a public space removed from the domestic domain.
    Reason is the prerequisite for, and point of access to, not just the public domain of political life but
    also a public realm of thoughta realm of universal principles and necessary orderings of ideas. In the
    highly influential picture of morality which found its fullest expression in Kant's ethics, this realm of
    universal principles was seen as the proper locus of moral consciousness; the picture is in many ways
    still with us. (Lloyd 1983:490491)
It becomes easy for the Western observer to assimilate indigenous model-building to a second-order activity,
to a type of systematization, the product of consciousness, which replicates the organizational forces of
society itself. 'Models' and 'representations' are conceived

                                                      page_95

                                                                                                            Page 96
holistically. At the same time, any organizational principle can also be construed as 'a view'. Because the
image is of self-reflective activity, a pluralistic hypothesis is also possible: that any one set of rationalizations
comprises a view from a specific vantage point. The concepts of models, representations, the imposition of
systems, ultimately predicated upon assumptions about nature and culture, thus enable the feminist
anthropological critique of ideology to take the form it does.
For the Melanesian cases, I am not sure that the indigenous modelling of domains, in the vocabulary of the
1970s, is helpfully regarded as second-order self-reflection. I suggest we regard their evaluations as
predicates for action, and that what is made visible are differentiated competences. This disposes of the
supposition that a gendered domaining necessarily represents different points of view. The idea of domains
corresponding to men's and women's worlds is not a dualism that needs be sustained in the Melanesian
context. Domaining itself is not simply a male description of the world imposed upon a preexisting
heterogeneous nature; nor do the values ascribed to the domains simply stand for men's and women's
intrinsically opposed perspectives. The very questions about the articulation of domains that were so
important to the anthropological-feminist critique turn out to endorse a model of a society that must code its
own and not other people's gender constructs.
One must, in fact, get away altogether from the model of a 'model' that takes symbolic representation as
ordered reflection. 22 Domaining is better taken as an activity, the creation/implementation of different as a
social act.23 This repeats the conclusion to chapter 3. There it was asserted that the vehicle of symbolism
should not be seen as its cause (that gender imagery is about men and women); here, that a differentiation
into domains of activity is not necessarily explicable in terms of their character. But one might ask: why is so
much energy thrown into the act of differentiation itself?
There is certainly a strong Melanesian interest in evaluating the way in which persons affect and influence
one another. Different types of relationships are made visible in transactions between persons. Indeed, to
imagine these interests as tantamount to a theory of social action rather than a theory of society might bring
one closer to being able to adjudicate on issues of inequality or at least to address the premises on which the
actors perceive their power. For the cases discussed in this chapter still leave us with questions about the
nature of the boundaries drawn through sexual imagery. In essence, there is only one boundary. There are
not an infinite number of types of sociality but basically two:

                                                      page_96

                                                                                                            Page 97
for the moment we can continue to call these 'political' and 'domestic', if what is understood is a contrast
between collective action (based on shared identities and aims) and particular relations (based on the
difference and interdependence between them). The one can thus be construed as 'opposed' to the other. But
in what sense does one also appear as subordinate to the other? For the Eastern Highlands case especially
has raised the issue of male domination. Women's wok meri rituals did not emphasize domination; women
claimed superior financial skill in order to circumvent male irresponsibility but not to control men as such.
Men's traditional cult activity, however, seems to have involved emphatic assertions of superiority as the
basis for domination over women. That claim remains to be examined.
                                                    page_97

                                                                                                        Page 98



5
Power: Claims and Counterclaims
Interpretations of sexual antagonism in the Papua New Guinea Highlands have never taken men's claims at
face value. I do not mean as to whether their domination over women is effective but in reference to the way
the claims as such are promoted. For these are seen to express anxieties on men's part about their 'real'
control of women's powers, and hence indicate both the extent to which these powers present a challenge
and the extent to which men's social institutions fail to acknowledge an ultimate dependence upon women.
Withdrawal into all male activities, it is held, by denying also asserts the power of the excluded sex.
A conundrum runs through anthropological analyses of male and female initiation/puberty rites: when a
category of persons claims ritual powers (through secret knowledge, cult engagement), is it because they
have or because they do not have comparable powers in other terms (in daily life, in politics)? 1 The
conundrum takes many forms but is most perplexing in relation to the initiation of boys into all-male
associations or cults. Do such male rituals imitate female capacities ('envy') or supersede them ('superiority')?
Are men compensating for what they lack or appropriating what females possess? Do ritually made
statements reflect distributions of secular power or are they a sop to lack of power? Beliefs may be regarded
as simultaneously exaggerating and reversing social realities, but such equivocations also accept certain of

                                                    page_98

                                                                                                        Page 99
the actors' definitions. It is they who propose a difference between male and female capacities.
The conundrum comes from joining these propositions to the anthropological habit of thinking of society in
terms of domains. Consequently, it touches on the very structure of anthropological explanation, on the
manner in which different areas of social life are symbolized. This operates in two modes that were
encountered in the last chapter, and both apply to the analysis of initiation/puberty ritual. The first regards
ordered, institutional life as imposed upon a reality that both presents it with its reasons for existence
(controlling nature, harnessing resources) and confronts its orderliness (in the recalcitrance of individuals).
The second divides up areas of social life into different levels or spheres; one talks of public and private
levels or political and ritual spheres, with an inbuilt ambiguity as to whether these are adjacent to or
encompass one another. When social life is regarded as motivated by the need to integrate the one with the
other these analytical divisions come to assume a taken-for-granted or innate status as part of the data. The
much used metaphor of 'articulation' aptly summarizes the problems posed by this second mode. I take the
two briefly in turn.
First, imposition upon reality. The claims Highlands men make in the context of their rituals have been
interpreted as strenuous assertions by which they at once dominate women and mystify themselves. To
suggest that a set of ideas has a mystifying effect also suggests, of course, that a real situation exists beyond
them, that the actors are incorrectly apprehending reality. Consequently there exists an interesting
asymmetry to these accounts. Men are regarded as deluding themselves, but what they attribute to women is
taken by the observer as real. Where Gahuku-Gama or Sambia men stress, as they do, that one of the
achievements of their ritual is making boys grow, the ethnographer may point to the supporting evidence that
the men also adducethat by contrast with boys, girls mature rapidly at pubertyand locate the evidence for
him/herself in real nature. Read writes,
   It may be a simple observation [i.e., common sense reality], but I think the Gahuku-Gama noted that
   the signs of sexual maturation are more obvious (visible) in females than in males. ... They did not
   hesitate (without any prompting) to liken the nosebleeding rites of the nama cult to menstruation,
   explaining that both were necessary to complete the process of maturation, and also acknowledging
   that men had to simulate (ritually induce) an event that occurred naturally in women. (1984:227)

                                                    page_99
                                                                                                          Page 100
What 'they' mean by growth is assimilated to what 'we' would mean (compare Lindenbaum 1976:57). Men
are thus seen to be grappling with problems which lie in (real) physiological processes beyond their (real)
control.
The rapidity with which girls grow is often noted to be part of indigenous commentary on male initiation.
Female 'initiation' may celebrate or strengthen this growth or be regarded as a further device for bringing
such power under men's control. 2 Where such suppositions are attributed to or voiced by the people
involved, they feed into a general set of theoretical assumptions (on the part of anthropologists) about the
intrinsic and visible value of women, particularly in terms of their fertility. It is of a piece to take it as
self-evident that men should organize social life so that they are able to exchange women between
themselves. In the case of marriage disposal, it is argued that men's domination of women is institutionalized
in their right to allocate their claims to other men; in ritual, that men strive to come to terms with the idea of
women's natures. Women confront men with a natural or real superiority in their biological functions which
propel men into social action. In the course of harnessing and organizing the natural resources embodied in
women, the argument goes, men's claims to an esoteric counterpower support concrete acts of domination
over real women in other areas of life.
Such interpretations imply that women, because of their natures, do not 'need' to exercise the ritual power by
which men mystify themselves. Indeed, it is rather easy for an outsider to achieve some distance from male
pretensions when they are embedded in activities (as in cults) that the outsider does not take at face value.
Yet when the observer is confronted with social realities he/she does take at face value, the argument about
exclusion proceeds differently. When it is a domain of political or economic action that men create,
bolstering their interest in warfare, individual acts of violence, or their extraction of women's labor, it is often
treated as significant that women are without the political and economic resources to protect their own
interests. To be excluded is to be deprived. In ritual activity, however, men's 'power' may be interpreted as
complementary to, as compensating for, or as controlling other 'powers' that women evince of themselves.
Their exclusion from ritual thus also appears natural and obvious. Men may be regarded as simply
attempting to overcome a "fundamental disparity between the sexes" which arises because "women are
naturally endowed with reproductive capacity" (Newman 1965:80).

                                                    page_100

                                                                                                          Page 101
Second, ritual as a domain. The staging and sequencing of acts surrounding particular ceremonies lends
concrete support to the anthropological perception of ritual activity as a domain separate from other 'areas'
of life but nevertheless reflecting upon them. The analytical separation seems further justified by the actors'
own distinctions, for example in women's exclusion from all-male ritual activity. We have already
encountered this kind of thinking in the assumption that a male domain must speak to men's exclusive
interests. The conjunction of this assumption with the firstthat an organized social life points to a reality
beyondleads to the prevalent anthropological supposition that it must be in men's interests to dominate
women. Domains are not merely adjacent to but potentially encompass one another. For these explanations
inexorably produce the view that men's energies are devoted to controlling something beyond themselves. In
the case of exclusive all-male activity, that beyond must be women or what women stand for; in the case of
ritual performance, that beyond must be a mundane sphere of a political or economic character.
Explanation of male ritual thus frequently turns on an 'articulation' between domains. For those
ethnographers who take men's assertions about superiority as grappling with real issues of women's power,
men's exclusive cult actions are revealed as supporting actions outside the cult context. While they might
have their own internal logic, the cults are not regarded as achieving their ends exclusively within their own
framework but as having an effect on mundane (real) areas of social life. It appears that men are able to
justify individual acts of domination by reference to their collective superiority, and to sustain the
domination of their particular constructions of reality. It may even be assumed that as a rich cultural activity,
the social life men create for themselves in the cults is in itself of value, so that women's exclusion is to their
deprivation. In this view, women are excluded from an arena of importance. The argument supposes female
envy of male social life, which directly contradicts the earlier supposition that women somehow do not need
ritual life.
These two potentially conflicting modes of anthropological explanation between them conceal the
conundrum. For the two modes can be run together in the analytic imagery of control: the rites are to be
understood in a double sense as men expropriating women's powers and controlling them by excluding them
from a domain of social activity. At this juncture the naive might ask, since the men are doing this all for
themselves and since women are excluded, in what sense are
                                                    page_101

                                                                                                        Page 102
men's activities of relevance to women? And should we give weight, for instance, to an observation
Ledermen (in press) makes of Mendi women who just did not seem to care very much about their exclusion
from group (clan) concerns?
It is the concreteness of images such as domains, in this case the ethnographer's geophysical metaphors, that
leads to an analytical conflation between a sex and its attributes. Male ritual must be about men's interests,
for the object of men's activities lies 'beyond' them, as exemplified in the idea that they desire to dominate
women. This kind of supposition is intimately bound up with those Western explanatory modes that regard
one 'area' of life as imposed upon or as an exteriorization of another, and force as applied to something
beyond and external to the acting subject. As we have seen, such metaphors may further be attributed to the
intentions and motivations of the actors.
The extension may be apposite in the hierarchical systems of the kind Bloch and Parry (1982:6) have in
mind when they point to certain specific contrivances of the idea of social order. The mortuary rituals with
which they are concerned comprise "an occasion for creating ... 'society' as an apparently external force
[original emphasis removed]." Yet more pertinent is a further argument Bloch (1985:40) presents about
Madagascan (Merina) initiation ritual: the picture of the world created by the ritual is not a guide to or map
of people's cognitive system. No such guide or map exists.
As I understand Melanesian concepts of sociality, there is no indigenous supposition of a society that lies
over or above or is inclusive of individual acts and unique events. There is no domain that represents a
condensation of social forces controlling elements inferior or in resistance to it. The imagined problems of
social existence are not those of an exteriorized set of norms, values, or rules that must be constantly
propped up and sustained against realities that constantly appear to subvert them. People are subverted by
the actions of other people. Or they are attacked by nonhuman forces forever beyond their reach. The world
is not mapped into spheres of influence, into adjacent and competitive empires. Nor do people envision a
hierarchy of levels whose final battle ground is the subduing of the human body. Consequently, initiation
rites are not, I think, imagined as presenting the individual with the power of society/culture as an external
force, and one which in male hands is also an instrument of a mundane power they have the prerogative to
exercise. It is not external forces that are, so to speak, the problem at all. Melanesians set for themselves the
problem of in-

                                                    page_102

                                                                                                        Page 103
ternal efficacy: how to draw out of the body what it is capable of. The rites construct ways of knowing what
these capacities are.
This chapter is concerned to dismantle the concreteness of certain other anthropological metaphors that are
so often ascribed to the minds of Melanesian participants. It introduces my further argument that the
powerful Western image of control depends on concepts of ownership and property. These, in turn, have
often had a drastic effect on how Western anthropologists deal with the question of gender identity. They are
also bound up with the conceptualization of power, an inevitable adjunct of any attempt to understand men's
emphatic claims to superiority and domination as they are reported in the ethnographic record.

Possession And Identity
What is arresting about male initiation cults are the apparently conflicting idioms of exclusion and
appropriation. From some of the supporting mythology of the Eastern Highlands cults, men clearly construe
their exclusive activities against the interests of women, as when boys are said to be torn from the mothers
who want to retain them. Whereas in the case of the extraction of labor, the ethnographer has to supply an
interpretation the actors do not necessarily admit, here are encountered blatant claims of extraction. In fact,
the logic of cult activity is constituted in such claims. The very necessity to perform the rituals is given by an
original act of theft from women. Across the Eastern Highlands, society after society is reported in these
terms. The ritual paraphernaliaespecially the flutes that are a central secret of many initiation cultsholds
power for men because at some point in the past they wrested it from the power of women. Something
women previously possessed is now in men's hands, an apparently simple and effective statement that
women are a source of power and that men control it.
Women are consequently construed by observers as doubly deprived. They are prevented from exercising
the ritual power by which men appropriate their fertility. This lack of ritual power is further interpreted as
indigenous justification for their (real) lack of (real) social power. Yet in spite of indigenous metaphors of
extraction, it is important not to extend the image of possession too far. Certainly we should not merge these
Melanesian formulations with the Western concept of private property.
Such property notions pose another conundrum: who really 'has' the

                                                    page_103

                                                                                                         Page 104
power? Is it those who say they have it or those who do not have to make such statements? For ultimately
power is known, in the positivist view, by its attachment as a resource to the possessor, who evinces 'it' in
interaction with others. Yet this definitive Western image of possession occludes the very question of
interaction. Possession implies a finality and thus holds out hope for the observer of an ultimate adjudication
about which sex has power. The rituals referred to here, of course, never come to completion; they involve
constant and repeated assertions about the significance of the theft. The impression derived from these
accounts is not that of an ultimate victory commemorated but of contemporary battles freshly engaged. As
Read points out in his retrospect, if women were 'enemies' they were nevertheless enemies ''as necessary to
the ideal of masculine strength as the traditional enmities between adjoining tribal groups" (Read 1984:233;
Tuzin 1980:313). This necessary confrontation is not illuminated by our thinking that Melanesians
conceptualize power as a possession, as something that one person 'has' and another 'does not have' in this or
that area of life.
An idiosyncratic feature of popular Western concepts of property is that singular items are regarded as
attached to singular owners. The fact of possession constructs the possessor as a unitary social entity, true
whether the owner is acting as an individual or a corporation. Property is construed as a relation between
persons and things, and the person is an entity to which things are external. Whether property is 'private' or
'communal', the possessor is the singular author or proprietor. Thus communal property would be owned by a
community and in this sense would be analogous to private property so-called.
Anthropological theories have for long provided a critique of such ideas through the analysis of multiple
interests. This was prompted largely by investigations of African kinship and politico-economic systems that
had to deal with equations between persons and 'things' (as in bridewealth) or the 'ownership' of persons by
other persons (as in certain authority structures). The terminology of ownership came to be abandoned or at
least modified, in anthropological analysis, being substituted by a flexible interpretation of 'rights': rights in
things and against persons can be shared or structured in such a way that the item is never exclusively
allocated to one social person. Interpretations of non-Western property systems, including the disposition of
rights with respect to persons, are thus advanced in specific critiques of private property as a universal
category, a point to which I return in the next chapter. Nonetheless, a proprietorial premise continues to
inform an-

                                                    page_104

                                                                                                         Page 105
thropological interpretations of people's conceptualization of power. Power is regarded as attached to a
person in such a way as to define the person's identity. There is an either/or, have/have not quality about it,
which also holds for Western gender constructs. Now if it is not, in the end, going to be helpful to regard
power as held like a piece of property, the same may be true of sexual identity.
This would release the analysis of initiation/puberty ritual from Western sex-role assumptions about the
unitary nature of the entities constructed in Melanesian gender concepts. For to assume that male initiation
cults simply make boys into men is to assume that the boys have an incomplete sexual identity. It is supposed
that they must become endowed with the appropriate attributes, that they must find their real identity. There
must be a point at which a boy's perception of himself matches the social expectations of the category role
he is to play as a full adult. In short, at issue is a figure whose constitution must show internal
consistency'male' in terms of maturity, sexual characteristics, inner feelings, and outward social attributes.
These he all owns as part of himself. Women and their powers, or associations and relations with women,
could only compromise a masculinity constructed in such a totalistic fashion. Femininity is interpreted in a
similarly totalistic manner, especially in the extent to which Highlands ethnographers dwell on female
pollution as marking out a definitive sexual identity. It is taken as Melanesians' signification of intrinsic
female nature.
These latter assumptions have been to some extent disturbed by two sets of reports from the Eastern
Highlands made in the 1970s. Faithorn and Meigs both observe that prevailing anthropological suppositions
about unilateral pollutionthat it is always women who pollute menreflect patchy knowledge on the
ethnographer's part. Faithorn (1975) argues that we should attend to contexts in which men are a source of
pollution. 3 Meigs (1976; 1984) emphasizes that we are mistaken in seeing pollution, a particular capacity to
harm, as an attribute of men or of women; rather, for the Hua people, it is a quality that inheres in substances
which may be passed between them.4 Indeed, these substances are powerful because they are transferable.5
Thus she identifies various disconcerting facts, as she calls them, that suggest that Hua "attempt to neutralize
or obscure the male-female opposition through a sharing of characteristics and flow of membership between
the categories of male and female" (1984:49).
   If pollution is a substance that can travel, then perhaps elsewhere in the highlands, as among the Hua,
   the polluted class of persons cannot be defined

                                                   page_105

                                                                                                      Page 106
   in terms of the genitalia, which are not in and of themselves polluting. (1984:69)
As the substances associated with sexuality (menstrual blood, vaginal secretions, semen) are "transferable
between the two genital classes, this classification permits crossovers: a genitally male person may be
classified as female through his contamination by female substances, and a genitally female person may be
classified as male through the transfer of pollution out of her body" (1984:7071). However she implies that
the transferred attributes then become possessed by the new owner, so to speak, so that the condition of the
total person becomes reclassifiable as male or female.
For Meig's description of Hua suppositions about the theft of flutes from women remains committed to a
style of analysis that assumes that a "belief in the natural superiority of women" is what motivates men's
rituals. The position is worth illustrating at length:
   [T]he view that women are by nature superior to males is implicit not only in the metaphor that
   relates sex and feeding but also in the origin myth of the flutes. In this myth ... females are
   represented as the original producers and owners of the flutes, and consequently the original rulers of
   the society. When women played the flutes, males hid their eyes and bowed their bodies to the
   ground in an attitude of submission. At some point in the distant past men stole the flutes from the
   women. With this theft of the symbol of political dominance they gained actual preeminence as well.
   From this time on it was women who had to prostrate themselves when the flutes were played.
   Male supremacy was thus achieved either by reversing the natural order, in which the female act of
   feeding is identified as good and the male act of sex as bad, or by overthrowing it, when the men
   seized power from its original and natural owners, the women. (1984:45)
   It is consistent with these male feelings of superiority to female powers that initiation among the Hua
   as well as other New Guinea highland people is perceived as a compensation to males for their
   natural physical disadvantages. The flutes revealed to initiates represent, Hua men say, the male
   counterpart to menstruation. Rites of initiation, they add, represent the Hua male answer to the
   challenge posed by the more rapid female growth and more dramatic female manifestations of
   maturity. (1984:134)
Suggestive as the above qualifications are, it is patent that we require insight into the epistemological bases
of these acts of classification. What is the status of a person's attribute? To this end I introduce three
accounts that have as their focus the elucidation of indigenous practices of knowledge. None is written from
an explicitly feminist perspective, although they would be germane to one.

                                                   page_106

                                                                                                      Page 107
The transfers to which Meigs draws attention can be interpreted, it seems to me, as an instrument of
knowledge for the actors concerned, how they make certain powers and conditions known to themselves.
Melanesian perceptions of power are in turn elicited in the methods by which people come to know about
themselves and others, for people's bodies are significant registers of their encounters with one another. 6
Here Meigs's language is blunt but apt. Much male ritual concerns definitions of masculinity in
physiological/genital terms. Images of nurture and conception distribute different powers between sexes:
either sex can claim reproductive capacity of a kind. Discarding the social-control-of-nature paradigm will
free one to think of this concern with physiological process in another wayas a matter of what people discern
must lie within their bodies including, of course, within their minds.
I follow Gillison's theoretical lead. Gimi ideas of male and female yield to men and women different kinds of
efficacies. But the results are not images of a totalistic sexed identity of a Western type. On the contrary,
maleness and femaleness seem defined to the extent in which persons appear as detachable parts of others or
as encompassing them. In the end, it is not male or female substance that flows between the sexes, as Meig's
description suggests, but visible signs of the alternating conditions of persons in their ability to separate
themselves from or contain one another. The question, then, becomes how people such as the Gimi make
known what is 'male' or 'female'.
Running through the practices in the cases that follow are concepts of a proprietorial nature. I have
emphasized that we should be wary of the metaphors that creep into and constitute exogenous analysis, in
particular Westerners' easy idioms of control. Making explicit the practices by which people 'know' and
classify their attributes, including knowledge of sexual identity, will be some kind of preparation for
composing a description of those indigenous assertions of possession and appropriation.

Making Power Known*
The three cases are drawn from roughly the same areas considered in the previous chapter. Here I begin with
Vanuatu, specifically with Rubinstein's work on the island of Malo, to the west of Pentecost,
   * These accounts are adapted from material I have presented elsewhere: all three appear in the
   volume edited by Fardon (1985).

                                                  page_107

                                                                                                     Page 108
where women substituted for men's sense of being rooted. The second case comes from the Eastern
Highlands of Papua New Guinea with its development of women's rites of regeneration. The Gimi, whom
Gillison studied, are on the southern borders of the wok meri area. Her study is very much an inspiration to
my general analysis. Finally, I return to the Western Highlands. The Paiela of Enga Province share some
features with Hagen. I have chosen them both because (unlike Hagen) they perform puberty rituals and
because I wish to draw on Biersack's explicit attention to the presentation of information. In the first
example, ritual surrounds men's entry into a system of public grades; in the second it is performed at both
girls' and boys' puberty ceremonies, and in the third in the context of a male bachelor cult.
Graded society: Malo. Types of knowledge can be conceptualized as attached to, detached from, and
transferred between persons (Rubinstein 1981). 7 Traditional Malo knowledge is divided into two
components, conceived as distinct sensory operations. The first component, 'understanding' (from 'feel',
'hear'), refers to emotional response, the impact that interaction with others has on the inner person. The
second component, 'knowing' (from 'eye', 'examination'), refers to a much more automatic response "existing
at the boundary between an individual and his environment" (Rubinstein 1981:150), and thus encompasses
perception, recognition, and factual knowledge. Knowledge of either type may be converted from an internal
state to an external fact. Words are its vehicle, being considered as objectified units of expressed knowledge.
Malo do conceive of sourceless knowledge, but generally it is 'part of a person', connected to its bearer. Over
his or her lifetime, each individual amasses a specific array of knowledgethe physical landscape is littered
with items commemorative of events under the proprietorship of particular persons. Understanding is not
privileged over knowing or vice versa. Both understanding and knowing are personalized; they are also both
capable of being objectified. Both have their source in specific personshow this felt, who saw thatwhile at
the same time being potentially detachable things to be communicated to others.
Rubinstein ponders on what he describes as the relationship between personalized and objectified
knowledge, which is paradoxical in terms of the Western antithesis between subjects and objects. Malo
envisage a special relation between persons and knowledge, which establishes an

                                                  page_108
                                                                                                        Page 109
identity between an individual and what he or she understands/knows, but also detaches that sensory
reaction as a resource transactable in encounters with others. Knowledge is like a gift. From its characteristic
as a resource (objectified) it can operate as a token in the external world; but precisely because it is also part
of the person (personalized), its deployment is an immediate vehicle for statements of that person's power or
standing.
An individual may be the origin of certain facts or act as a channel for them. This perception takes three
forms. (1) 'Understanding' or wisdom is a record of the way events have been experienced by someone.
People's conception of the order of things can be shared with others, thereby creating a factual world on the
basis of personal experience: what is understood comes to seem objective and depersonalized. Rubinstein
gives the example of the cargo cult leader who impresses his vision on those participating in his experience.
(2) The kind of knowledge ('knowing') possessed as custom (skills, spells) can be transferred to others
through payment: the transaction detaches the knowledge from the original owner and reattaches it to the
new. It is possible to purchase another's bodily gesture or idiosyncratic speech form. The relationship
between person and knowledge here is that between owner and disposable, but not alienable, itemthe item
retains its value as a resource from being simultaneously in another's possession. (3) Where knowledge of
either type is enunciated through words, factual value is measured directly by personal source. For example,
validation of what people say must come through reference to the person who 'saw' it. Disembodied
information is discounted. Here the personal reference is crucial for establishing the objective status of a fact
in the eyes of others. Only when information has belonged to a particular person can it have social currency,
that is, affect what others see or feel.
There is an intimate relationship between the attachment of knowledge and the structuring of power
relations in men's political life. At the institutional heart of the traditional political system were fifteen
ranked grades, entry being restricted to men and achieved through the killing of tusked pigs. Rubinstein
(1981:139) refers to the pig-killing sequence as a "progressive determination of masculinity." Women and
those who had not gained initial entry were grouped into a single low-ranking class. Membership involved
consubstantiality: men of the same rank ate together. Leaders, who purposefully 'walked', attained high rank
at the head of others who 'followed'. Such successful men held a monopoly on esoteric knowledge, and its
value was related to

                                                    page_109

                                                                                                        Page 110
the status of the individual who claimed it, for the success of the individual was proof that the knowledge
was true.
The three modes of linking persons to one another through knowledge transmission structure the acquisition
of rank. Thus (1) creating a factual world on the basis of shared personal experience: members of one rank
share a common life, ingest the same food. (2) Transactability of skills: partaking of the power of a higher
person is accomplished through purchase 8a young man can only succeed by following an elder who shows
him the pig-killing techniques. The elder disposes of his asset in this sense but with no loss to himself;
through the purchase, rank becomes attached to the junior entrant. (3) The measuring of factual value by
personal source: powers of accreditation increase with rankthe more highly ranked, the more comprehensive
is a man's feeling and seeing; the facts of his success are testimony to his internal state of understanding and
knowing.
Rank must be exclusively enough perceived in order to define interpersonal behavior yet open enough for its
values to encompass everyone who is eligible. The Malo structuring of everyday knowledge establishes the
conditions for its attachment as a personal quality. For the (male) person's processing of response (through
knowing and understanding) is construed as a set of assets, the value of these assets being reflected in the
eyes of others and thereby determining his own value. Secret knowledge becomes a reflex of the fit assumed
between the skills and enterprise by which high rank is gained and a man's superior but invisible internal
processing capacities. Anyone's realization of his qualities as assetsin objectifying them or claiming their
personal sourcebrings confrontation with others. In turn, assets are made out of one's position in life, such as
sex, age, accomplishments, which are seen as inseparable from the power of self-knowledge (understanding)
and of grasp of the social world (knowing). This differential evaluation of persons constitutes their ranking.
Intersexual transactions: Gimi. Malo women are discounted as a category in exchanges between
high-ranking men. My second case concerns exchanges between the sexes themselves and is pivotal to my
general argument. Gillison's (1980; 1983) analysis of Gimi perception turns us away from both social
constructionist and proprietorial views of gender relations.
The Gimi live in an isolated southern region of the Eastern Highlands of Papua New Guinea. To them "the
surrounding rainforest ... is re-

                                                   page_110

                                                                                                       Page 111
garded as a male refuge from women and from ordinary life within the settlement. The Gimi wilderness is an
exalted domain where the male spirit, incarnate in birds and marsupials, acts out its secret desires away from
the inhibiting presence of women" (1980:143). A special kind of knowledge leads to the realization of men's
ambitions to identify with the nonhuman world and to be revitalized by its "limitless, masculine powers."
This identification is achieved through initiation rituals where male initiands are likened to birds of paradise
and hornbills and male potency to tall trees and flowing rivers. Yet the knowledge imparted during the stages
of the ritual makes it clear that this is no realm definitively cut off from things feminine. On the contrary,
these features of the male natural world turn out to be female characteristics detached from women,
'appropriated' by men (1980:147, 170). At the center of male self-identity, then, lies a statement of their
power with respect to women.
The female identity of elements central to male ritual in Melanesia is frequently the subject of ethnographic
reports, to the greater or lesser surprise of the ethnographer. 9 Gillison draws explicit attention to an
underlying premise: the transactability of what we would regard as sexual attributes. These are exchanged
between men and women, attachment and detachment visualized in terms of gain and loss. Such attributes
are not purchased in the Malo fashion but are mythologized as having been seized with violence. This
interchange is reenacted in the contemporary world through the deliberate staging of shifts of meaning. What
was one thing is seen to have been something else. At different points of knowing, different origins and thus
different identities are attached to the actors' sexual parts.
Gimi rituals involve flutes. Mythically stolen long ago from women, they are sounded during the male
initiation sequence in the all-male forest preserve. This decisive separation from women is dramatically
dissolved at one point and re-presented as encompassment. Maleness is revealed to include female features,
knowledge of which is imparted through verbal commentary on what the initiands are 'seeing'. Perceptions
are altered:
   As the climactic moment of revelation of the flutes to adolescent male novices approaches, the
   symbols of the body in men's initiation songs, which up to this moment have been unequivocally
   masculine, now become bisexual. Trees are phallic projections which not only have 'heads' that feed
   birds (symbols of the erect penis, the gorgeously befeathered initiates and the transcendent spirit of
   dead men) but they also have hollow trunks inside

                                                   page_111

                                                                                                       Page 112
   which nest 'female' marsupials (symbols of women's pubic hair, initiates when they are called 'new
   vaginas', and the ancestral spirit-child). Headwaters are not only clear streams of male effusions but
   are also, according to the singers, the issuances from fissures in rocks and from inside mountain
   caves. The dark cavities of trees and rocks, Gimi men say, are like vaginas; the rivers, like menstrual
   blood. (1980:170)
A special kind of self-knowledge is thus imparted. The initiate is not being endowed with attributes; rather
he learns that what he already has (his genitals) are signs of encounters with women that already have taken
place. They commemorate men's theft: the beard he will grow originated when the first man played the flute
not realizing it was plugged with his sister's pubic hair. The flute was simultaneously the woman's child and
the woman's birth canal, and possession of it as his penis means that the initiand has both been successfully
separated from women (his mother) and contains within him vital reproductive power. "Masculinity is wholly
achieved when the married Gimi initiate successively assumes the ritual identities both of female
(menstruator) and male (flute-owner) and of mother (supplier of uterine food) and child (eater of uterine
food). To attain full male status the initiate symbolically acts as his own creator. He is mother to himself"
(1980:164, emphasis removed).
The impact of these equations is built up through stages. The true man is defined as pan-sexual and capable
of reproducing himself without women. The power to create is itself defined in male formthe hollow penis is
womb; menstrual blood is semen as it emerges from real or symbolic (noses and arms of male initiates)
penises. How is this made to stand as knowledge?
The truth of this knowledge about men is established, I would argue, by the evidence of what happens to
women. First, men have extracted something from a source thus made external to themselves. Men own the
flutes, and women bear evidence to the theft in their bleeding from the wound. Second, by masculinizing
female attributes (womb, menstruation) men imply that the effective reproductive capacities of real women
are male in origin. Parallel to male initiation is a rite for girls. Gimi girls are betrothed before puberty, and at
her first menses the bride is 'initiated' by men of her husband's clan. They take male spirit from their forest
and deposit it in the female. She drinks ancestral semen (river water) and eats a spirit child (a marsupial
encased in sugarcane and vines, a penis). These objects are forced on her. If she does not eat

                                                     page_112

                                                                                                           Page 113
these foods she will not bear her husband's children. Childbirth becomes testimony to male efficacy. 10
But there is equivocation here: if men are self-reproducing, then women may be self-reproducing too. Since
men's capacities are sustained by ritual, it becomes this ritual alone that prevents women from being
parthenogenetic. But once they were and so they could be again. If men possess now what women no longer
have, their current claims to being self-reproducing block women from making the same (male) claim; at the
same time, because of the cross identities set up, what is possible for the male sex is perpetually recreated as
possible also for the female. Men's fears "suggest that female and male have too great an affinity, are too
easily brought together" (1980:150).
I have followed Gillison's exposition of Gimi men's views. She argues that women generally concur in giving
credence to their underlying assumptions, though where men orchestrate ritual, women orchestrate the
growth of plants and pigs. It would be an error, however, to interpret men's intended definition of themselves
as reproducers as also taking away women's reproductive powers. On the contrary, their own reproductive
activity is evinced in women's. What they take away is women's ability to plant or implant the new life that
the women must grow for them. The new life must be conceptualized as part of their male selves. In
constructing this image, they momentarily extend the claim to the ability to encompass and grow the new life
itself, in unitary identity with its (male) source. But there is no prior stasis in the respective powers of the
sexes: "separations in existence (self/other, male/female, human/animal, etc.) are repeatedly destroyed in
order that they may be repeatedly created" (1980:171). The product of this tussle is an image of power itself.
The contexts in which now male and now female is seen as the encompassing agent together constitute the
possibility of encompassment as such. It takes a singular form. "Sexual antagonism is a conflict over who
controls the indivisible power to reproduce the world" (1980:171, original emphasis). The indivisible flute is
symbol of a thing that "cannot be shared," but "is wholly possessed by one sex or by the other''; it is
"transmissible but indivisible" (1983:49).
In daily life, Gimi men claim superiority over women: they shun them through fear of contamination, and
Gillison refers bluntly to Gimi women's debasement. Yet the ritual cannot be said simply to validate male
power. Rather, it is an elaborate commentary on the nature of

                                                     page_113

                                                                                                           Page 114
power. That there are parallel rites for girls and boys is significant. Gimi have produced a double system of
knowledge that rests on the claims of one sex being forever defined by the claims of the other; yet there can
be no resolution in terms of the claims. The product of this dialogue is also its context, not that one or other
sex in the end encompasses but that Gimi have created in the idioms of sexual reproduction a model of
power as encompassment, a totalizing condition, and either sex may evince it totally.
I wish to argue, moreover, that this power lies more in 'being able to do', in its evidence of an internal
capacity, than in 'control over' others. We are misled in that evidence of 'being able to do' is reflected in
external others, through their changed state.
Gimi see people's fears and desires as the basis of the contest between the sexes. Men are held to be
motivated by the fear that women want to retain their children inside themselves rather than releasing
progeny into the world. Indeed, women's songs imply that the female body can be sealed, retaining menstrual
blood in the form of its own lineage's semen. Against this, her husband's lineage has to force the bride to eat
the foods symbolizing the entry of male spirit from a different source. It is important also that women's
anthropophagytheir absorption of men's bodies when they diebe construed as entirely 'women's idea'. This
crucial processing of body enables male essence to be released into the wild forest as a spirit/bird, and the
futures of unborn men depend on it. But the custom is held to have begun spontaneously. The first act of
consumption is attributed to female appetite. Men's accounts of such events in the recent past present them
as chaotic and orgiastic, whereas women recall the orderly distribution of the corpse's parts and say they had
too much compassion for the dead to let it rot in isolation. Such compassion is congruent with the nurturing
intentions mentioned in the last chapter. Women tend the plants and pigs whose growth so depends on their
care. Men's fear that spirit will again be trapped within the female is resolved by them at the end of the
absorption process: for each part of the corpse that a woman ate, she is given wild marsupial meat. By
replacing the (male) substance within women's bodies in this way, the men force it outside and thus compel
the women to release spirit.
Evidence of women's driving motivations was structured through the device of secrecy. 11 Women were
supposed to trick their husbands who did not realize what they were eating, so that in effect they stole the
corpse (as men stole the flutes). What was not secret in actuality was

                                                    page_114

                                                                                                        Page 115
thus made out to be so. Women were secluded during the greater part of the mortuary meal, within the men's
house where the wrapped flutes were kept that at other times tricked them by their sounds, and were not
allowed to emerge until ingestion was complete.
The containment of women and the concealing of acts are central to these rites. I noted in chapter 4 that the
wok meri sequence was structured through both private and public episodes. Indeed, it is a feature of cult
life in general in the Highlands, and of all initiation ritual, that a contrast is staged between acts which
remain 'hidden' and their effects which are brought into the 'open'. There is nothing individualistic about the
privacy: it is a collective privacy. I would also note how often a ritual enclosure is the focus of these
activities; initiands or cult members are secluded in 'houses' that may be specifically designated as such. 12
The house image recalls (for myself) the character of domestic interactions rather than of public life of a
political nature. A collective domesticity: but instead of a cross-sex pair, the house is filled with persons all
of one sexthe opposite sex is represented through the artifacts and paraphernalia deployed in the course of
the rituals and even perhaps in the gender of the enclosing house itself.
Gimi women's secret devouring of flesh, like men's secret blowing of the flutes, does not successfully
dissemble information; it does orchestrate secrecy as an event. The sexes claim that details of their own
ritual performances are 'unknown' to the opposite sex, notwithstanding Gillison's photograph showing young
men dressed as female initiates for a mime of female secret rites to be presented during the course of male
ceremonies (1980:166). Gimi secrecy does several things. It allows process to occur: revelation will be
evidence of a changed state. Secrecy 'fixes' motivation: in the same way as people's intentions are locked
within themselves, so the 'real' desires and impulses that are held to drive this or that category of people are
locked within a portion of their ritual; secrecy indicates that those excluded do not share these drives.
Finally, it acts out encompassment: the stretches of secret ritual establish what the actors are claiming on a
wider stage, that they have sole control over the meanings they give to their internal actions. This kind of
claim to power is self-fulfilling, a matter of power to do, of evincing what the body is capable of.
In Gimi politics at large, the handling of motivation provides a divide between those who claim prestige and
those who remain rubbish. Big men can subordinate impulse and appetite, while little men give in and
become like women. Gimi say, for example, that little men could not

                                                    page_115

                                                                                                        Page 116
refrain from watching women prepare the cannibal meal and would even join their secret orgy and share in
the meat also. Generally, in the Highlands, big men are able to shape the management of events because
evidence of management is fixed first in themselves. In this positive feedback system, prestige leads to
prestige. For if a big man can align the intentions of little men with his own, it is because the big man
internally aligns himself in accord with ideal male behavior. He literally makes himself capable and thus
embodies power to do.
Male puberty rights: Paiela. This last case concerns a Western Highlands society, Paiela, also rather isolated
but related linguistically to the large populations of Enga-speakers to their east. 13 I took a cue from
Biersack's (1982) analysis of Paiela puberty ritual in suggesting that one mechanism by which Gimi men
know the meanings of their own sexual parts is the perpetual information before their eyes of what happens
to womenbecause of men, women bleed (semen) and give birth (to male spirit). Paiela men also see evidence
of themselves in women but through individual relationships between particular men and women and with
respect to nonrepeatable short-term events. The definitive actions of women as a category are less important
than how this or that woman is behaving here and now. The example suggests intentionality skewed in the
reverse direction: what happens to Paiela men is evidence of what women have done and of how women are
motivated.
Biersack is concerned with a rite whose purpose "is to grow the boys who participate in it so that they might
mature and marry" (1982:239). The participants are thus oriented towards a particular relationship with the
women who will become their wives.14 In the rites, they are made dependent upon a female spirit, as in
nonritual contexts husbands depend on wives. A married man needs his wife to perform secret growth magic
for him every time she menstruates, to make his skin look large and beautiful. First, however, a man has to
become marriageable, and it is by entering into a relationship with the female spirit (the Ginger Woman) that
he is initially grown as a man. Biersack emphasizes the transactional nature of the relationship he thus enjoys
initially with his spirit wife and then his human partner. People and animals do not grow by themselves, but
transactionally, "as the beneficiary of someone's actions" (1982:241).
Here, the sexes do not differentiate themselves through substances whose identities can be exchanged; they
are exchanging with substances already differentiated and whose identities therefore remain constant.

                                                    page_116

                                                                                                        Page 117
There is no changeover of gender and no place for girls' puberty rites in such a system. But that does not
mean that the sexes are bounded off from one another. Rather, Paiela accomplish through ritual what Gimi
take for granted; Paiela men must compel women to grow them.
Biersack points to the trivial material content of the initiates' gifts to the female spirit (the ginger gardens
planted for her). Nevertheless, the transactional monopoly that men hold over ceremonial exchange thereby
appears to create its counterpart idiom: women's transactional monopoly over personal male growth. Male
growth has political connotations, in that the strength of a clan depends on the strength of its members. 15
Strength and health depend in turn on the success with which men influence the motivations of others.
Intermarrying groups may either fuse or polarize in respect of potentially joint activities. Those who are
related may or may not support one another, may or may not exchange pigs, and perhaps the intentions of
wives in this sense present a categorical problem to men. As in other Highlands societies, intention is
'unknowable' except in so far as it can be read from behavior. I wonder if in their rituals Paiela men attempt
to resolve a further political uncertaintythat dependency on a female caretaker will actually 'grow' them and
keep them healthy.
Female intentions are certainly at the heart of the ritual, and since intention always remains hidden, only the
outcomes being known, secrecy is important for its organization. Biersack's theorization of communication
codes points out the opposition Paiela set up between what is visible and what is invisible. Transactions are
classified as overt or covert. Overt transactions are witnessed by both parties, as in the open exchange of
wealth. In covert transactions, the donor's intentions are kept out of sight, and his or her gift is only known
as a condition subsequently produced in the recipient. A husband cannot observe his wife's menstrual magic;
he knows she has performed it properly through the appearance of his skin. Growth itself is thought to occur
in the invisible inner layer of a person's body, below the surface of the skin, so that the "size of the epidermis
is the consequence of an action that occurs offstage" (1982:241). This action is thus perceived to be a
(covert) decision-making process on the part of the man's female caretaker, and only after the event can a
husband reconstruct his wife's intentionswhether she meant help or harm. Hers is the crucial and hidden
decision whether to perform the correct menstrual magic, neglect to do so, or even perform it maliciously
with injurious specifications.
The Paiela political system, predicated on sustaining relationships

                                                    page_117

                                                                                                        Page 118
between kin groups through exchange and/or war, is intensely concerned with the structure of intentions.
Relations between whole sets of people can shift according to intentions revealed. If gifts are given, are they
adequate (good intentions for the future) or inadequate (bad intentions)? If a fight takes place, is it a cover
for something else (allies playing a double game) or the hostility it appears to be (enemies acting as
enemies)? Indeed, there is uncertainty about even overt transactions. In spite of people 'seeing' the material
embodiment of intention in a gift or blow, this knowledge must rapidly regress on itself. What relationship
does a single gift or blow bear to wider social and political issues? By contrast, covert transactions can be
apprehended in a singular encompassing form. Invisible, ritually-enacted decision-making, as in the growth
rituals, substitutes uncertainty about the act (the transaction between initiate and spirit remains secret) for
certainty about its outcome. The visible effects of these ritual transactions are located within the confines of
a single body.
In communicational terms, Biersack argues, the secrecy of the boys' seclusion is necessary to structure a
relationship between observer and observed. The audience waits in uncertainty to see what will have
happened to the boys. When they emerge, handsomely decorated, out of the forest enclosure, uncertainty is
replaced by certainty. Those watching now decide whether they are being informed that the boys have
indeed grown or whether they are still small and puny. The observing witness is crucial, because what he or
she receives is what is being imparted. A boy either does or does not make a favorable impression. Thus
growth "is a product of a recognition of difference" (1982:250), whereas imperceptible change produces no
information. But the evidence is self-contained, the relevant criteria being displayed for each initiate in his
own body. It is also uni-dimensional; only physical growth is at issue and not the open-ended parameters of
public renown, wealth, prestige.
In this sense, perhaps, the audience's decisions about the success of puberty ritualsthe affirmation of male
growthis a constrained decision, for there will be a tendency to agree that the boys have indeed grown since
that was the purpose of the ritual. Male growth is categorically assured; it is undermined only for individuals.
It is known that rituals were carried out for all the initiates; it is not known if each has had satisfactory
transactions with the spirit. On display, the initiates compete within themselves for audience favor, for only
the beautiful give evidence that their transactions were successful, and only some will

                                                   page_118

                                                                                                       Page 119
be admired. This discrimination is also witness to the relative powerlessness of the secluded boys. They may
try to compel reciprocity in making ritual gardens and a tiny house for the female spirit, but whether in turn
she makes them all large and beautiful depends on her.

Collectivizing Dependency
Whether people perceive power as a piece of property, estate, a personal attribute, an ability, or an effect
revealed in the reactions of others, power also has the status of a proposition. Propositions evoke their
context, and in being context-dependent are inherently contestable. An extreme example is a proposition
framed as a claim, for a claim derives its character from the adversary context of counterclaim.
Claims are being made in all these cases. These may be based on information about facts or experience, as
on Malo; or be seen as the outcome of a particular moment of revelation, as in the Gimi ritual cycles that
constantly supplant one proposition by another; or in the Paiela mode inhere in a transaction between cult
observer and observed. But for power to be distinguished from other propositions, it must have a content of
a sort. A notion of power as enablement (Fardon 1985) directs us to the definition of internal capacities.
These may be made visible through the acquisition of qualities (Malo), the changing identity of body parts
(Gimi), or a staged uncertainty about whether particular values have adhered to the body or not (Paiela). For
Malo, reputation is established through convincing others of the standing of the knowledge that one has
processed; people thus evaluate themselves as more or less convincing processors in terms of their knowing
self. Gimi create alternating universes by switching the meanings attached to their sexuality; access to these
meanings sets up an evaluative divide between men and women, pre- and post-initiates. Paiela men define
themselves as having a problem that Paiela women do not share: an acute bodily susceptibility to the
motivations of others, to how they appear to their audience, for they know their own capacities through this
reflection. In all three sets of practices, people are construed as depending upon others for knowledge about
their internal selves. They are not in this sense the authors of it. It is on the two Highlands cases that I now
concentrate.
Gimi men appear to voice strong concepts of proprietorship and appropriation. Yet to metaphorize those into
the kind of 'control' redolent of Western property ownership would be quite limiting. Imag-

                                                   page_119
                                                                                                      Page 120
ining that people conceptualize power as an exclusive possession leads to the conundrum with which I
opened. If a set of rituals is about the power men have, they must also be about women's lack of power; or
else the property analogy supposes that one must really have the power and the other is either making
mystifying claims or compensating for its lack at an unreal level. It cannot be the case that men have
exclusive power, and that women also have exclusive power, as Gimi appear to claim.
The Western paradox is not, of course, a Melanesian one. The actors may state that now one sex and now
the other is all-encompassing, but we miss the point if we take sides: like flutes blown in pairs, the pair of
statements offer a single proposition about the effects of encompassment. One such effect is growth. On the
part of Paiela men, by contrast, power lies in compelling others to make decisions favorable to oneself. Here
it could be said to exist in the control of others only in so far as transactions have successful outcomes.
Power is thus measured against the risk of unsuccessful outcomes. These two Highlands practices
consequently differ as to the significant corollary: where force has to be applied. In the sequences that have
been described, Paiela men force transactions on others, as do the boys on the Ginger Woman. They have to
compel an engagement, or else there will be no productive outcome. They must make her grow them, be a
grower on their behalf. Gimi men and women, on the other hand, take growth for granted in these rituals:
rather, men must force a differentiation between the grower and the grown in order to extract the (grown)
product.
An important indigenous metaphor is singularity or boundedness, also an effect of encompassment.
Throughout Highlands societies, descent constructs of varying degree of emphasis establish boundaries for
groups of men who know themselves as clans or lineages. Clan life becomes collective and public by
definition. Here in these cults, with their physical enclosures of houses and fences, I suggested that we might
imagine the procedures as creating instead a 'collective domesticity', recalling its crucial kinship and
cross-sex interdependencies. Collectivization is effected through single-sex association. But at every turn,
through emphatic assertion or denial, dependency on the opposite sex is at issue. The excluded sex is thus
'present'. Presence constructed through deliberate absence has been noted by a number of ethnographers.
Herdt and Poole (1982:13) make the point nicely, citing Tuzin's (1980; 1982) studies. The additional question
of women's cooperation in apparently all-male enterprises was initially raised by Van Baal (1975) in 1970 in

                                                   page_120

                                                                                                      Page 121
the context of "The part of women in the marriage trade: objects or behaving as objects?" The opposite sex
is not, however, simply there in the sense that every performance needs an audience, nor in the sense that
leaders need followers: they are there as vital processors of the information the actors are seeking about
themselves.
The resultant interdependence I take as defining domesticity, hence the particularity of the gender
designations of the actors. They are, in external appearance, all-male (or all-female in the case of the Gimi
mortuary rites) with reference to the crucially 'absent' sex. Expanded, my suggestion would read that the cult
context collectivizes the condition of particularity. Relations that rest on the differentiated particularity of
identities, as between men and women, imply that the distinctiveness of the parties is never submerged. Each
is known by its separation from the other. By contrast, the collective character of relationships is created
through replicationthe gathering of persons of like sex. Each knows him or herself in the image of similar
others (Schwimmer 1984). Yet neither the single-sex identity of the participants nor the replicable nature of
their activities can be taken as givens. On the contrary, interdependence of a domestic nature, involving the
division of labor between spouses and debts between kinsfolk, denies autonomous identity to either sex
alone.
A later chapter returns to the apparent contradiction between a single-sexed collectivity (which is how the
multiplication-effect of persons is achieved) and the fact that its concerns may be those of domestic kinship.
Here I observe how the contradiction is established. Unable to be present in person, the excluded sex is
present in artifacts, and these may include artifacts that also appear as personal appendages. A person's own
body parts can embody the other sex. A man's genitals may be revealed as artifacts of this kind, as may the
contents of a woman's reproductive tract or of her mind.
In order for the distinctive gender of these artifacts, like the particular and distinctive gender of the
participants, to be made apparent, bounding mechanisms are necessary. 16 Seculsion and the secrecy
surrounding stretches of the ritual momentarily contain the participants and their acts. I would also suggest
that the body is constructed for a duration as a parallel unitary and singular entity.17
A person's outer skin can be organized, so to speak, decorated and doctored, to produce a single effect, to
indicate unambiguous masculinity or femininity. Actors present themselves through a single image, as
all-male or all-female. The individual body is then perceived as at once

                                                     page_121

                                                                                                          Page 122
singular and momentarily total in its identity; it follows that the replication of like bodies multiplies this
effect but does not modify it. Modifications take place internally.
One of the best known Melanesian axioms must be that appearances deceive, and the unitary identity sets
the stage for the revelation that it covers or contains within itself other identities. At certain moments in the
kinds of revelatory sequences described here, a separation may be seen between the body's enveloping skin
and its internal substances. In gender terms, the single sex figure will have parts or appendages 'belonging' to
the opposite sex. These are imagined as encompassed or contained within the single body, for it is only a
unitary form that can appear to 'contain' an internal differentiation of this kind. A male body encompasses
female parts. This proposition then prompts the further conceptualization of the female parts taking a male
form, continuous with, rather than discontinuous from, the enveloping male body.
The unitary perception is thus highly contextualized, like the deliberate conceptualization of single-sex
collectivities in all-male or all-female events. The corporeal body is presented as exclusively male or female
for specific ritual effect: persons are not axiomatically conceived by these Highlanders as single sex. Rather,
an alternation of sexual conditions, two modes of gender constitution, is displayed. In the same way as these
rites deliberately juxtapose the separation of particular identities from one another along with the replication
of like identities, so they juxtapose different relational perceptions of gender. Homomorphism between
persons, or between a person's constituent parts, produces a same-sex relation, while dimorphism produces a
cross-sex relation. Either relation may be made evident within or beyond the body.
A same-sex identity, then, is effected as a deliberate contrivance. In fact, in those societies with puberty rites
for both sexes or rites celebrating homosexual nurture, these are the occasions at which the androgynous or
cross-sex character of personal identity is revealed as a premise underlying efficacy and interaction. Claims
of all-maleness or all-femaleness are transient and temporary definitions of power. In the Gimi case, claims
of all-maleness are laid to powers of fertility that at other times may be conceptualized as all-female. Men
momentarily construe themselves as totally responsible for reproduction by encompassing exogenous
powers.
To us it is a paradox that men should flaunt their maleness by

                                                     page_122

                                                                                                          Page 123
revealing that they contain within themselves what is also female. This seems a confusion of properties.
Western formulations of identity of a unitary kind would lead one to expect that men become more male by
associating with things definable as exclusively male; an intrinsic attribute (maleness) would be elaborated
with extra attributes of the same nature (more maleness). The more removed from female matters, on this
Western model, the more permanently male is the identity: hence the interpretations of male initiation
sequences which take as their culmination the achievement of manhood (a single-sex social identity that
finally matches an intrinsic physiological one). This could not be further from the Melanesian case.
There is an additional point. If it is the body's capacities which are made known, then the evidence for these
must lie in the effectiveness of action. In Melanesian terms, this implies interaction. While separation marks
off one sex as distinctively male against the other's femaleness, each makes itself known through the nature
of the transactions between them. That is, the specifically male contribution to this or that enterprise is
created through its effects on female enterprise. Paiela transactions thus depend on the differentiation of the
partners, or there is no effect. Or the effects may be the very constitution of the opposite sex, as when Gimi
men compel childbirth: women's capacity to give birth to the appropriate offspring is proof of male efficacy
in the matter. The presence of the other sex remains crucial, then, not simply as a cognitive device, that what
is male is defined by what is female, but in terms of demonstrating external efficacy and thus by the same
token internal capability.
Barrett found startling the suggestion that sexual differences cannot be known in advance (see p. 65). I
repeat her quotation of Adams (1980:87): ''what has to be grasped is, precisely, the production of differences
through systems of representation; the work of representation produces differences that cannot be known in
advance [emphasis removed]." Gimi ideas appear sustained by the premise that the differences between the
sexes cannot be known in advance of the interaction between them. The Paiela cult, however, presents a
variant case. Here sexual difference is known in advance and is not redefined but itself made productive
through the transactions between male and female. As we shall see, there are concomitant cultural contrasts
in the way transactions are constructed. It will, in fact, turn out to be significant whether, as far as the sexes
are concerned, the differentiation between

                                                    page_123

                                                                                                         Page 124
them is regarded as prior to their interaction or as constituted by it. The one schema creates anxiety about
their productive combination (growth), the other about their productive separation (creativity, birth).
Distinctions must be made (Harrison 1985b:419). Some Highlands gender constructs take as a starting point,
as it were, that when they transact with one another each sex retains its discrete identity and jointly creates
productsthe children and food they grownwhich carry the identity of both sources, newly combined.
Although this interpretation comes from my understanding of Hagen, it would also apply to Paiela. The
discrete identity of men and women (there is no ambiguity about sexual ascription) is the basis for the
transactions between them: the one is not axiomatically encompassed by the other. In such a context, where
the transacting entities are by their prior nature already differentiated, their transactional engagement has to
be forced. Activity mobilizes the differentiation and makes it productive. If the transaction is successful, it
will have a productin the Paiela boys' (husbands') case their own growth as well as the gardens and children
that husband and wife produce between them. Such intersexual transactions consequently result in an
outcome that combines the work and identity of both, and in this sense has a dual or multiple and thus
cross-sex character. In turn the reproductive construction of the joint identity of such products takes the
separate sexual identities ('male', 'female') of the sources or origins of the products as given: they are
combined only as the result of the transactions themselves. Paiela 'descent' formation is pertinent here.
Although the consanguineal units that intermarry and make exchanges are cognatically structured, Biersack
makes it clear that the separate origins of the intermarrying groups remain relevant: the unit that now regards
itself as 'one' is a "transactional corporation" (Biersack 1984:123), 18 predicated on sustaining internal
cooperation. The original groups are combined but not conflated.
However, Gimi gender constructs, and this may also be true of Daulo, elaborate the premise of androgyny.
Taken as given is a conflated cross-sex identity. Reproductionthe harvested crops women nurture, the
children to whom they given birthis achieved through momentarily distinguishing the product from its
source. The distinction works through gender. The 'maleness' of children which emerges from the
'femaleness' of mothers, derives from the fact that it is a male feat to have effected the separation at all. As
Gillison argues, the female characteristics that men appropriate have become male in the decisive act of
being detached from women. Separations thus occupy a different

                                                    page_124

                                                                                                         Page 125
symbolic place by contrast with those of Hagen and Paiela. The separations are crucial at particular
conjunctions in the staging of effectsas in effecting birthbut once separation is accomplished, the distinction
between male and female agency collapses, each being presented as a form of the other.
In the Hagen/Paiela instance, the separate identities of the sources remain as a pair; they are merged not in
each other but only in the product of the relationship between them. That multiply-composed relationship is
thereby made productive, and the androgynous product is thus differently constituted from either of the
sources taken alone. Gimi (and Daulo?) sources of growth are not paired in the same way. On the contrary,
growth is taken for granted as an effect of encompassment. Encompassment is made evident in turn as a
same-sex state. In one mode, it may be regarded as emphatically female. The 'spontaneous' growth that so
many commentators report as a focus of attention in the case of females is evidence of this homomorphic
capacity. Its male counterpart is creativity, the spiritualizing effect of men's association with the spirit world,
axiomatically productive of both health and welfare. Released from the female, the "male soul had the
capacity parthenogenetically to bring forth every kind of life" (Gillison 1980:40). It is in cross-sex contexts
that force is necessary to induce the complementary effect: males have to be forced to grow in their bodies,
as females grow; females have to be forcibly injected with spiritual essence in order to produce life, as males
give birth to spirit. Encompassment imagery thus construes sources of growth and creativity as all-male
(male encompassing female parts in a 'male' form) or as all-female (female encompassing male parts in a
'female' form). That imagery also indicates the form that separation will take. The momentary realization of
opposed single sex identities appears as container distinguished from contained. Thus either container or
contained can be seen as at once distinct from and merging with the other, a conjunction of dimorphic and
homomorphic possibilities.
Instruments of androgyny. Suppose in some nightmarish moment we were forced to make up our minds
about another Highlands conundrumnot who has power but who is male and who is female. Images from a
quite different area of Papua New Guinea are suggestive in this regard. In the course of analyzing the art of
the Abelam in the Middle Sepik, Forge (1973:189) observes that the paintings in question are not "a picture
or representation of anything in the natural or spirit world,

                                                   page_125

                                                                                                       Page 126
rather [they are] about the relationship between things [emphasis removed]." 19 The facades of men's
houses are covered with multiple designs representing male clan spirits and other beings; the figures have
various appendages. Though graphically they appear similar, Abelam exegesis distinguishes some as breasts
and some as penises. This raises an initial query about the meaning of the apparent phallus, which Forge
concludes is an organ of nourishment.20 But what is imagined in this fused representation of nurture, with its
male and female elements, and what kind of relation or identity is being claimed between the two? It is
almost as though male and female were variants of one another. But are types of nurture being differentiated
or conflated?
There are two stages here. It is necessary to know what maleness means in the configuration within which it
is presented, and thus what kind of relationship is supposed with female elements. Yet if the houses are
decorated with figures whose appendages can be read as both breasts and phalluses, then what is 'male' and
what is 'female' in the first place? Is the phallus a male breast? Is it to emphasize its maleness or femaleness
that the breast is imagined as a female phallus?21
Now this equivocation is not simply a piece of Sepik esoterica; it runs through much gender symbolism in the
Highlands and in Melanesia at large. Men's houses may be equated with wombs. Penile bleeding may be
identified as menstrual. The flutes men blow in their secret cults may be described as 'mothers' or as 'wives'
or be paired as male and female; Herdt (1982:88) gives a number of examples. At one point Gillison
(1980:167-177, n. 19) observes that the Gimi flute, 'mother's penis', can also refer to mother's breast. Where
male flute pairs are given a same-sex designation, do we imagine two brothers as two breasts? To pursue the
case of flute symbolism, I note that Herdt suggests the instruments are thus eroticized, and Dundes (1976)
that their feminization is in the interest of subverting heterosexual dependency by homosexual
independence.22
Yet to conclude that men wish to live without recourse to women, or that what is at issue is male control
over female reproductive power (men simply encompass within their affairs things to do with women, and
thus appropriate them), encounters that original difficulty: how is it made known what is distinctively male
and what was imagined as male and female before the act of appropriation? Lewis, writing about another
Sepik people to the far west of Abelam, asks how we come to recognize representations of other things. He
considers the phenomenon of penis-bleeding.23

                                                   page_126

                                                                                                       Page 127
   To see it as symbolic depends on our choosing to classify penile bleeding apart from menstrual
   bleeding. The idea we have of menstrual bleeding is that it can be applied correctly only to something
   which happens to women. This is an essential attribute, an intension, of our definition or
   understanding of menstruation; real or true menstruation can only happen to women. Therefore male
   bleeding must be apparent menstruation, symbolic or mimic menstruation. (1980:112)
In what sense, then, might we understand real or true and therefore also 'symbolic' gender designations? Are
the Sepik figures with their breasts/phalluses a mimicry of one or the other? Or do they embody some variety
of bisexualism, as entities of ambiguous or fused sexual status? Is an androgynous ancestor depicted on a
male cult house the sign of victory, that men really have won their battle over women in encompassing all
forms of nurture within themselves?
All such questions would require the assumption that breasts belong to women or that phalluses are the
property of men. However, if people say that phalluses were stolen from women or if a phallus is treated like
a fetus, it is not at all clear that we can be so certain in our evaluation on the Melanesians' behalf. Even if we
were to allow that phalluses are male, when they are offered to women (in their physiological embodiment or
in the form of bamboo tubes) are they being offered as instruments of masculinity; or will they change in the
process into something else (into fetuses perhaps); or is a thing, as Schwimmer (1974) argued in another
context, being rendered to women that belongs to women anyway? In which case, is a phallus on a man
some woman's 'property'?
It is clear that our metaphors of possession have exhausted themselves. Were we to draw on metaphors of
interaction, the formulas might seem less tortuous. Perhaps persons give parts of themselves to others or
yield to others what is already owned by them, because it is owed to them. A transactional idiom might
afford a way out of the conundrum. And that goes for notions of possession in relation to one's bodily parts,
where property idioms make for such difficulties in symbolic analysis. As Westerners we feel, as Lewis
remarked, that we should be able to identify things by their attributes: to decide whether flutes are 'male' or
'female'. It is not necessary that they are one thing or another (we can envisage a dual or ambiguous identity)
but we do imagine that identity inheres in the thing, as it does in people. However, the Melanesian material
indicates that knowledge (what is made apparent as male or female) cannot be derived from inspection
alone. 24 Iden-

                                                   page_127

                                                                                                        Page 128
tity is an outcome of interaction. Yet stated like that the conclusion seems trite; let me therefore give it some
cultural substance.
If people define their relations through transactions with one another, then perhaps among the things that the
Sepik characters display, with their dual appendages, is the fact of transaction. In the timeless dimension of a
portrait (to borrow from Harrison 1984) appears the figure of an interchange between elements that
simultaneously indicate the relation between them.
One can supplement this suggestion sociologically, for cult ritual associated with the men's house is
invariably conducted between two partiesbetween sponsors and their supporterswith alternate initiation
classes in specific reciprocity. 25 Androgyny personifies the relation created by a transaction, the
juxtaposition of elements that in the dimension of time were first separated then joined. The indivisible Gimi
flute is such an androgynous instrument. 'Male' and 'female' at best discriminate points in a process, how it is
played and what is emitted, or rather, who plays it and who is emitted.
Gimi symbolization establishes the male or female character of a person as an incident, an event, a historical
moment created in time. Such character does not inhere in attributes of a fixed kind, in the exclusive
possession of particular items, not even in possession of genitals, for the origins of those are ambiguous,
always the result of past transactions. What differentiates men and women, then, is not the maleness or
femaleness of their sexual organs but what they do with them. Whether a tube turns out to be a penis or a
birth canal depends on how it is and has been activated. And how an organ is activated is shown in its
effects, whether it works as container or contained. Knowledge about this is therefore simultaneously
knowledge about internal capacity or enablement, and about external efficacy in interaction with others.
At one juncture in his overview of the diverse approaches through which anthropologists have examined
assertions of single sex identity in male initiation rites, Keesing (1982:22) draws attention to what is often
taken as the clinching rationale: "what men produceas women cannotis men [original emphasis]." If the
assumption is that like must produce like, then this is a profound misreading of male creativity. Certainly it
would not hold for Gimi. On the contrary, one could say that men have to be 'produced' by women because
the whole difference between men and women lies in their respective enablements in produc-

                                                   page_128

                                                                                                        Page 129
tion. Men break away from the endo-anthropophagic cycle of women's nurture. They are, in this sense,
produced only by women: they do not themselves produce in like form. Rather, they transform themselves
into the agents who coerce women to so produce (and thus produce them as agents). What women grow
they create. A drastically differentiated capacity lays the basis for male identity.
Coercing women to give birth seems to me a very different statement from saying that men control women's
reproductive powers. It also abandons the paradox of the power of the weak.
This chapter opened with a reference to those analyses of male cults that turn on the idea that women are
powerful because of their femaleness. Yet women are supposedly weak for the same reason. Herdt notes the
"culturally constituted contradiction" that "men's mundane idioms tacitly assume ... that ... women ... are
inherently powerful because of their very femaleness" (Herdt 1981:17). The contradiction only arises if it is
assumed that women are intrinsically 'female' and that men have to be established as intrinsically 'male'.
For Gimi, ultimately what differentiates the sexes is not things possessed. Sexual organs can appear
androgynous, like the flutes/bamboo containers, at once breast and penis, both hollow and penetrant. They
do not have a unitary character in themselves: such a character is determined by how they are used, caused,
or completed by the opposite sex. Male and female sexual organs 'in themselves', then, stand for a composite
relation: if one is male and the other female, it is because one is completed by or derived from the other.
They do not in themselves indicate a differentiated thing; instead difference is constituted relationally by
men's and women's respective agency. The one grows, the other is grown; the one is forced to be creative,
the other creates. Women grow in their wombs what men grow in their cult enclosures; men make women
yield the penis-child that they thus separate from themselves. Gimi men are not afraid of having their
masculinity swallowed up, enveloped by women; the very fact that they are enveloped and not the
enveloper saves them from absorption. Their fear is not to be released at the proper time, for were they not
released they would no longer be male. Again, it is at the point of interaction that a singular identity is
established. Gatens (1983) argued that women are different from men because their bodies are different;
even if women 'do' the same things as men, the context provided by their own bodies genderizes their acts.
For Gimi at least, it would be truer to suggest that it is the

                                                   page_129

                                                                                                       Page 130
other way around. It is because women 'do' things differently from men, because they evince different
capacities in the way they act, that their bodies are gendered.
Yet Herdt's supposition might seem to fit cases of the Hagen/Paiela type, where sexual differentiation is
taken for granted. However, it is clear that even here men and women do not so much possess sexual
qualities as attributes as deploy their gender capabilities in transacting with them. The maleness or
femaleness of the objects of transaction comes from their source in the actions of men and women. If the
capabilities of the sexes are taken for granted, nevertheless their interaction has to be deliberately promoted,
and this gives a political dimension to men's and women's relationship. The concurrent political dimension of
Paiela cult activity is, in fact, best understood through its analogue with ceremonial exchange, a topic
developed in the following chapters.
Biersack offers a striking depiction of Paiela domestic sociality which brings us back to the collective
context of knowledge: "That sector of 'inside' [the realm of human action] that Paiela designate 'gardens and
houses' signifies a relationship and its moral connotations, the relationship of nonunion and insularity and the
immorality of 'selfishness'" (1984:134). In her terms, the inward-looking character of domestic relations
contrasts with the outward-looking character of households in the public domain, where collective
activityincluding the cooperation at the basis of consanguineal groupsis interdomestic, where pigs are not
eaten but exchanged. She stresses the noncommunicative nature of productive activity: "the only
relationship a human being can establish with gardens is a relationship of noncommunication. ... On a daily
basis the producer operates alone and in silence" (1984:121). The transactions by which wives 'grow' their
husbands, and husbands 'bind the blood' of wives in conception, are also covert and secluded; they would
fall into the Paiela class of noncommunicative relations. 26 If the bachelor rites do indeed collectivize such
domestic relations, we may comment on the significance of a communicational element in the accompanying
omen-taking. The boys attempt to communicate with the spirit woman, to compel her to reveal whether she
will grow them or not. They force a visible, overt sign from her.27 This communicatinal possibility in the
collectivization of otherwise 'silent' intradomestic relations is the central achievement of the ritual.
In their dependency upon others to evince capacities in the self, Paiela, quite as much as Gimi, locate the
sources of their internal efficacy beyond themselves. The sources do not constitute some other

                                                   page_130
                                                                                                         Page 131
realm or domain but another type of person. For 'men' they lie in the acts of 'women'. These sources are not
to be controlled or overcome but sustained in order to give perpetual evidence of this very efficacy. They are
at once a point of origin and a reference point for demonstrating subsequent historic moments. Thus they
may also be rendered as 'appropriated'. They are perpetually preserved since they are required to elicit, in
Wagner's phrase, the body's capacities, to externalize and make known its internal composition. But the
difference between internal (intrasomatic) and external (extrasomatic) relations has itself to be made known,
and this is done through the imagery of replication, through the collective character of the events by which
what is made known about one body is repeated for many.
Indeed, disparate as they might seem, the three ethnographic cases addressed in this chapter show parallels
in their practices of knowledge. Information, sexual organs, and a capacity to grow are all made known or
valued by reference to their source. Yet the source lies beyond the person who displays it, by the same token
that its efficacy must be registered in another. For a Malo man acquiring the idiosyncratic behavior of
another, value lies in the origin of that behavior in another. The donor does not lose what he gives away. In
the instance of Gimi reproductive creativity, violent extraction is imagined as gain and loss. Yet here, too, the
original source (women's possession of the flutes) seems to be capable of regression or regeneration (namely,
return to another moment in time), such that loss or gain is ever only temporary.
We may put the point another way. These Melanesian cases delineate the impact which interaction has on
the inner person. The body's features are a register, a site of that interaction. Consequently, what is drawn
out of the person are the social relationships of which it is composed: it is a microcosm of relations. In this
sense are the capacities of the body revealed. And if the body is composed of relations, if it shows the
imprint of past encounters, then the relations are not in a state of stasis. Awareness of them implies that they
must be attended to. These internal relations must either be further built upon or must be taken apart and
fresh relationships instigated. The kinds of initiation ritual to which I have been referring stage just the
awareness or acknowledgment of the necessity of so taking further action, and of the possibility of doing so.
Although I refer to the body, the effect of the rites is to bring the body to consciousness and, in the
Melanesian idiom, to show the impact of people's minds upon one another. Intention and motivation

                                                    page_131

                                                                                                         Page 132
have physiological consequences. The person is vulnerable, so to speak, both to the bodily disposition of
others towards him or her and to their wills and desires. For there is more to the Melanesian 'person' than
that analytical figment of the anthropological imagination that supposes the social person is a locus of roles,
a constellation of statuses. In the Melanesian image, a series of events is being revealed in the body, which
becomes thereby composed of the specific historical actions of social others: what people have or have not
done to or for one. 28 The person appropriates its own history.
The practices of knowledge to which I have been alluding, and especially that people are construed as
dependent upon others for knowledge about themselves, do not simply reside in the personal discoveries of
reflective individuals: these are not existential possibilities that could apply anywhere. I refer specifically to
the manner in which the cultural conventions of these societies present people with the effects of their
actions. And this is not in turn simply a question of intersubjective dramatics, the personae that people
proffer, the playing of their 'roles'. A distinctive feature of these Melanesian practices is the elicitation of
knowledge about inner bodily and mental constitution. A set of internal relations are externalized. This may
be communicated as a condition shared collectively, but the condition itself is a particularistic dependency
on critical social others, made manifest in the objects of their encounters.
If the individual person, then, is the site at which its own interactions with others is registered, then that
supposition on Melanesians' part must in turn shape their conduct of relations. Succinctly put, it gives social
relations the form known in the literature as gift exchange.

                                                    page_132

                                                                                                         Page 133



