[]

[9781405100144.jpg]

Contents

List of Figures

Acknowledgements

Preface: The Contradictions of Theory

1 Common Sense is Not Enough

Definitions of Theory

Understanding Theory

2 The ‘New Archaeology’

Culture History

Origins of the New Archaeology

New Archaeology: Key Points

Case Study: The Enigma of the Megaliths

Conclusion

3 Archaeology as a Science

Definitions of Science

Positivism

Examples

Objections to ‘Science’

Kuhn and Feyerabend

Social Constructivism

4 Middle-range Theory, Ethnoarchaeology and Material Culture Studies

Binford and Middle-range Theory

Interpreting the Mousterian

Uniformitarian Assumptions

Case Study: Bones at Olduvai

Middle-range Theory: Problems

Behavioural Archaeology

Material Culture Studies

5 Culture and Process

Culture History

Cultural Systems: Summary

The Idea of Process

Example: Cultural Process around the North Sea

Cultural Process: Strengths

The Context of Cultural Systems

Processual Thinking: Drawbacks

Processual Thinking Modified

Culture, Process and the Individual

6 Thoughts and Ideologies

Looking at Thoughts

Structuralism

Marxism

Ideology

Cognitive Archaeology

Conclusion

7 Postprocessual and Interpretive Archaeologies

Postprocessual Archaeology

Case Studies: Rock Art and Medieval Houses

Phenomenology

8 Archaeology, Gender and Identity

Gender

Bias Correction

Critique of Archaeological Practice

Archaeologies of Gender

Men, Women and Knowledge

Case Study: What This Awl Means

Archaeologies of Identity

Performativity

Conclusion

9 Archaeology and Cultural Evolution

Darwin, Marx and Spencer

Cultural Evolution

Criticisms of Cultural Evolution

Multilinear Evolution

Cultural Evolution and Marxism

Origins of the State

Case Study: Cahokia

Cultural Evolution Strikes Back

10 Archaeology and Darwinian Evolution

Darwin’s Dangerous Idea

Cultural Ecology

Genes and Memes

Co-Evolutionary Theory

Selectionist Archaeology

Case Study: Art, Handaxes, Population and Innovation in the Palaeolithic

Darwinian Archaeologies: Criticisms

Conclusion

11 Archaeology and History

Traditional History

The Annales School

The Linguistic Turn

Historical Archaeology

Historical Archaeology and the Text

Case Study: Bodiam Castle

Conclusion

12 Archaeology, Politics and Culture

Archaeology is Not in a Vacuum

Case Study: African Burial Ground

Indigenous Archaeologies

Multiculturalism, Diversity and Inclusion

The Relativism Question

13 Conclusion: The Future of Theory

Where We Are Now

The Fall and Rise of Empiricism

Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies

Agency

Materiality

Theorizing The Field

Where Theory Is Going

Progress and Impact

Diversity and Pluralism

Conclusion

Selective Glossary

Further Reading

Bibliography

Index

Alan Sorrell, ‘Falling Tower’, date uncertain. Sorrell (1904–74) was a
neo-Romantic artist known both for his ‘reconstruction’ drawings of
archaeological sites and depictions of past cultural life, and for his
‘imaginative’ work, which was characteristically inspired by the
monuments and images of the past.

For Jo,

who learnt to love theory

[Image]

This second edition first published 2010

© 2010 Matthew Johnson

Edition history: Blackwell Publishing Ltd (1e,1999)

Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007.
Blackwell’s publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global
Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.

Registered Office

John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom

Editorial Offices

350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA

9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK

The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK

For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and
for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright
material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.

The right of Matthew Johnson to be identified as the author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
without the prior permission of the publisher.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.

Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often
claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this
book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks
of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Johnson, Matthew, 1962–

Archaeological theory : an introduction / Matthew Johnson. – 2nd ed.

p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 978-1-4051-0014-4 (hardcover : alk. paper) – ISBN 978-1-4051-0015-1
(pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Archaeology–Philosophy. I. Title.

CC72.J65 2010

930.1–dc22

2009039202

List of Figures

Preface: ‘You’re a terrorist? Thank God. I understood Meg to say you
were a theorist.’ From Culler (1997: 16)

  ------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  2.1    The gulf between present and past
  2.2    Illustration of burial urns from Sir Thomas Browne, Hydriotaphia (1658)
  2.3    ‘Cultures’ in space and time, from Childe (1929)
  2.4    Piggott’s (1968) view of culture
  2.5    David Clarke’s (1976) systemic view of culture
  2.6    Glyn Daniel’s (1941) view of megalith origins
  2.7    Renfrew’s megaliths on Rousay, Orkney Islands, showing ‘distribution of chambered tombs in relation to modern arable land, with hypothetical territorial boundaries’
  3.1    Lon Chaney, Jr and Lionel Atwill in Man Made Monster (1941, Universal)
  3.2    A selective diagram showing some schools within the philosophy of science
  4.1    Present statics, past dynamics and middle-range theory
  4.2    Bordes’ Mousterian assemblage types, as redrawn by Binford (1983a)
  4.3    Part of Hillman’s (1984) ethnoarchaeological model of grain processing, derived from ethnographic research in Turkey
  5.1    David Clarke’s (1976) diagram of the normative view of culture
  5.2    A systems model of the ‘rise of civilization’ in Mesopotamia 78
  7.1    The results of Hodder and Orton’s simulation exercise showing that ‘different spatial processes can produce very similar fall-off curves’, implying that ‘this advises great caution in any attempt at interpretation’
  7.2    The relationship of theory and data in postprocessual archaeology
  7.3    (a) Carvings from Nämforsen, (b) part of Tilley’s structural scheme for interpreting the carvings
  7.4    A medieval hall (after Johnson 1989: figure 2)
  8.1    Prehistoric life according to children’s books. From Unstead (1953: 20)
  8.2    The awl handle excavated by Spector’s
  8.3    The elderly Mazaokeyiwin working a hide
  9.1    St George and the Dragon, as depicted on St George’s Altarpiece, National Gallery, Prague, c.1470
  9.2    A Native American chief, drawn by John White in the 1580s
  9.3    An ‘Ancient Briton’, drawn by John White in the 1580s
  9.4    Clarke’s contrast between organic and cultural evolution
  9.5    Artist’s impression of the site of Cahokia at its peak, by William R. Iseminger
  10.1   Charles Darwin, from a cartoon in 1871
  10.2   An entangled bank, close to Down House, Darwin’s home
  10.3   William ‘Strata’ Smith’s map of the geology of the British Isles
  10.4   Handaxes from Cuxton, southern England
  11.1   Bodiam Castle
  11.2   Bodiam Castle: plan of landscape context
  12.1   A coffin from the African Burial Ground, New York. The heart shape is made of tacks; it has been interpreted as a west African symbol
  13.1   Archaeological theory in 1988
  13.2   Archaeological theory in 1998
  13.3   Archaeological theory in 2008: the struggle between different elements of thought and activity, in the mind of every archaeologist
  ------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acknowledgements

The author and publishers gratefully acknowledge the following for
permission to reproduce copyright material:

Acknowledgements

Preface cartoon © Anthony Hadon-Guest; figure 2.2 from Childe, V. G.,
The Danube in Prehistory (Oxford University Press, 1929); figure 2.4
copyright © 2010 by Transaction Publishers. Reprinted by permission of
the publisher; figure 2.5 from Clarke, D., Analytical Archaeology
(second revised edition) (Routledge, London, 1976); figure 2.6 from
Daniel, G. E., ‘The dual nature of the megalithic colonisation of
prehistoric Europe’, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 7, 1941,
courtesy of The Prehistoric Society, Salisbury; figure 2.7 from Before
Civilisation: A Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric Europe by A. C.
Renfrew, published by Century. Reprinted by permission of The Random
House Group Ltd.; figure 3.1 © The Kobal Collection; figure 4.3 from
Hillman, G., ‘Interpretation of archaeological plant remains’, reprinted
from Lone, F. A., Khan, M. and Buth, G. M., Palaeoethnobotany – Plants
and Ancient Man in Kashmir (A A Balkema, Rotterdam, 1993); figure 5.1
from Clarke, D., Analytical Archaeology (second revised edition)
(Routledge, London, 1976); figure 7.1 from Hodder, I. and Orton, C.,
Spatial Analysis in Archaeology (Cambridge University Press, 1976);
figure 7.3 from Tilley, C., Material Culture and Text: The Art of
Ambiguity (Routledge, London, 1991, © Dr Christopher Tilley); figure 8.1
from Unstead, R. J., Looking at History 1: From Cavemen to Vikings
(Black, London, 1953); figure 8.2 © Klammers and the University of
Minnesota Collections; figure 8.3 © Minnesota Historical Society; figure
9.1
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:St_George_and_the_Dragon-altar_wing-NG-Praha.jpg;
figure 9.2 © The British Museum, London; figure 9.3 © The British
Museum, London; figure 9.4 from Clarke, D., Analytical Archaeology
(Routledge, London, 1976); figure 10.1 Private collection/The Bridgeman
Art Library Nationalaity; figure 10.2 © Crown copyright, RCHME; figure
10.3 © Royal Geographical Society, London/The Bridgeman Art Library;
figure 11.2 © Crown copyright NMR.

The publishers apologize for any errors or omissions in the above list
and would be grateful to be notified of any corrections that should be
incorporated in the next edition or reprint of this book.

Preface: The Contradictions of Theory

This book is an introductory essay on archaeological theory. It tries to
explain something of what ‘theory’ is, its relationship to
archaeological practice, how it has developed within archaeology over
the last few decades, and how archaeological thought relates to theory
in the human sciences and the intellectual world generally.

To many, ‘theory’ is a dirty word both within and outside archaeology.
Prince Charles earned almost universal approbation when he condemned
‘trendy theorists’ in education; nobody however, including the Prince
himself, seemed to be very clear precisely who he meant. When visiting
an archaeological site a few years ago a suggestion of mine met with
laughter and the response ‘that’s a typical suggestion of a theorist’. I
don’t recall anyone telling me exactly why my suggestion was so absurd,
and when I visited the site the following year the strategy had been
adopted. For the meat-and-potatoes Anglo-Saxon world in particular,
theory is an object of profound suspicion. It is a popular saying that
for the English, to be called an intellectual is to be suspected of
wanting to steal someone’s wife (sexism in the original). Theory,
‘political correctness’ and being ‘foreign’ stand together in the dock
as traits to be regarded with hostility in the Englishspeaking world–and
beyond; there is even a word for hostility to theory in
German–Theorifeindlichkeit. I shall look at some of the reasons why this
is so in chapter 1.

At the same time, however, theory is increasingly popular, and seen as
increasingly important, both within and outside archaeology. Valentine
Cunningham commented in The Times Higher Education Supplement that
theorists in academia are ‘a surging band, cocky, confident in academic
credentials, job security and intellectual prestige’, inspiring the
columnist Laurie Taylor to write a memorable account of a bunch of
theorists intellectually roughing up a more empirical colleague at a
seminar before departing to the local bar. His account was fictitious
but contained much truth.

‘You’re a terrorist? Thank God. I understood Meg to say you were a
theorist.’ From Culler (1997: 16)

[fpref_image001.jpg]

There are various indices of the ‘success’ of an explicitly defined
archaeological theory; one might cite the frequency of ‘theoretical’
symposia at major conferences such as the Society for American
Archaeology or the European Association of Archaeology, or the incidence
of ‘theory’ articles in the major journals. One particularly telling
index is the rise and rise of the British Theoretical Archaeology Group
conference (TAG). This was formed as a small talking-shop for British
archaeological theorists in the late 1970s, but since then has become
the largest annual archaeological conference in Britain with substantial
participation from North America and Europe. There are now similar
organizations in North America, Scandinavia (NordicTAG) and Germany
(Arbeitsgemeinschaft Theorie).

It is true that a lot of papers delivered at TAG scarcely merit the term
‘theoretical’, and even more true that many only come for the infamous
TAG party in any case. It must also be conceded that the degree of
impact of TAGs and ‘theory’s’ influence on the ‘real world’ of
archaeological practice, and the cultural and legislative framework of
archaeology, is debatable. The theorist often feels like Cassandra,
constantly giving what he or she sees as profound predictions and
insight and constantly being ignored by the decision makers.

This book is written to give the student an introduction to a few of the
strands of current thinking in archaeological theory. It is deliberately
written as an introduction, in as clear and jargon-free a fashion as the
author can manage (though as we shall see, criteria of clarity and of
what constitutes jargon are riddled with problems).

It is intended as a ‘route map’ for the student. That is, it seeks to
point out prominent landmarks on the terrain of theory, comment on
relationships between different bodies of thought, and to clarify the
intellectual underpinnings of certain views. As such, it is anything but
an encyclopaedia; it is hardly one-tenth of a comprehensive guide to the
field, if such a guide could be written. The text should be read with
reference to the Further Reading and Glossary sections, and
over-generalization, oversimplification and caricatures of viewpoints
are necessary evils.

Above all, I remind all readers of the fourth word in the title of this
book. I have tried to write an Introduction. The book, and its different
chapters, are meant to be a starting-point for the student on a range of
issues, which she or he can then explore in greater depth through the
Further Reading sections. Many of the comments and criticisms made of
the first edition of this book focused on an alleged over-or
under-emphasis of a particular theoretical viewpoint, or lack of
coverage. Many of these criticisms were valid, and I have tried to deal
with them in this second edition; but many evaluated the text as a
position statement with which they happened to agree or disagree, rather
than on its pedagogical intention, that is as an introductory route-map
to the issues. Additionally, students need to be reminded that this book
should be the start, not the end, of their reading and thinking, a point
I will return to in the Conclusion. A route-map is not an encyclopaedia.

To pursue the route map analogy, the route followed here is one of
several that could be taken through the terrain of archaeological
theory. I could have devoted a chapter each to different thematic areas:
Landscape, The Household, Trade and Exchange, Cultures and Style,
Agency, and so on. In each case, a variety of approaches to that theme
could be given to show how different theories contradict or complement
each other and produce different sorts of explanation of the
archaeological record. Alternatively, a tour could be taken through
different ‘isms’: positivism, functionalism, Marxism, structuralism,
poststructuralism, feminism. These would be reasonable paths, and ones
moreover that have been taken by other authors.

This book, however, tries above all to bring out the relationship
between archaeological thought and wider strands of theory in
intellectual and cultural life as a whole. It seeks to show how specific
theoretical positions taken by individual archaeologists ‘make sense’
within a wider context, cultural, social and political as well as
academic. This book also seeks to bring out the relationship between
archaeological theory and archaeological practice more clearly than has
been done in the past. The structure adopted here, of a historical
approach focusing initially on the New Archaeology and reactions to it
before moving on to current debates, fitted this purpose best.

I have written above that this book is a guide for ‘the student’; I mean
the student in the broadest sense. Many practising archaeologists
employed outside the academic world have told me that they are
interested in current theoretical debates, and see such debates as of
potential relevance to their work. Nevertheless many feel alienated by
what they see as the unnecessary obscurity and pretentiousness that is
central to the theoretical scene. I don’t subscribe to such an analysis,
but I have to acknowledge that it is widespread. Right or wrong, I hope
that they may find that what follows is of some help.

In trying to survey many different theoretical strands, I have been torn
between trying to write a ‘neutral’, ‘objective’ survey of different
currents of thought on the one hand, and a committed polemic advancing
my own views on the other. The end product lies, perhaps a little
unhappily, somewhere between these extremes. On the one hand, the
construction of a completely objective survey simply isn’t
intellectually possible; the most biased and partial views on any
academic subject consistently come from those who overtly proclaim that
their own position is neutral, detached and valuefree. In addition, it
would be disingenuous to claim that the book is written from a
disinterested viewpoint–that it is a guide pure and simple. Obviously an
interest in theory goes hand-in-hand with a passionate belief in its
importance, and an attachment to certain more or less controversial
views within the field.

On the other hand, if we want to understand why theory is where it is
today, any account of a wide diversity of intellectual positions must
endeavour to be reasonably sympathetic to all parties. A survey can
never be neutral, but it can make some attempt to be fair. As R.G.
Collingwood pointed out in relation to the history of philosophy, most
theoretical positions arise out of the perceived importance of certain
contexts or issues; that is, philosophical beliefs are in part responses
to particular sets of problems, and have to be understood as such rather
than given an intellectual mugging. One’s intellectual opponents are
never all morons or charlatans to the last man and woman and one’s
bedfellows are rarely all exciting, first-rate scholars. Before we get
carried away with such piety it must be remembered that this does not
mean that certain positions are not therefore immune from criticism. An
intellectual relativism in which ‘all viewpoints are equally valid’ or
in which ‘every theory is possible’ is not a rigorous or tenable
position. We can see historically that some theoretical positions have
been abandoned as dead ends, for example the extreme logical positivism
of the 1970s.

I have also been torn between writing a historical account of the
development of theory, and of giving a ‘snapshot’ of theory in the
present. On the one hand, it might be held that my re-telling of the
origins of the New Archaeology of the 1960s, and more arguably the
processual/postprocessual ‘wars’ of the 1980s and 1990s, is now out of
date. On the other hand, I feel that in order for the student to
understand where theory is today, it is necessary to look at its
development over the last few decades, and indeed to look at the deeper
intellectual roots of many views and positions in the more remote past,
for example in the thinking of figures like Charles Darwin and Karl
Marx. Much of traditional cultural evolutionary theory, and much of the
early postprocessual critique, may appear to be passé to some; but I do
not think that the modern student can understand current thinking
without reference back to this literature. Archaeology would be a
strange field of study if it asserted that it could understand the way
the discipline thinks in the present, without reference back to the way
it thought in the past.

For this second edition of the book, I have made a number of changes. I
give a more extended account of these and reflection on them in the
Further Reading section, but two stand out. First, there has been an
explosion in archaeological discussion of Darwinian evolution, and I
have therefore divided the chapter on ‘Evolution’ into two. Second, the
first edition concentrated on theory in the Anglo-American world, in
part reflecting my own background and limitations. This concentration
was rightly criticized by many non-Anglo scholars. I have tried in this
second edition to write a more inclusive text, giving more attention to
Indigenous and postcolonial perspectives as well as drawing more
attention to theoretical contributions from across the world. I have
nevertheless retained the original structure of the book, and have run
the risk of ‘fitting in’ material around this organizing structure; but
the alternatives, for example of having a separate chapter on non-Anglo
theory, or of a country-by-country survey, seemed to me to be greater
evils and to do greater violence to the very subtle texture of
theoretical debate.

The adoption of an informal tone and omission of detailed referencing
from the text is deliberate. It is to help, I hope, the clarity of its
arguments and the ease with which it can be read. Many ‘academic’
writers have often been taught to forsake the use of the ‘I’ word, to
attempt to render our writing neutral and distant, to avoid a
conversational or informal tone, all in the name of scientific or
scholarly detachment. This may or may not be a valid project. The aim
here however is educational rather than scholarly in the narrow sense.

One of my central points, particularly in the first chapter, is that all
practising archaeologists use theory whether they like it or not. To
make this point clear and to furnish examples I have often quoted
passages from avowedly ‘atheoretical’ writers and commented upon them,
to draw out the theories and assumptions that lie implicit within those
passages. In most cases the passages come from the first suitable book
to hand. I want to stress that critiques of these examples are not
personal attacks on the writers concerned. Here, the need to use
practical examples to make a theoretical point clear clashes with the
desire to avoid a perception of unfair, personalized criticism.

The text is based in part on lecture notes for various undergraduate
courses I have taught at Sheffield, Lampeter, Durham and Southampton.
The students at all four institutions are thanked for their constructive
and helpful responses. Some students may recognize themselves in the
dialogues in some of the chapters, and I ask their forgiveness for this.
The first edition of the book was partly conceived while I was a
Research Fellow at the University of California at Berkeley in the
spring of 1995. I would like to thank Meg Conkey, Christine Hastorf,
Marcia Ann Dobres, Margot Winer and many others too numerous to mention
for their hospitality during that time and for making my stay so
enjoyable and profitable. I also thank Durham University for giving me
study leave for that term. A number of reviewers, some anonymous, made a
string of invaluable comments without which the book would have been
much more opinionated and parochial and much less comprehensible. These
include especially Randy McGuire, Jim Hill, Chris Tilley and Elizabeth
Brumfiel. Robert Preucel and Ian Hodder reviewed the final draft
extensively. Tim Earle, Clive Gamble and Cynthia Robin kindly corrected
my misconceptions for the second edition. Dominic McNamara drew my
attention to the Foucault quotation in chapter 6. Within the Department
of Archaeology at Durham, Helena Hamerow, Colin Haselgrove, Anthony
Harding, Simon James, Sam Lucy and Martin Millett read and made
invaluable comments on the first draft. Brian Boyd, Zoe Crossland, Jim
Brown and John McNabb helped with illustrations. William R. Iseminger
kindly supplied figure 9.5 and Francis Wenban-Smith kindly supplied
figure 10.4. Collaboration with staff of the History, Classics and
Archaeology Subject Centre, particularly Annie Grant, Tom Dowson and
Anthony Sinclair, influenced my thinking on the pedagogical framing and
impact of the second edition. Conversations on the philosophy of science
with my late father C. David Johnson clarified many points.

I moved to Southampton in 2004; I thank an outstanding group of
colleagues and students there for their advice and support over the last
five years. I prepared revisions for the second edition while a visiting
scholar at the University of Pennsylvania in the autumn of 2008. I thank
Bob Preucel and Richard Hodges for making that visit possible, and the
students of Bob’s theory class for their input and hospitality. I also
thank Clare Smith, Heather Burke and Matt Spriggs for organizing a
stimulating visit to Australia in 2003/4, and Prof Joseph Maran, Ulrich
Thaler and the staff and students of Heidelberg University for four
wonderful months discussing theory and practice in spring 2005.

More broadly, can I thank everyone who has taken the time to speak or
write to me over the last ten years to express their appreciation for
this book. Students, teachers and practicing archaeologists have given
me some very kind compliments, for which I am flattered and grateful,
from the Berkeley feminist who said that I wrote like a woman to the
Flinders student who sent me a picture of her Matthew Johnson Theory
Action Doll.

Conversations with Chris Taylor, Paul Everson, Casper Johnson and David
Stocker informed the discussion of Bodiam in chapter 10, though errors
and misconceptions in this discussion remain my responsibility. John
Davey, Tessa Harvey, Jane Huber, Rosalie Robertson and Julia Kirk at
Blackwell were always patient, encouraging and ready with practical help
when needed. My wife Becky made comments on successive drafts; proofread
the final manuscript; and most importantly, provided emotional and
intellectual support without which this book would never have been
written. In return, I hope this book explains to her why archaeologists
are such a peculiar bunch of human beings, though I know she has her own
theories in this respect. My thanks to everybody.

1

Common Sense is Not Enough

Archaeology can be very boring, distressing and physically
uncomfortable. Every year we excavate thousands of sites, some with
painstaking and mind-numbing patience, some in a great and undignified
hurry. Every year we get chilled to the marrow or bitten half to death
by mosquitoes while visiting some unprepossessing, grassy mound in the
middle of nowhere. Miles from a decent restaurant or even a warm bath,
we try to look interested while the rain comes down in sheets and some
great professor whose best work was 20 years ago witters on in a
monotone about what was found in Trench 4B. Every year we churn out
thousands of interminable, stultifyingly dull site reports, fretting
over the accuracy of plans and diagrams, collating lists of grubby
artefacts to publish that few will ever consult or use again.

Why?

We could spend the money on hospitals. Alternatively we could quietly
pocket the cash and write a much more entertaining, fictitious version
of what the past was like while we sat on a sun-kissed terrace somewhere
in southern California. If we were feeling ideologically sound we could
raise an International Brigade for a liberation struggle somewhere. Each
of these alternatives has its attractions, but we don’t do any of these
things. We go on as we have done before.

One reason we don’t do these things is because archaeology is very
important. The past is dead and gone, but it is also very powerful. It
is so powerful that an entire nation (Zimbabwe) can name itself after an
archaeological site. It is so powerful that archaeological sites are
surrounded by police and are the subject of attempted occupations by New
Age travellers. It is so powerful that even individual groups of
artefacts like the Parthenon frieze are the subject of major
international disputes.

The question ‘why do we do archaeology?’ is therefore bound up with the
question ‘why is archaeology – the study of the past through its
material remains – so important to us?’ And this again leads on to the
question of ‘us’, of our identity – who are we? And these are all
theoretical questions.

Definitions of Theory

‘Theory’ is a very difficult word to define. Indeed, I shall return to
this topic in the final chapter, since different theoretical views
define ‘theory’ in different ways. Different definitions cannot
therefore be fully explored without prior explanation of those views.

For the time being, I propose to define theory as follows: theory is the
order we put facts in. I will go on to discuss the extent to which
‘facts’ exist independently of theory, and how we might define ‘facts’.
We can also note that most archaeologists would include within the
purview of theory why we do archaeology and the social and cultural
context of archaeology. They would also refer to issues of
interpretation. Most archaeologists would agree that the way we
interpret the past has ‘theoretical’ aspects in the broad sense. For
example, we could cite general theories such as cultural and biological
evolution, issues of how we go about testing our ideas, debates over how
we should think about stylistic or decorative change in artefacts.

There is disagreement over whether many concepts can be considered
‘theoretical’ or whether they are merely neutral techniques or methods
outside the purview of theory. Stratigraphy, excavation and recording
techniques, and the use of statistical methods are, for example, clearly
all examples of putting facts in a certain order. However, they might be
considered ‘theoretical’ by some but ‘just practical’ or ‘simply
techniques’ by others. Theory and method are often confused by
archaeologists. In this more restricted sense of theory, if theory
covers the ‘why’ questions, method or methodology covers the ‘how’
questions. So theory covers why we selected this site to dig, method how
we dig it. However, theory and method are obviously closely related, and
many archaeologists including myself regard such a straightforward
division as too simple.

To give an example of the relationship between theory and method, we
might consider different methods of investigating social inequality in
the archaeological record. Thus the method archaeologists might use
would be to compare graves ‘richly’ endowed with lots of grave goods
with poorer, unadorned graves. It is evident in this exercise that
certain ideas or theories about the nature of social inequality are
being assumed (that social status will be reflected in treatment of the
body at death, that material goods are unequally distributed through
society and that this has a direct relationship to social inequality,
and so on). These ideas are themselves theoretical in nature.

Perhaps theory and method are one and the same thing and cannot be
separated; perhaps they have to be separated if archaeology is to be a
rigorous discipline that is capable of testing its theories against its
data. This is a debate we shall return to in chapter 4.

I’m sorry to butt in, but all this discussion of theory and method
clearly demonstrates just how sterile and boring theory really is.
You’re already lost in definitions and semantics, you haven’t mentioned
a single fact about the past, and I’m beginning to wish I hadn’t
bothered to start reading this and had turned my attention to that new
book about the Hopewell culture instead. Theory is irrelevant to the
practice of archaeology; we can just use our common sense.

Ah, Roger, the eternal empiricist. (Roger Beefy is an undergraduate
student at Northern University, England, though women and men like Roger
can be found in any archaeological institution. Roger fell in love with
archaeology when he was a child, scrambling up and down the ruins of
local castles, churches, burial mounds and other sites. Roger spent a
year after school before coming to Northern University digging and
working in museums. Roger loves handling archaeological material, and is
happiest when drawing a section or talking about seriation techniques
over a beer. Now, in his second year at Northern University, Roger has
found himself in the middle of a compulsory ‘theory course’. Full of
twaddle about middle-range theory, hermeneutics and postcoloniality, it
seems to have nothing to do with the subject he loves.)

So, you want to know why theory is ‘relevant’ to archaeological
practice. Perhaps you will bear with me while I discuss four possible
reasons.

1 We need to justify what we do

Our audience (other archaeologists, people in other disciplines, the
‘general public’ or ‘community’ however defined) needs to have a clear
idea from archaeologists of why our research is important, why it is
worth paying for, why we are worth listening to. There are a hundred
possible answers to this challenge of justification, for example:

-   The past is intrinsically important, and we need to find out about
    it for its own sake.
-   We need to know where we came from to know where we’re going next.
    Knowledge of the past leads to better judgements about the future.
-   Only archaeology has the time depth of many thousands of years
    needed to generate comparative observations about long-term culture
    processes.
-   Archaeology is one medium of cultural revolution that will
    emancipate ordinary people from repressive ideologies.

The chances are that you disagree with at least one of these statements,
and agree with at least one other. That doesn’t change the fact that
each statement is a theoretical proposition that needs justifying,
arguing through, and debating before it can be accepted or rejected.
None of the statements given above is obvious, self-evident or
common-sensical when examined closely. Indeed, very little in the world
is obvious or self-evident when examined closely, though our political
leaders would have us think otherwise.

2 We need to evaluate one interpretation of the past against another, to
decide which is the stronger

Archaeology relies in part for its intellectual credibility on being
able to distinguish ‘good’ from ‘bad’ interpretations of the past. Were
the people who lived on this site hunter-gatherers, or were they aliens
from the planet Zog? Which is the stronger interpretation?

It’s impossible to decide what is a strong archaeological interpretation
on the basis of ‘common sense’ alone. Common sense might suggest, for
example, that we accept the explanation that covers the greatest number
of facts. There may be thousands of sherds of pottery dating from the
first millennium BC on a site, all factual in their own way, but one
other fact – a treering date of ad 750, for example – may suggest that
they might be all ‘residual’ or left over from an earlier period. In
practice, every day of our working lives as archaeologists, we decide on
which order to put our facts in, what degree of importance to place on
different pieces of evidence. When we do this, we use theoretical
criteria to decide which facts are important and which are not worth
bothering with.

A good example of the inadequacy of common sense in deciding what is a
strong or weak archaeological explanation is that of ley lines. Ley
lines were ‘discovered’ by Alfred Watkins in the 1920s, when he noticed
that many ancient archaeological sites in Britain could be linked up by
straight lines. The idea that ancient sites lay on straight lines could
be ‘proved’ easily by taking a map upon which such ancient monuments
were marked and drawing such lines through them. Watkins suggested these
lines represented prehistoric trackways. Nonsense, said the professional
archaeological community. It was common sense that prehistoric peoples
living thousands of years before literacy or formal geometry were far
too primitive to lay out such geometrically sophisticated lines. Watkins
had intended his book as a genuine contribution to archaeology, but his
research, sincerely carried out, was laughed out of court and consigned
to the ranks of lunatic ‘fringe archaeology’. Other writers took his
thesis up in succeeding decades but extended it by suggesting that the
lines were of sacred significance or mystical power.

Now it is quite clear today that prehistoric peoples would have been
quite capable of laying out such lines. The original, common-sensical
criteria used by archaeologists for rejecting Watkins’s thesis were
completely invalid.

Ley lines do not exist. This was shown by Tom Williamson and Liz Bellamy
in Ley Lines in Question, which analysed such lines statistically and
showed that the density of archaeological sites in the British landscape
is so great that a line drawn through virtually anywhere will ‘clip’ a
number of sites. It took Williamson and Bellamy a book’s worth of effort
and statistical sophistication to prove this, however.

The moral of the debate over ley lines is that what is considered to
constitute a strong or a weak explanation is not simply a matter of
‘common sense’. I would argue that if we really want to understand what
drove and continues to drive the ley line debate, we have to look, in
part, at class divides in British archaeology. In his time Watkins was
derided as a vulgar amateur, while today the tradition of ley line
searchers continues strongly in ‘alternative’ or New Age circles. New
Age travellers and others in their turn view middle-class professional
archaeologists with suspicion. Others might dispute this social
interpretation and suggest alternative reasons for the intellectual
development of the issue. I might reply: we would then be having a
theoretical debate.

3 We must be explicit in what we do as archaeologists

In other words, we must be as open as possible about our reasons,
approaches and biases, rather than trying to conceal them or pretend
that they do not exist. This is a basic rule of academic discourse,
though it is not always followed. Lewis Binford, a character we shall
meet properly in the next chapter, made the point that all scientists of
all disciplines need to be aware of the assumptions they are making if
they wish to be productive.

It goes without saying that we can never be completely explicit about
our biases and preconceptions. This should not stop us trying.

4 We don’t ‘need’ theory, we all use theory whether we like it or not

Put another way, we are all theorists. This is the most important point
of all. The most lowly troweller, the most bored washer of ceramics, the
most alienated finds assistant or lab technician, are all theoreticians
in the sense that they all use theories, concepts, ideas, assumptions in
their work. (The theory may have been imposed on them by the project
director or funding body, but it is theory nevertheless.) Put another
way, the driest, most descriptive text or site report is already
theoretical. Somebody wielding a WHS or Marshalltown trowel relies on
theories of soil colour change and stratigraphy in his or her work;
editorial judgements about the relative weighting and order given to
pottery and artefact reports in a site monograph depend on a judgement
on what is ‘significant’ about that particular site which in turn rests
on theoretical criteria.

Any archaeologist who therefore tells you that their work is
‘atheoretical’, that they are ‘not interested in theory’, or that they
are doing ‘real archaeology’ as opposed to those ‘trendy theorists’ is
not telling the whole truth. They are as much theorists as anyone else,
though they might choose to mask their theoretical preconceptions by
labelling them ‘common sense’ or derived from the ‘real world’. In doing
so, I would argue that they are bypassing their responsibility to make
clear the intellectual basis of their work, trying to hide the
theoretical assumptions and approaches that they are in fact using from
critical scrutiny. They are indulging in an intellectual sleight of
hand.

I would go further: pretending to be atheoretical is an attempt to
impose a kind of machismo on to archaeological practice. As we shall see
in chapter 8, archaeological practice is bound up with gendered notions
of what is or is not valuable. There is, at least in the
English-speaking world, always something vaguely effeminate (and
therefore, it is implied, somehow secondary) about talking, reasoning,
discussing, trying to think clearly and explicitly. It is difficult to
see Vin Diesel at a philosophy discussion group. ‘Real men’ don’t do
isms and ologies; they just dig – preferably with a really large, heavy
pickaxe.

I’ve listened long enough to this; you’re descending into abuse now. I’m
willing to concede that we all use theory in some sense, but at the end
of the day it’s the facts, the raw data, that count.

I’m not going to argue now about whether ‘raw data’ really exist
independently of theory – that will come later. Let’s suppose for now
that raw data really do exist. Where does that get us? There is an
infinity of archaeological facts. They are piled in their millions in
museum and laboratory storerooms, in microfiche lists and in tables of
data. Here are some pretty undeniable ‘facts’:

The pot I am holding is 600 years old.

Cuzco is an Inca site in Peru.

Lepenski Vir is a Mesolithic site in Serbia.

Colono Ware pottery has been found in Virginia.

A skeleton was excavated at Maiden Castle, Dorset, England, with an iron
projectile lodged in its spine.

Great Basin projectile points come in different sizes.

The Bronze Age preceded the Iron Age.

Tikal was a major ceremonial centre for the Ancient Maya.

There are usually lots of clay pipe fragments on post-1500 sites. The
Dordogne area of France is full of cave art.

The Great Wall of China is studded with towers.

In Chaco Canyon the ancient pueblos are built of stone.

Do the sentences above add up to a meaningful account of the past, a
coherent archaeological narrative? No. Simply dredging up facts and
waiting for them to cohere into an orderly account of the past is like
putting a number of monkeys in front of typewriters and waiting for them
to come up with the complete works of Shakespeare.

What makes us archaeologists as opposed to mindless collectors of old
junk is the set of rules we use to translate those facts into meaningful
accounts of the past, accounts that ‘make sense’ to us as archaeologists
and (it is hoped) to those who read or engage with our work. And those
rules, whether they are implicit or explicit, are theoretical in nature.
Facts are important, but without theory they remain utterly silent.

Let’s take the example of a distinguished Professor of Archaeology who
claims to be writing in an atheoretical, factual manner using ‘common
sense’, and see what he is really doing. I have selected this text more
or less at random:

It is worth stressing that Romano-British culture was based on a money
economy. In south-eastern Britain coins were indeed in use before the
conquest, but the Romans were responsible for spreading their
circulation throughout the island. The extent to which currency
permeated the whole commercial life of the country, down to the smallest
transactions, may be gauged from the occurrence of coins on the humblest
Romano-British sites and in the remotest part of the province. (Alcock
1976: 174)

One theoretical assumption being made here is that ideas like
‘transaction’ and ‘commercial life’, which only gain their modern
meaning in the later eighteenth century and only arguably so even then,
can easily be applied to Roman Britain without further explication. It
follows that the writer must expect the reader to use his or her modern
experience of transactions and commercial life – market oriented,
largely unconnected with social relations, mediated by a common means of
monetary exchange – to understand the meaning of the sentence. This and
other assumptions may or may not be true, but they are theoretical in
nature.

A second is a ‘middle-range’ assumption: that is, it connects particular
facts on the one hand to general theories on the other (see chapter 4).
Alcock assumes that the relative numbers of coins on different site
types (note the use of an implicit site hierarchy that equates with a
social hierarchy, assumed rather than demonstrated: ‘the humblest
sites’) will accurately reflect the level of what Alcock has termed
‘commercial activity’. Of course, we have already acknowledged that
commercial activity is a much more theoretically complex beast. Again,
this is a theoretical proposition.

Alcock’s account may or may not be ‘true’, a ‘fair picture’ or ‘valid’;
that is a matter for debate among those specializing in this period. It
is certainly deeply theoretical. I could go on analysing the passage for
several more pages, but the point has been made that even the most
apparently straightforward, transparent, ‘clear’ prose conceals
theoretical depths.

All this is very plausible and convincing, but I still dislike theory
intensely. Theorists seem constantly to use incomprehensible jargon,
write in an impenetrable style, and never to get anywhere tangible. You
might persuade me there is a point to theory, but you can’t stop me
being irritated and alienated by what theorists write.

No, I can’t. I get irritated by a lot of theoretical writing, just as I
get irritated by all sorts of archaeological writing. But you’ve raised
a lot of points here that are worth taking in turn.

First, why the ‘jargon’? Long words with specialized meanings are not
confined to archaeological theory. Every area within archaeology has its
own specialist terms of reference; in this sense jargon is in the eye of
the beholder. My familiar terms as a theorist or as a specialist in
vernacular architecture may seem jargon to the environmental specialist,
and those of the environmental specialist may equally seem jargon to me.

There is a deeper problem with the accusation of jargon, however. There
seems to be an assumption behind such an accusation that we can always
express what we want to say in ‘clear, simple and easy’ language. If
only archaeology were so straightforward! If it were, we might have
concluded the archaeological project with a perfect understanding of the
past hundreds of years ago. Archaeology is, if nothing else, about new
ideas about the past. We express ideas in words, and it may be
appropriate to use new words to lead the reader to think in new ways.

Human societies were and are very complex things. As part of the natural
world they share its complexity, and also have a social and cultural
complexity all of their own. We don’t complain when the chemist or
biologist uses technical language incomprehensible to the lay person, so
why should we when the archaeologist does so?

The point I am making here is that archaeologists expect the finer
techniques of archaeological practice to be difficult to comprehend and
master; that is the nature of our discipline. We are prepared to put
effort into mastering the language and practice of stratigraphy, Harris
matrices, seriation, scientific dating techniques, even the
half-intuitive practical skill of differentiating between layers by the
feel of the soil under the trowel. But the ‘theory’ side of what we do –
using the tiny scraps of information thus gained to tell us about the
human past in all its richness and complexity – must be at least equally
difficult as these ‘practical’ tasks. It fact, it must be one of the
most intellectually demanding tasks we as a species have ever set
ourselves.

I think you’re missing the point. The suspicion is that jargon is being
used to mystify, to create a language of exclusion where the outsider is
made to feel small.

There is some justice in this charge. Certain forms of academic rhetoric
are used, intentionally or unintentionally, to set up in-groups and
out-groups. I do not defend such a practice. But again, one hears the
vague murmur of pots calling kettles black; all sectional interests
within and outside archaeology do this. Read any article in Vernacular
Architecture on the classification of scarf-joints with squinted and
pegged abutments, or a medieval historian on enfeoffments and
subinfeudation.

Finally, ‘writing clearly’ assumes that one is writing about something
else. In other words, that there is a real, external world out there
with certain essential, concrete features, features that language can
describe in a more or less clear and neutral manner. Now whether one is
describing the decoration on pots or suggesting what it might have been
like to live in the Bronze Age, this is a highly debatable assumption.
Certainly, in most traditions of Western thought, the past doesn’t exist
anywhere outside our own heads. I have never touched, kicked or felt the
past.

Theory is difficult. If one accepts that all archaeologists are
theorists, then logically it is no more or less difficult than any other
branch of archaeology. But archaeology itself is difficult. We have set
ourselves an incredibly daunting task. We want to understand human
societies that have been dead and gone for thousands of years, whose
customs, values and attitudes were almost certainly utterly different
from our own. We have to do this without talking to the people
themselves. What is more, we want to understand how and why they changed
in the way they did. And the only materials we have to achieve this
immense task are a few paltry scraps of rubbish they left behind on the
way, most of which have long since decayed into dust. Such a task is not
a simple one; the wish that, for all its practical discomforts and
difficulties, it be an intellectually easy one is quite understandable,
but very naïve.

Theory is also difficult for reasons that have less to do with jargon as
such and more to do with academic practice. Practitioners in theory will
often say one thing and do quite another. A theoretical article will
proclaim that it is tackling a problem from a new, exciting perspective
and just churn out the same old approach thinly disguised. Another
article will accuse a rival of a string of theoretical iniquities and
then do exactly the same things itself using different language.

Which leads to my final point: theory is difficult, in the last
analysis, because it requires one to think for oneself. When a student
writes a term paper or essay on southwestern Native American pottery, he
or she can churn out a series of ‘facts’ gleaned from the standard
textbooks. Such a list of facts, or more accurately a repetition of the
textbooks’ narratives, may not get a particularly good mark in the
absence of any critical analysis or independent thinking whatsoever, but
the student will get by. Such an approach comes unstuck, however, in
writing a theory essay. It’s more difficult to regurgitate things copied
out of books and not really deeply understood when one is dealing with
abstract ideas, particularly when one writer disagrees so clearly and
fundamentally with another. Though any crop of undergraduate essays will
demonstrate that it is not impossible.

The literary theorist Jonathan Culler (1997, 16–17) points out that:

theory makes you desire mastery: you hope that theoretical reading will
give you the concepts to organize and understand the phenomena that
concern you. But theory makes mastery impossible, not only because there
is always more to know, but, more specifically and more painfully,
because theory is itself the questioning of presumed results and the
assumptions on which they are based.

Theory, then, involves pain. It involves the deliberate placing of
oneself in a vulnerable position, where the need to think for oneself
makes one’s conclusions always provisional and always open to attack
from others.

Thinking for oneself, however, is something every student of archaeology
(or any other critical discipline for that matter) is (or should be) in
the business of doing. Ultimately, critical evaluation with reference to
evidence is the key-stone of a liberal education. In an age when
education is increasingly seen as a commodity, in which knowledge can,
it is implied, be bought and sold in the marketplace, the idea of an
education as learning the skills of thinking critically and of
evaluating the evidence for and against a particular view is more and
more under attack. Perhaps it is this cultural context that has led to
some of the sharpness of the ritualized denunciations of theory.

Understanding Theory

Well, I still feel pretty dubious about theory, but I’m prepared to go
along with you for a bit. Where do we go from here?

The rest of this book will try to illuminate some of the major trends in
archaeological theory, starting with the 1960s and moving on from there.
To try to make this book as clear as possible, I am going to adopt two
strategies.

First, from time to time I shall talk at length about developments in
associated disciplines and in intellectual thought as a whole. As a
result, long passages and even sub-sections of chapters may seem utterly
irrelevant to the practising archaeologist. The reason I do this is
because archaeology has had a habit of picking up ideas second-hand from
other disciplines. Ideas have been changed, even confused and distorted,
in the process. As a result, it is necessary to go back ‘to source’ to
explain them clearly and to understand precisely how they have been used
and abused by archaeologists. So please bear with the text, plod through
the ‘irrelevant’ material, and I will then try to explain its relevance
to archaeological thought.

Second, I shall look at the development of theory historically, looking
first at the origins of the New Archaeology, then at reactions to it. I
suggest that by understanding the historical context of a set of ideas
such as ‘New Archaeology’ or ‘postprocessual archaeology’, one may more
easily sympathize with its aims and grasp some of its underlying
principles and concerns. By understanding this context we can also put
many of the features of contemporary archaeology in their historical
surroundings rather than place them in a vacuum.

The next chapter will discuss the New Archaeology; the following three
will look at the questions of ‘science’ and ‘anthropology’ that it
raised. The New Archaeology is now over 40 years old, but the
intellectual questions raised by New Archaeologists are, I will suggest,
absolutely central to contemporary archaeological theory and practice.

2

The ‘New Archaeology’

Most archaeologists fall in love with the subject by getting ‘hooked’ on
things. The things vary from case to case – castles, Roman baths, flint
or chert arrowheads, Neolithic pots, Maya temples – but in most cases
the immediate appeal is of mystery and romance, of the past calling to
us through its remains. This romantic appeal is often aesthetic and
sensual as well as intellectual. Archaeologists love clambering round
medieval ruins or handling pottery sherds. We try to persuade ourselves,
however, that these ruins or sherds are mere ‘data’. (One colleague told
me that as a result of the acute boredom of his researches he now
loathes Neolithic pottery to the depths of his soul, but I interpret
this as another, rather twisted form of love.) Artefacts, whether as
small as an arrowhead or as large as a royal palace, fascinate us.

This love of artefacts, in itself, has nothing to do with archaeology in
the strict sense as the study of the past. Artefacts tell us nothing
about the past in themselves. I have stood in the middle of countless
ruins of castles and ancient palaces and listened very carefully, and
not heard a single syllable. Colleagues tell me that they have had
similar distressing experiences with pottery, bones, bags of seeds. They
love handling and experiencing their material, but it remains silent. In
and of itself, it tells them precisely nothing.

Artefacts can’t tell us anything about the past because the past does
not exist. We cannot touch the past, see it or feel it; it is utterly
dead and gone. Our beloved artefacts actually belong to the present.
They exist in the here and now. They may or may not have been made and
used by real people thousands of years ago, but our assessment of the
date of their manufacture and use is itself an assessment that we make,
that is made in the present.

Until scientists invent a time machine, the past exists only in the
things we say about it. Archaeologists choose to ask certain questions
of our material: ‘How many beads were found in this grave?’ ‘Do we see a
shift to intensive exploitation of llamas in the Formative Period?’
‘What was it like to live in the Bronze Age?’ ‘What degree of social
inequality do we see in this period?’ We make general or particular
statements about the past: ‘There was increased use of obsidian in Phase
3B of this site’; ‘There were more elements of cultural continuity
between Mesolithic and Neolithic populations than have hitherto been
assumed’; ‘Gender relations became less equal through time’; ‘The Romans
were a cruel and vicious people’. These are all statements made here,
now, in the present, as I write and you read. They do not belong to the
past.

It is only in works of fiction, or if you believe in ghosts, that past
and present can really be made to collide and merge into each other. It
is striking that many writers have used this collision with great effect
to disturb and horrify the ‘rational’ Western mind (the novels of Peter
Ackroyd are excellent examples of this). More critically, this collision
of past and present is also possible within ‘non-Western’ schemes of
thought, where living cultural traditions may be held to be embodiments
of cultural memory and in which past and present are not so radically
divided; hence in part the conflicts between different cultures over,
for example, excavation and reburial of Native American human remains,
where the belief that time moves in a cycle rather than in a line makes
archaeological excavation a threat to the present through its
‘desecration’ of the past. ‘Indigenous archaeology’ does not, then,
necessarily make this radical division between present and past, a point
we will return to in chapter 12.

Now it is the task of archaeologists to find out about the past. We want
to know what really happened back then. The source materials – stones,
bones, pots – are in the present, and the past that we create is also in
the present. We will never ‘know’ what the past was ‘really like’, but
we all can and do try to write the ‘best’ account we can, an account
that is informed by the evidence that we have and that tries to be
coherent and satisfying to us.

One of the basic problems of archaeology, then, is summarized in figure
2.1. Somehow we have to take the archaeological materials that we have
and through our questioning get them to give us information about the
past. There is a gulf between past and present, a gulf that the
archaeologist has to bridge somehow even if it can never be bridged
securely or definitively. Otherwise we risk a descent into the mindless
activity of simply assembling and collating old objects for their own
sake, rather than as evidence for the past (an activity which has been
derided as ‘mere antiquarianism’, though such a term fails to do justice
to the methods of early antiquarians).

I am labouring this point because it is easy to fall into the trap of
believing that the very physicality of archaeological material will in
itself tell us what the past was like. It will not. Kick a megalith and
it hurts; stand in a castle chamber and you see nothing but medieval
fabric. But kicking the megalith or standing in that cold chamber will
tell you nothing about what the Neolithic or the Middle Ages were
‘really like’, or what processes led to the construction and use of the
megalith or castle. Archaeologists only see megalith and castle in the
present, the here and now. This is a present that is framed by
contemporary ideas, attitudes and assumptions. We see megalith and
castle through our eyes, not the eyes of the prehistoric or medieval
observer.

Figure 2.1 The gulf between present and past

[c02_image001.jpg]

The idea that there is some direct link is closely allied to a belief in
‘common sense’ discussed in the previous chapter and a naïve empiricism,
in which we do not need theory to translate between present and past.
Such a position, as we have seen, is simply not intellectually
sustainable, but is is nevertheless still widespread in areas of
archaeology that have yet to feel the full impact of explicit theory,
and we will return to it again and again in the chapters that follow.

I am also labouring this point because it can be seen as the point of
departure for very different views of archaeological theory. One of the
few areas of common ground for most archaeological theorists is that we
all want to talk about the past, and we all use archaeological material
in the present to do so. But how do we do this? One possible suggestion
is that we should use the methods of the natural sciences on our
material, to try to test alternative hypotheses about past events and
processes against that material and so expand and develop our
understanding. Another possibility is to view artefacts like literary
texts, to ‘read’ them as we would a piece of writing, and so begin to
uncover the rich complexity of past cultural meanings.

There are a multiplicity of other views; and the problem has been
perceived for some centuries. Indeed its origins can be traced directly
to the genesis of modern archaeology in the work of Renaissance
antiquarians. The English humanist Sir Thomas Browne centred his
wonderful mid-seventeenth century essay Hydriotaphia around the
discovery of cremation urns that we now believe to be of Anglo-Saxon
origin, fifth to seventh century ad in date. Browne contrasted the
physical solidity of the urns with the impossibility of understanding
the religious beliefs that they expressed, or even the impossibility of
assigning a date to them (he speculated that they might be Roman: figure
2.2).

The question of how to link present and past, however, surfaced in its
most explicit form with the New Archaeology of the 1960s and 1970s.
Though now over 40 years old, the New Archaeology raised foundational
questions about the nature of archaeology that form the basis of many
theoretical views today.

Culture History

There is an ongoing debate about the nature of archaeological theory
before the New Archaeology. There is not space here to do this debate
justice.

Some historians of archaeology maintain that the century before 1960 was
the ‘long sleep’ of archaeological theory, in which very little explicit
discussion of theory took place. They argue that archaeologists
concentrated on collecting masses of archaeological material within an
unquestioned, generally assumed framework. Others deny this, maintaining
that this period did see lively theoretical debates of various kinds.
They further maintain that the importance of the New Archaeology for the
development of archaeological thought has been grossly overestimated. In
particular, they point to New Archaeology’s origins and impact in
Britain and North America, and its much more limited impact in many
other parts of the world.

I want to set this important historical debate aside, and stress here
that one of the starting points of the so-called ‘New Archaeology’ lay
in what I have discussed above, that is in the notion that mere data
collection – the acquisition of more stuff – does not in itself lead to
a better understanding of the past. David Clarke, one of the principal
proponents of the New Archaeology, started his classic book Analytical
Archaeology with a telling quote from Lewis Carroll:

Now here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the
same place. (The Queen to Alice, Through the Looking-Glass, Chapter 2,
Lewis Carroll, 1832–98.)

Every year produces a fresh crop of archaeological excavations, a new
harvest of prehistoric artefacts. … The archaeologists come and go, new
names and sites outshine the old, while hundreds of years of collected
material overflows and submerges our museum storerooms. At the same time
a relentless current of articles and books describe and label the new
material so that the intrepid archaeologist, by dint of furious
activity, can just maintain his [sic] status quo against the constant
stream of data. However, the nebulous doubt arises in our minds that a
modern empirical discipline ought to be able to aim at more rewarding
results than the maintenance of a relative status quo and a steady flow
of counterfeit history books. (Clarke 1978: 3)

Clarke, then, was not at all sure that the methods of archaeologists
actually give us better and more reliable versions of the past. In his
view, archaeologists seem to dig up more and more things but stay in the
same place in terms of our ideas. Our knowledge of artefacts in the
present grows better and better, but because we do not bridge the gulf
with the past very well, progress in understanding that past does not
follow.

Figure 2.2 Illustration of burial urns from Sir Thomas Browne,
Hydriotaphia (1658). The Latin tag is from the Latin poet Propertius:
‘See, I am a burden which is lifted by five fingers’

[c02_image002.jpg]

What were the theories Clarke was dissatisfied with? In other words, how
did archaeologists before the 1960s, and how do many archaeologists
continuing to work in culture-historical traditions today, translate
archaeological material into statements about the past? It is easy to
over-generalize here, and exceptions can always be found. One of the
basic building-blocks, however, was the idea of an archaeological
culture and what it meant in terms of past human populations. In the
words of Gordon Childe:

We find certain types of remains – pots, implements, ornaments, burial
rites, and house forms – constantly recurring together. Such a complex
of associated traits we shall term a ‘cultural group’ or just a
‘culture’. We assume that such a complex is the material expression of
what today would be called a ‘people’. (Childe 1929: v–vi)

Such an idea of culture has been called normative. That is, it depends
on two assumptions: first, that artefacts are expressions of cultural
norms, ideas in people’s heads, and second, that those norms define what
‘culture’ is. I will give two examples, one from the present and one
from the past.

1 The English are the English because they drink tea, speak English,
don’t eat horse, and queue in an orderly fashion, often for hours
without complaint. This distinguishes them from the French who drink
coffee, speak French, eat horse and do not queue with such equanimity.
(These are, of course, all cultural norms, ideas about what is the right
way to behave, and one can easily see that they are in fact ideals (in
this case crude stereotypes) that don’t necessarily correspond to
reality in every case.)

2 The Linearbandkeramik (LBK) archaeological culture differs from the
Trichterbandkeramik (TRB) in Neolithic Europe: in LBK areas we find
rectangular house forms, pottery decorated with linear designs, a
certain form of arable economy. In TRB areas house form, pottery
decoration and economy are all different. (Again, this is an ideal: not
every TRB or LBK site will share all the features of all the others.)

Such a concept of culture is also polythetic: that is, it depends on a
number of different traits occurring together rather than on one trait
alone. Drinking coffee does not make an English person French; a single
rectangular house does not turn a TRB settlement into an LBK village. It
is a number of traits occurring together, as Childe stressed, that
defines culture. In North America, lists of traits were tabulated and
added up from site to site.

So to summarize, in the traditional view we translate present into past
by collecting artefacts into groups, and naming those groups as
archaeological cultures. We then make the equation between an
archaeological culture and a human culture by making the assumption that
artefacts are expressions of cultural ideas or norms. (It is a tenable
position, sometimes taken, to only go half-way with this process: in
other words, to classify and name archaeological cultures, but to deny
an equation with human cultures.)

This approach, which was termed ‘culture history’ by many, has several
consequences. In the first place, it leads to a tendency to
particularize what archaeologists say about the past rather than
generalize. What this means is that instead of stressing the
similarities between things, one stressed the differences and
particularities between them.

One might, for example, want to generalize between the LBK and TRB, to
stress that these different groups were at the same ‘level’ of social or
economic development. They might both be classified as societies with a
certain level of social ranking, for example, or with certain similar
modes of subsistence economy, or exchange and trade. The
culture-oriented approach, however, tends to direct attention away from
such general features towards what makes the TRB and LBK distinctive,
both from each other and from other cultures. It encourages us to stress
their differences, their diagnostic and peculiar features, their
particular forms of house type and burial rite, the contrast between the
zigging of one form of pottery decoration and the zagging of another
form, rather than those they have in common.

The second consequence of a normative view of culture is that cultures
tend to be viewed as unchanging. To repeat, the normative approach sees
artefacts as expressions of shared ideas. If people in the LBK all
shared the same ideas on how to build houses, make pots and bury their
dead, where did change come from? The easiest way to explain change is
to suggest that it was brought in from outside, from another human
group. Such outside ‘influence’ can be of one of two forms: migration of
peoples, or of diffusion the spread of ideas through contact between
groups.

Figure 2.3 ‘Cultures’ in space and time, from Childe (1929)

[c02_image003.jpg]

Accounts of prehistory written using a culture-historical framework,
then, tend to consist of two elements. The first is a chronological
sequence of cultures, a sort of timetable with culture groups listed
instead of trains. The second is a map full of arrows to indicate the
migration and diffusion of ideas that marked change between cultures
(see for example figures 2.3 and 2.4).

The whole synthesis thus produced tends to be descriptive. That is, it
describes phases and areas of cultural change: this culture followed
that culture, this innovation spread or diffused at that rate. Much
traditional prehistory reads like much traditional history, that is like
a chronicle of events held together by a narrative. Often, there is
little explicit explanation of why this or that pottery style changed,
why this or that culture spread or changed.

Figure 2.4 Piggott’s (1968) view of culture. Piggott’s caption reads:
‘Distribution of mature La Téne culture and influences; 2, Sword
scabbards in Swiss style; 3, British derivatives; 4, Many scabbards’

[c02_image004.jpg]

This descriptive emphasis is one reason why culture-historical
approaches continue to be popular in Classical, medieval and historical
archaeology: in these areas, underlying causes or reasons for change are
often implicitly invoked not from the archaeological material itself,
but from documents and wider historical narratives. Thus, a series of
pieces of art or examples of tombs or architectural features will be
described, with change then being ascribed to the ‘influence of Rome’ or
the ‘spread of Renaissance values’ (see chapter 5).

In some regional and national traditions, for example in much central
and eastern European work, a well-established and continuing approach is
to use typologies and distribution maps to sort artefacts into
archaeological groups and cultures in time and space, without then
making the step of moving outwards to statements about human cultures.
Rather, the archaeological entities thus defined can then be gathered
together and synthesized with evidence from historical linguistics and
historical ethnography to form an overarching discipline of
‘prehistory’, within which archaeology is one of several contributing
techniques, alongside historical ethnography, historical linguistics and
other disciplines such as folklife studies. In North America, the
‘direct historical method’ worked backwards from ‘known’ Native American
groups from ethnography and history, mapping them in terms of
archaeological cultures, and working backwards to a prehistoric origin
point.

Lewis Binford called the culture-historical view of change ‘an aquatic
view of culture’ (Binford 1964, 204). Binford’s image was a caricature,
but like all good caricatures it contained an essence of truth. What
Binford meant was that the traditional archaeologists of his time saw
the map of the prehistoric world as being a little like a large pool of
water. When an innovation was made for whatever reason in a given place,
it would tend to spread through the process of ‘influence’ or diffusion
in all directions, like the ripples from a stone dropped in the pool. In
any given location, then, one sees cross-cutting ‘ripples’ of influence.

I want to repeat that this characterization of culture-historical
archaeology is far too brief, over-simplified and over-generalized.
Suggestions for further accounts are given in the Further Reading
section. In particular, it leans too heavily on what New Archaeologists
such as David Clarke, Colin Renfrew and Lewis Binford said that
traditional archaeology was like. Many have complained that the New
Archaeology set up a distorted image of traditional thought for its own
polemical purposes, a ‘straw person’ that could easily be knocked down.
But if this is what New Archaeology thought traditional thinking was
like, this was what New Archaeology was reacting against.

Origins of the New Archaeology

What, then, was the ‘New Archaeology’? One thing is certain: it is no
longer new. The term ‘New Archaeology’ is applied to a school of thought
that swept through much of Anglo-American archaeology in the 1960s and
early 1970s. It must be seen in the contexts of similar currents of
thought in other disciplines – the New Geography in particular.

The ‘New Archaeology’ was also not a single set of beliefs or theories.
One does not expect all members of a political party to have identical
views on all policy matters; there are rather certain core ideas and
values that inform the approach of any one party. Similarly, under the
banner of the New Archaeology was a very diverse set of archaeologists
with different approaches and beliefs. What united them all was a sense
of dissatisfaction with the way archaeology was going, a sense that
things had to change and that they, as a thrusting new generation of
‘young Turks’, were going to change it.

This dissatisfaction with traditional archaeology was crystallized in
the phrase: ‘we must be more scientific and more anthropological’. In
this one phrase can be seen New Archaeology’s source of disaffection
with what went before, the foundations of its rise, and in my view the
seeds of subsequent developments.

Why was culture history seen as unscientific? We must go back to David
Clarke’s comments on running harder and harder to stay in the same
place. More data do not automatically equate to better ideas about the
past. Archaeologists spend much of their time accumulating more and more
information and presenting that information in ever more detail – what
is sometimes called in German Materialschlacht, or literally ‘war of the
materials’. This does not automatically mean however a better and better
idea of what the past was like, for all the reasons discussed above.
Such studies simply fit more and more archaeological material into the
same existing classification, for example an endless sequence of
cultures. The end result is not necessarily a better or more accurate
picture of the past in any way.

‘Science’, argued the New Archaeologists, uses its data to test
hypotheses about the way the world works, and generalizes from these
conclusions. ‘Science’ progresses; it does not simply collate its facts
into orderly patterns, rather it confronts theory and data in such a way
as to make larger and larger and deeper and deeper its understanding of
the world. The natural sciences, in this view, have a proven record of
developing better and better understandings of the world around us.

Why was culture history seen as not anthropological? Anthropology is the
study of humanity. Traditional archaeologists, in the basic process of
sorting artefacts into groups and cultures, often seemed to ignore human
beings: pottery styles seemed to get up and march around with no
reference to the humans that produced them. In this sense many forms of
culture history can be seen as fetishistic. A fetish is a thing that
comes to stand for something else such as a human or a human group:
traditional archaeologists often seem to spend their time describing the
movement of these things without thinking about the human beings, the
cultural systems, behind them. In the shorthand of culture history,
pottery styles and house types seem to develop little legs and run
around without any help from human beings.

At a deeper level, traditional archaeology was not anthropological in
the sense that there seemed to be no guarantee that the archaeological
‘cultures’ so lovingly produced by culture historians had any
relationship to real human communities. Many New Archaeologists
questioned the link between archaeological cultures – Childe’s recurring
assemblages of traits – and past peoples. Childe himself had come to
doubt whether we really could equate archaeological cultures and past
peoples:

It would be rash to define precisely what sort of social group
corresponds to the archaeologist’s ‘culture’. … Culture and language
need not coincide. (Childe 1942: 26–7)

This is why many New Archaeologists moved away from the normative
conception of culture and looked for other ways to explain the things we
dug up. Clarke’s famous 1973 article claimed that archaeology
experienced a ‘loss of innocence’. The innocent equations archaeology
had made between artefacts, cultures and peoples, or between data and
interpretation more generally, had to be questioned.

To repeat, the New Archaeology must be understood as a movement or mood
of dissatisfaction rather than as a specific set of beliefs. David
Clarke called it ‘a set of questions rather than a set of answers’
(1973). It was certainly marked with revolutionary fervour. Lewis
Binford, its most famous figure, tells a story that sums up both this
fervour and its irritation with the particularism of traditional
methods:

I remember one day when one of the traditional Griffin students had
returned from a field trip to the Upper Illinois valley. He had burst
into the museum with the announcement that he had found a ‘unique’ item,
a negative-painted sherd from the site. Griffin was obviously
stimulated, and Papworth said, ‘Let me see’. He took the sherd, looked
at it and then threw it on the floor and ground it to pieces with the
heel of his shoe. ‘That’s what I think of your “unique” sherd’. Griffin
was in total shock, the student was practically in tears, and I was
laughing inside. (Binford 1972: 130–1)

New Archaeology: Key Points

As the New Archaeology developed, certain key themes came to be repeated
in the writings of its proponents. I will try to summarize these under
seven points. If the descriptions seem brief and over-simplified, many
of these themes will be discussed and developed further in future
chapters. The important thing here is to get an overall sense of the
spirit of the movement.

First, an emphasis on cultural evolution. The word ‘evolution’ has a
series of different though related meanings stretching back to the work
of Darwin in the nineteenth century (see chapters 9 and 10). For some
within New Archaeology, it meant in part that societies could be
classified on a scale from simple to complex. Cultures in this view
evolved from one state to another, for example from ‘band’ societies to
‘tribal’ networks to ‘chiefdoms’. This stress was in part a rejection of
the aquatic view of culture, with its random ripples spreading across
the map. Instead New Archaeologists wanted to look at the internal
dynamics of a society, what was driving its general direction of social
development (the phrase often used was ‘cultural trajectory’).

Evolution was also part of a conscious stress on generalities rather
than particularities. Cultures might differ in their specific forms of
jewellery and house type, one pottery style might zig and the other zag.
But both societies might be comparable on the same level on an
evolutionary scale. So we could generalize about, say, the evolution of
state level societies from chiefdom level societies, without worrying
too much about the different art styles or pottery decoration in each
case.

Figure 2.5 David Clarke’s (1976) systemic view of culture. In language
characteristic of the New Archaeology, Clark’s caption reads: ‘A static
and schematic model of the dynamic equilibrium between the subsystem
networks of a single sociocultural system and its total environmental
system. S_(n) represents the summation of the effects of alien
sociocultural systems connected to S by cultural ‘coactions’ (dashed
lines) and to the environment by ‘interactions’ (solid lines). To set
the model in motion all the components must oscillate randomly along
intercorrelated trending trajectories’

[c02_image005.jpg]

Second, an emphasis on systems thinking (see figure 2.5 and chapter 5).
Culture wasn’t just a mixed bag of different randomly acquired norms, as
culture history had implied; rather it was a system. Lewis Binford
(1964) defined culture as ‘man’s extrasomatic means of adaptation’.

To clarify Binford’s point, other animals are adapted to their
environment through their bodies – the giraffe has a long neck to reach
to the tops of trees in the savannah, polar bears have lots of fur to
deal with the Arctic winter. Humans adapt through culture – the Inuit
wear furs and live in igloos, the !Kung San have an extensive range of
specialized hunting equipment. These cultural adaptations are all
outside (extra) the body (soma), hence ‘extrasomatic’.

So past cultures were:

(a) not just a bag of different, randomly acquired norms – the different
parts of the system were related one to another as part of a functioning
system;

(b) comparable to other kinds of system such as those found in the
physical and animal worlds.

I will talk more about systemic approaches in chapter 5. But note here
that it allowed New Archaeology to do two things. It firstly helped the
stress on generalization. Different cultures may have had different
pottery styles and burial rites, but the underlying social system could
be shown to have underlying similarities (they were both more or less
complex, practised similar systems of gift exchange even if the specific
goods traded were different, and so on).

It secondly helped New Archaeologists to be more optimistic about what
archaeology could achieve. One of the least attractive features of
traditional archaeology was its implied pessimism: we can never
reconstruct the religious or social life of past peoples, we can only
build chronologies. Christopher Hawkes famously wrote of seven levels of
inference in archaeology, ranging from technology and subsistence to the
almost unknowable areas of society and religion. James Deetz questioned
this:

Stress on the essential interrelatedness of cultural systems allows us
to reach understandings of many aspects from a relative few … this
certainty is at least a partial answer to the problems posed by the
incompleteness of the archaeological record. (Deetz 1972: 112)

Third, if culture was adaptive, it was adaptive to an external
environment. For the archaeologist Kent Flannery, we were not just
looking at objects and trying to learn about human cultures through
them; we were trying to reconstruct the whole ecological system behind
both ‘the Indian and the artefact’ (1973b). This theoretical stress on
the importance of the external environment led to interest in cultural
materialism (in which the material world is seen as more important than
the mental world), cultural ecology, and modelling of the subsistence
economy. Here, new theoretical attitudes went hand-in-hand with the new
scientific techniques that were developed in the postwar period: faunal
analysis, palaeoethnobotany, carbon-14 dating, dendrochronology, and so
on.

Fourth, there was stress on a scientific approach. New Archaeologists
saw traditional archaeology as modelling itself on the techniques of
traditional history, with cultures taking the place of historical actors
and the aim being the reconstruction of individual events in time. This
may not have been a fair characterization, either of what archaeologists
actually did or what traditional historians actually do, but it led New
Archaeologists in part to embrace Science as the way forward. According
to Watson, Redman and LeBlanc in their Explanation in Archaeology: An
Explicitly Scientific Approach (1971), one index of the progress of
archaeology is the extent to which hypotheses are scientifically tested.

Fifth, there was stress on the idea of culture process. The idea of
‘process’ was central to New Archaeology and remains absolutely central
to much of archaeological theory, but it is a difficult idea to grasp.
It involves several related themes that have already been touched on: we
want to explain rather than be merely descriptive – to ask ‘why?’ rather
than merely ‘when?’; we want to look at the underlying process rather
than the ‘noise’ on top; we want to look at change in the long term. I
will examine the concept of process in more detail in chapter 5.

Many New Archaeologists contrasted culture process to culture history.
In this view, traditional history simply described a set of more or less
random political events such as battles and births and deaths of
monarchs without ever really explaining anything. By substituting
process for history, the long-term trends or processes beneath the
surface of such events became the important objects of study.

Sixth and more generally, there was a trend to attempt to become more
explicit about one’s biases. A good scientist, argued New
Archaeologists, does not use unspoken and implicit assumptions; he or
she makes clear their aims and interests. Much of the New Archaeology
was concerned with making what had been unspoken formally outlined. A
good example is the technique of typology, or the classification of
objects according to their changing form. It has long been accepted that
one could classify objects, and that this classification has something
to do with chronological order: archaeologists make statements like
‘pottery vessels get baggier through time’, or ‘this jewellery style
goes out of fashion in this period’ as a matter of course. But the
criteria by which a typologist suggests one piece of jewellery or
architectural style is ‘early’ and another one is ‘late’ are rarely
clearly spelt out (in fact, they often tend to be implicitly derived
from ideas and concepts developed by nineteenth-century art historians).

In his book Analytical Archaeology, David Clarke used many of the
concepts of traditional archaeology – typology, assemblage and culture
for example – but discussed openly, explicitly and at length how they
should be defined. For Clarke, the need to be explicit and precise in
one’s terms to replace ‘the murky exhalation that passes for
“interpretative thinking” in archaeology’ was one of the main thrusts of
the New Archaeology.

A related aspect of making one’s biases explicit was problem
orientation, or the belief that one should survey and dig sites, or do
research more generally, with clear research questions in mind. Again,
this linked in with being scientific – the scientist tested specific
hypotheses, he or she brought specific questions to the data. In chapter
3, we will see how asking specific questions or testing specific
hypotheses was central to the idea of archaeology as a science.

A seventh and final concern of New Archaeology was the understanding of
variability. What this meant was a basic understanding of our material
in statistical terms. Previous archaeologists had often concentrated on
the biggest and best sites, or the most beautiful artefacts. New
Archaeologists pointed out that we couldn’t understand, say, a major
urban civilization without looking at its rural infrastructure (the
importance of looking at the whole system again), and we couldn’t
understand the rural infrastructure without knowing just how many rural
sites there were on the ground. So to really get to grips with
understanding that civilization, the archaeologist might want to forgo
digging yet another elite site with lots of pretty, exotic artefacts and
instead concentrate on systematic survey of ordinary farmsteads. The
finds might be less spectacular, but the understanding of the settlement
system would be much greater.

To understand variability, New Archaeologists looked much more
critically at sampling theory and techniques. To be sure of variability,
at the very least we had to be sure we were looking at a representative
sample of sites. Kent Flannery told a memorable parable of a
Mesoamerican archaeologist who only stopped to record archaeological
sites if he was forced to put his Jeep into first gear to get over the
top of them. In response, New Archaeologists explored methods of
sampling randomly or at least systematically.

Many of the worst aspects of the traditional attitudes the New
Archaeology castigated still survive and indeed flourish today. A few
years ago I remember asking a prominent, senior scholar who had written
several influential books on traditional architecture how many houses of
a certain date and type there were in a certain county of England. ‘Oh’,
he said, ‘an awful lot’. Yes, but how many? Tens, hundreds, thousands?
‘Well, a lot, but I really couldn’t put a figure to it’ came the reply.
And how many were there in an adjacent area? ‘Oh, not many at all …’.
And what, statistically, was the proportion of Type A houses to Type B
houses in the two areas? ‘Ah …’. And yet you are quite confident in
saying that Type A houses are more frequently found than Type B houses
in this area but not that, and we can indeed go on from this observation
to draw conclusions about relative levels of wealth in the two areas?
‘Oh yes, that’s quite clear …’. One does not have to be a paid-up New
Archaeologist to see that such reasoning is an insecure foundation for
any understanding of the archaeological record.

I’m a bit sceptical about all this. In the first place, archaeologists
before New Archaeology were not the dry, traditional dullards that New
Archaeologists made out. They did many of these things already. Look,
for example, at Grahame Clark’s work at Star Carr, where environmental
analysis was used in the 1950s. Or Alfred Kidder’s work in Mesoamerica
and the American Southwest. And Gordon Childe can hardly be accused of
many of the sins the New Archaeology tried to pin on culture historians.
His books Man Makes Himself and What Happened in History are full of
dynamic pictures – they try to explain things, they deal with underlying
processes …

Your analysis contains a lot of truth. Traditional archaeology is not
necessarily the narrowly descriptive, sterile pursuit that New
Archaeology painted it. It can be argued, for example, that traditional
accounts of migration and diffusion do address ‘why?’ questions rather
than simply describe the data. There are ongoing debates within such
traditions on the concept of ethnogenesis and the nature of historical
change. Additionally, books like Childe’s The Prehistory of European
Society presented a model in which Indigenous cultures were seen as
creative and dynamic and in which modified diffusion played a key role
in explanation. Again, in North America the ‘culture history’ model was
in part caricatured by New Archaeology.

Nevertheless New Archaeology’s criticisms were pertinent. For our
purposes in trying to understand where theory is today, it isn’t of
primary importance to ascertain whether New Archaeology was accurate in
its criticisms; we want to understand why New Archaeology developed in
the way it did. Our all-too-brief sketch serves for this purpose.

It is equally true that much of New Archaeology was not really new. Like
so many theoretical movements in archaeology, it borrowed from other
disciplines. The work of the cultural anthropologist Leslie White was
especially influential. His 1949 book The Science of Culture stressed
the need for a scientific approach and the idea of culture as a system.
Again, another anthropologist, Julian Steward, had stressed cultural
ecology and adaptation in his work. Binford’s early work makes clear his
profound debt to both White and Steward. Finally, stress on systems
thinking owed much to Walter Taylor’s emphasis on what he called a
‘conjunctive approach’ in his 1948 A Study of Archeology. But don’t
forget that White, Steward and Taylor were in a minority within their
own disciplines. White in particular was writing against the orthodox
cultural anthropology of his time when his thinking was adopted by
archaeologists.

The New Archaeology, particularly in its stress on anthropology, can be
particularly associated with the New World. In Britain New
Archaeologists such as Clarke and Renfrew had a great impact;
Kristiansen, Randsborg and others applied New Archaeology to
Scandinavian archaeology, and there was some take-up in other areas of
Europe, for example Spain. Overall, how ever, the impact of the New
Archaeology was not as revolutionary or as hard-hitting as in North
America. I suggest there were several reasons for this.

One is the institutional set-up of archaeology. In North America, there
are few Departments of Archaeology. The majority of academic
archaeologists have posts within Departments of Anthropology, and form a
‘minority’ within those departments. Some archaeologists are hosted in
Classics departments, but (with exceptions) these archaeologists are not
always as engaged in theoretical discussion as their ‘anthropological’
counterparts. By contrast, in Britain Departments of Archaeology are
largely separate institutions, or are more closely linked to Departments
of History. In continental Europe, archaeologists again often find
themselves within Institutes of Pre- and Proto-History rather than
having primary links with anthropology, though links with ethnography
and folklife of European peoples are often found.

Hence, North American graduate students intending to do their PhDs on an
archaeological topic and go on to an academic career will generally be
expected to read extensively and take courses in anthropological theory,
where they will encounter many of the ideas of evolution and
cross-cultural comparison discussed above. By contrast, a European
graduate student will probably have less theoretical training in general
and often very little encounter with anthropological method.

Underlying this institutional difference are different perceptions of
the past. American archaeology is split between study of ‘native’ New
World cultures and the Old World and the ‘historical archaeology’ of its
colonies, to the extent that Native American archaeology is often spelt
differently – ‘archeology’. The anthropologist Franz Boas played a
pivotal role in keeping archaeology within the ambit of anthropology in
North America in the earlier twentieth century. Now anthropology has
traditionally been concerned with ‘other cultures’ rather than with
‘us’. As relatively few Native Americans were employed within American
archaeology until very recently, New World cultures have been perceived
very much as ‘them’. In the past, archaeological remains such as burial
mounds and cliff dwellings had been interpreted as evidence for the Lost
Tribes of Israel or analogous groups, it being assumed that Native
Americans were too ‘primitive’ to have produced such cultures; but such
theories had been completely abandoned by the archaeological profession
by the 1960s. This situation is changing, for example with increased
recruitment and training of Native Americans as archaeologists and with
a changing political and cultural context (see chapter 12), but this
institutional and cultural history remains powerful in determining
archaeology’s position in North American cultural and intellectual life.

For British and other European archaeologists the situation is
different. The prehistoric site of Stonehenge is used as a symbol of
‘English Heritage’, though it was built 2–3,000 years before the
‘English’, according to traditional history, arrived on what is now the
English coast. The British, like Europeans generally, perceive
prehistoric archaeology as part of ‘their’ past, part of their
‘heritage’. Right or wrong, this perception has meant that both past and
present archaeological interpretation has been thoroughly permeated with
nationalist concerns, often of a politically unpleasant variety. Also,
prehistory and history are seen as much more of a continuum: Neolithic
Greece leads to the Minoans and Myceneans, and Iron Age studies blend
into the Roman and early medieval periods. There is therefore not such a
radical divide between prehistoric and historical archaeology.

So British archaeologists tend not to worry so much about the need to
make explicitly theoretical generalizations in order to justify their
work, and are much more comfortable with the idea of archaeology as the
‘handmaiden of history’. New Archaeology had even less impact in
continental Europe than it did in Britain, again for complex historical
reasons. It also had less influence on the study of later periods: ‘New
Archaeology’ had a major impact on the study of European prehistory,
arguably most of all on the Palaeolithic, but less on Roman, medieval
and post-medieval archaeology, to the extent that I would characterize
the majority of European medieval and later archaeology as remaining
culture-historical in method, tone and emphasis.

I think that there was also a practical element in the differential
impact of New Archaeology in different areas of the globe. Stand in the
middle of the Arizona desert and the need for sampling theory,
understanding of variability, and so on is all too clear. By contrast,
British and other European landscapes are cramped; they have been
intensively settled for millennia, and intensively studied for
centuries. Most of their basic units (administrative boundaries, patches
of woodland) are irregular in shape and are themselves hundreds if not
thousands of years old. As a result, many of the techniques of New
Archaeology such as sampling theory make clear sense as practical
strategy in the Arizona desert, but are counter-intuitive in the densely
settled palimpsest that is Wessex.

Anyway, what happened to all this youthful enthusiasm? I bet it didn’t
get very far.

Many of the ways in which New Archaeology developed will be picked up in
later chapters. One thing that inevitably happened is that New
Archaeologists got older. From being pushy young research students
intent on causing a fuss, they became tenured lecturers and professors
with job security, positions on powerful committees and funding bodies
and supervising pushy graduate students of their own. Indeed, many of
the key youthful figures in New Archaeology fostered groups of students
who are today’s generation of senior academics.

As New Archaeology got older and developed as a body of thought it
became known as processualism. Processualism is so called because of its
stress on culture process (point five above); the term will be discussed
further in chapter 5.

Case Study: The Enigma of the Megaliths

An excellent example of the way New Archaeology led to new ways of
thinking about the past was that of megalithic tombs in Western Europe.
These are burial monuments built with large stones, within which
collective burials often took place.

Traditional studies of megaliths had concentrated on dating, typology
and diffusion. Scholars such as Glyn Daniel and P. Bosch-Gimpera had
defined megaliths into sub-groups based on their position around the
Western Mediterranean and Atlantic seaboard (figure 2.6). They tried to
date these groups in the absence of scientific dating techniques such as
carbon-14; the only way of doing this was to look for similarities in
the form of the monuments and assume that similarities had been produced
through contact. Ultimately, then, megaliths could be dated by reference
to their presumed ancestors in the Mediterranean such as the Maltese
temples. These could then be cross-dated in turn with reference to the
literate civilizations of the Eastern Mediterranean. There was a clear
link here between theory (the importance of typology and the dominant
idea of diffusion) and archaeological practice (the need to set up a
working chronology, without which we couldn’t really say anything at
all).

Colin Renfrew questioned this work. He used the tree-ring calibration of
radiocarbon dates to show that the megaliths on the Atlantic seaboard
were in fact much older than their supposed ‘origins’ in the
Mediterranean. Some scholars responded by simply reversing the arrows so
that the ‘influence’ went in the opposite direction, but Renfrew
suggested that instead of trying to prove or disprove diffusionary
links, we should instead ask why the monuments were built in the first
place. In short, we should look less at chronology and diffusion and
more at the underlying process involved. Or to put it another way, we
should not be content with dating and describing; we should try to
explain the phenomenon of the megaliths.

Figure 2.6 Glyn Daniel’s (1941) view of megalith origins

[c02_image006.jpg]

Renfrew suggested that megaliths might be territorial markers. He
pointed out that whereas early agricultural communities moving from east
to west across Europe had plenty of land, being able to simply expand
westwards into new territory when things got cramped, when such peoples
reached the Atlantic coast there was nowhere left to go. Additionally,
these areas also had a high population level in the preceding Mesolithic
period, populations who would also be pressing for territory. In such a
situation he suggested that different communities would be competing for
land. The megalithic tombs, then, would mark out the land of particular
groups, by reference to the ancestors buried within them.

Figure 2.7 Renfrew’s megaliths on Rousay, Orkney Islands, showing
‘distribution of chambered tombs in relation to modern arable land
(stippled), with hypothetical territorial boundaries’ (Renfrew 1973a)

[c02_image007.jpg]

So Renfrew’s arguments:

1 explained rather than merely described the existence and distribution
of megaliths;

2 used ethnographic analogies from societies assumed to be at a similar
level of social development to strengthen his argument – monumental
structures in Polynesia, linked to particular descent groups in
competition over land;

3 stressed environmental factors and hence adaptation to the environment
– the shortage of land;

4 saw megaliths not as one diagnostic trait to define cultures, but as
one functional element of a total cultural system;

5 ‘tested’ his model – by drawing hypothetical divisions between
megaliths on the Scottish island of Orkney, Renfrew claimed to
demonstrate that the megaliths were spaced at the centre of possible
territories, each territory being of approximately equal size (figure
2.7).

Conclusion

If the New Archaeology was a revolution, it suffered the same
fundamental problems of any revolution. New Archaeology had a double
slogan: science and anthropology. But like many revolutionary slogans,
discord and disagreement broke out when archaeologists tried to work out
in practice what those slogans really meant. In many ways, the ongoing
story of archaeological theory to the present day can be seen as the
attempt to deepen our understanding of these slogans, and to ‘roll out’
the concerns of New Archaeology beyond their original applications.

The next three chapters will deal with these questions and bring the
reader into the present. Chapter 3 will ask: What do we really mean by
the term ‘science’? Chapter 4 will ask: What do we really mean by the
word ‘testing’ how do we evaluate archaeological arguments? Chapter 5
will ask: How do societies work, what do we really mean by
‘anthropology’?

We shall see in the process that debates within archaeological theory
mirror debates in the human sciences such as history, sociology,
cultural anthropology, politics and economics very closely. Questions of
science, testing and how societies really work are central to the human
sciences as a whole.

3

Archaeology as a Science

There are both positive and negative views of science. In the positive
view, science is wonderful. It has given us modern medicine, transport,
a level of material affluence few people would wish to give up. We know
the way the world is because scientists tell us so. Scientists are so
powerful, hold such a grip over our beliefs and sentiments, that we
believe them even when our strongest intuitions tell us otherwise, when
boarding an aeroplane for example. But in the negative view science can
be disturbing and alarming. It can be dangerous, it can offend human
sensibilities. Science has moral limits: look what happened to Doctor
Frankenstein (figure 3.1).

Both positive and negative views of science are culturally loaded. To
clarify, Science is viewed in a certain way within Western culture. The
sociologist Auguste Comte suggested that science is a central
institution of authority in the modern world, just as the Catholic
Church acted as an authority for the people of medieval Europe.

Modern Western society is partly based on the idea of Science with a
capital S. The term ‘scientific’ is used as a form of approbation, and
that of ‘unscientific’ as one of abuse. But Westerners are often less
sure what they actually mean by the term ‘Science’, which I have
dignified here with a capital S to distinguish the image from the
reality. What is Science, are there different forms of Science, and to
which forms (if any) can or should archaeology strive to approximate?

This was one of the problems that faced the New Archaeology as it
matured, and it is a problem which archaeology still faces today. As we
have seen, ‘we must be more scientific’ was a good slogan, and
concentrated (and continues to concentrate) appropriate criticism on
limitations in the approaches and methods of culture historians. But New
Archaeology found that deciding what it actually meant by its slogan was
more difficult.

One of the ways in which archaeology has become more ‘scientific’ in the
last 50 years is in its techniques. The period after the Second World
War saw an explosion in the number and range of ‘science-based’
techniques used in archaeology. These included the use of computers, the
study of environmental remains, pollen diagrams, dating techniques such
as carbon-14 and dendrochronology, soil geomorphology, paleopathology,
and so on. Though I did not discuss these at any length in the last
chapter, for many people, such as David Clarke, this development and
growth in use of scientific techniques was a central part of the New
Archaeology. In the last decade, advances in DNA research, chemical
analysis of human and animal bones, advanced geophysical techniques,
geographical information systems, virtual reality, and many other
developments have continued to unfold.

Figure 3.1 Lon Chaney, Jr (left) and Lionel Atwill in Man Made Monster
(1941, Universal): still from Everson, W. K. 1974 Classics of the Horror
Film (Secaucus, NJ, The Citadel Press), 152–3

[c03_image001.jpg]

This development of scientific techniques, and their place as an ever
more important part of the discipline, has led to a problem of technical
specialization. An archaeologist in 1950 had to have an understanding of
some statistics, and the principles of geology. Sixty years later, she
or he does not necessarily have to know the practical details of a
technique, but does have to know how to use a pollen diagram, how to
manipulate statistical packages on computers, how to interpret and
understand the significance of a radiocarbon determination or a
tree-ring date, and at the very least how to understand and use the
findings of a range of other very complex and specialized techniques. As
a result, it can be argued that archaeology is a much more fragmented
discipline, and less of a unified and homogenous community, than it was
50 years ago.

In this sense the general atmosphere of the practice of archaeology has
become more ‘scientific’. Where archaeologists used to work in dusty
backrooms full of old junk, their offices are often now part of suites
of laboratories (often taken over second-hand from other, more
‘respectable’ physicists, biologists or chemists who have moved into
newer, smarter accommodation). In many universities, particularly in
North America, smart white labcoats have succeeded frayed tweed jackets
with elbow-patches as the uniform of the academic archaeologist. Perhaps
more importantly, key career targets for many academics are now articles
in peer-reviewed scientific journals as much as the more traditional
synthetic monograph or site report.

The growth of ‘science’ has led to changes in the pattern of funding of
academic archaeology. In the USA, archaeology is funded under the aegis
of the National Science Foundation. In Britain and in much of the rest
of Europe, funding is often predominantly ‘humanistic’ (for example,
through the British Arts and Humanities Research Council) or tied to
‘culture’ or ‘heritage’, though the situation varies widely in different
national contexts and is subject to rapid change.

In its essentials, however, the use of scientific techniques does not in
itself imply the use of ‘science’ as a distinctive approach to finding
out about the past. David Clarke wrote that the use of scientific
techniques ‘no more make archaeology into a science than a wooden leg
turns a man into a tree’ (Clarke, 1978: 465). For the traditional
archaeologist Jacquetta Hawkes, archaeology remains essentially a
humanistic, not a scientific, pursuit: ‘however scientific the methods
employed, the final aims are historical’ (Hawkes, 1968: 257).

To clarify, archaeologists use an increasing battery of techniques to
assist in dating, the environment, geophysical techniques, and so on.
These techniques have given us more and more data of potential use in
the study of the past. But we are still left with the gulf between
present and past discussed in chapter 2 and presented in figure 2.1.
‘Science-based’ techniques accumulate even more data in the present. If
that gulf between present and past remains unbridgeable, then the
statements archaeologists make about the past remain ‘unscientific’
however clean their white coats are or how much money they spend on the
many machines that go ping! in laboratories. If, on the other hand, the
gulf can be bridged securely, using the methods of the natural sciences,
then archaeology really can be called scientific, regardless of whether
or not archaeologists wear white coats and use lots of expensive
equipment.

Definitions of Science

New Archaeology suggested the use of ‘science’ as the solution to the
problem of inference, discussed in the last chapter. If archaeologists
have no reliable means of assessing how valid their arguments really
were, it is only natural to look at how natural scientists do it. The
natural sciences of physics, chemistry, biology, after all, appear in
the view of many to have demonstrable and indeed spectacular success in
terms of their ability to accurately describe and explain the world when
compared for example to other forms of thought such as magic or
mysticism.

Such an argument is reinforced by the disciplinary success of science in
the ‘real world’. Whatever one’s views of science as a theory, there is
no disputing its long-term success as a discipline. Scientists are often
well funded compared to humanistic scholars, and often appear to have
the ear of government and an influential role in setting public policy.

In one sense there is no argument about whether archaeologists should be
scientific. If science is about the rational accumulation of knowledge,
assessed in rigorous, systematic ways, then all archaeologists would
consider themselves to be scientists. (At least, archaeologists would
all claim to be scientists, though our opponents always seem to be
lacking in rigour, system or method.) Science in this broad sense is
often referred to by the German term Wissenschaft. Even the most fervent
opponent of ‘archaeologyas-science’ would probably consider themselves
scientists in this sense.

Positivism

There are, however, more narrow definitions of what science is (figure
3.2). One of these definitions is called positivism, which is another
word with several meanings. Theorists confusingly use the word
‘positivism’ in different senses in different contexts. Here, I shall
isolate two.

1 A set of beliefs about how we should conduct scientific enquiry

These beliefs include:

(a) The idea that scientists should separate theory from method, however
method is defined. If we have two or more competing theories to explain
a phenomenon, then we have to have some kind of independent and neutral
method to judge which theory is the better. It is no good trying to
conduct such an independent test if our method is not independent and
neutral, but is predicated on one of the theories being true. This is
why many archaeologists would vehemently oppose the very broad
definition of theory I adopted in chapter 1 as ‘the order you put facts
in’, as it does have the implication of making a clear and strict
separation of this kind difficult if not impossible.

Figure 3.2 A selective diagram showing some schools within the
philosophy of science

[c03_image002.jpg]

(b) The separation of the context of the discovery of an idea from the
context of its evaluation. It doesn’t matter whether the law of gravity
came to us sitting under an apple tree or in a book-lined office or in a
drugcrazed hallucination; what is important is that the existence of
such a law is evaluated scientifically separately from this context.
Again, we might get some perfectly good ideas about processes in the
prehistoric past from comparative ethnography or from a novel or a
dream; what is important, in this view, is that we then test the ideas
against the archaeological record to see whether they are valid or not.

Archaeologists will often claim, therefore, that they are using a
particular idea or model only for heuristic or learning purposes; that
is, they find the model of value in throwing up new hypotheses or
possible interpretations. They might well insist that such hypotheses or
interpretations need then to be formally tested or evaluated before they
can be considered to be of lasting value.

(c) A generalizing explanation is the only valid form. Here, generality
is closely linked to the importance of predictability and testability.
Results have to be predictable and repeated for scientific validity.
Scien tists can test the law of gravity by observing apples dropping
from trees again and again and again. The law of gravity is framed as a
general proposition that has predictable consequences, all other things
being equal.

If an explanation is not generalizing, if it cannot suggest a consistent
pattern of results, it will not be predictable and therefore will not be
amenable to testing again and again.

(d) Untestable statements are outside the domain of science. In less
extreme forms of positivism, this does not mean that untestable
statements are unimportant. For example, moral and metaphysical
questions may be untestable but central to our lives. Whether God exists
or whether slavery or child labour are morally wrong are clearly
important issues for individuals to discuss and act upon as human beings
and communities; but they are not scientifically testable one way or the
other. Science therefore, in this view, has nothing to say about them.

(e) It follows from (d) that scientific thought should be independent of
value judgements and political action. The threat to use nuclear weapons
or investment in countries with repressive regimes may or may not be
morally or politically wrong; we all, scientists or non-scientists, make
value judgements concerning these matters as human beings living in the
world today. But the scientist cannot bring these judgements into the
methods of his or her work. She or he might comment on them in other
spheres, even campaign against nuclear weapons or repressive regimes,
but must draw a clear line between (morally neutral) scientific
knowledge and moral judgement and action.

Positivism in this sense has tended to be linked with a specific method
of testing propositions, called the Hypothetico-deductive-nomological
model, or HDN for short. The HDN model suggests that one proceeds as a
scientist by taking a specific hypothesis and testing it. The deductions
one makes from the result of the test should then be used to produce
generalizing explanations (‘nomothetic’ or ‘nomological’ means
generalizing). The need to test specific hypotheses, rather than just
dig sites because we might find something interesting or because they
are particularly big or beautiful, was an issue discussed in the last
chapter.

But positivism also, confusingly, has a second set of meanings attached
to it.

2 The belief that the social sciences, including archaeology, should try
to follow the historical path of development of the natural sciences

This argument was advanced for sociology by the nineteenth century
French social philosopher Auguste Comte, who was one of the key figures
in the development of the human sciences in general. Comte looked to the
example of biology. Before the eighteenth century, biology had, in
Comte’s view, been a speculative and unsystematic pursuit at a time when
the scientific techniques and methods of physics and chemistry were
already established. By modelling its disciplinary rules on the ‘hard
sciences’ of physics and chemistry, however, biology had freed itself
from the shackles of prescientific beliefs and become a rigorous
science. Comte suggested that social sciences like sociology could
follow a similar route, moving from their present unscientific state to
that of a natural science.

New and processual archaeology can clearly be identified with much of
the agenda outlined above. New Archaeology tried to generalize; it tried
to adopt a HDN model of testing; its whole project was that of Comte’s,
that of leading archaeology along an analogous path to that of the
natural sciences to a mature, rigorous, self-critical discipline. For
David Clarke (1973), this was part of archaeology’s ‘loss of innocence’.

Examples

For New Archaeology, then, and for much of ‘processual archaeology’
today, we should adopt a broadly positivist definition of what we do. We
should be trying to test or evaluate hypotheses about the past, and to
draw generalizations from those hypotheses.

Such a model might proceed as follows:

1 Hypothesis: early states involve differential access to resources, in
other words that élites have greater access to basic goods (a hypothesis
suggested maybe by political anthropologists).

2 Test: dig a cemetery from an early state society and chemically
analyse the human bones.

3 Deduction: the élite ate more meat, so we deduce that they did indeed
have greater access to nutrition.

4 Generalization: early states do have such differential access, subject
to further testing, other examples from other cultures at the same phase
of social development, etc.

Another example might be hunter-gatherers and social complexity:

1 Hypothesis: that hunter-gatherer groups adapt to marginal environments
in part through greater economic specialization and social complexity
(suggested perhaps by study of modern ethnographies).

2 Test: take a marginal environment such as Upper Palaeolithic Europe in
the last Ice Age, and look for different types of site suggesting task
differentiation, the presence or absence of trade goods suggesting
social alliances, etc.

3 Deduction: that social alliance and logistical hunting strategies are
responses to harsher climates.

4 Generalization: there is a positive correlation between increasingly
marginal environments and greater social complexity.

Note that in both these examples there is a tendency to generalize.
General statements tend to emerge from the discussion: for example, that
increasing complexity of trading networks tends to be linked to élites
and thus to development of social ranking, whether this is in late
prehistoric Europe, Mesoamerica or Polynesia. Look at the titles of some
typical edited volumes in the processual mould, in which different
articles often based on data sets from around the world and different
time periods focus on certain processes which are held to be general and
cross-cultural: Ranking, Resource and Exchange … Specialisation,
Exchange and Complex Societies … Heterarchy and the Analysis of Complex
Societies …

Such generalizations are what is meant by a ‘softer’ approach to
covering laws than that taken in other areas of the natural sciences. In
its first phases, some New Archaeologists searched for ‘laws’ of human
behaviour, on the model of the hard sciences. It has proven to be very
difficult to come up with ‘laws’ for past human behaviour akin to the
law of gravity (we will discuss the attempt to create a unified field
with biology, itself a ‘softer’ science than chemistry or physics,
through the application of Darwinian ideas in chapter 10). This does not
mean, however, that the production of generalizations about past human
behaviour is necessarily an invalid or an unimportant goal – indeed, for
the reasons discussed above, for a discipline that sees itself as a
science in which propositions are testable, generalization or general
theory has to be a central component of archaeology.

Objections to ‘Science’

We noted that if part of the appeal of ‘Science’ comes from its cultural
value in modern society, so opposition to ‘Science’ is similarly
culturally loaded. For some, archaeology can never be scientific;
rather, it is a humanistic discipline. Rather than being about white
labcoats and generalizations, it is about what it means to be a
civilized human being. Archaeology in this view is a noble, aesthetic,
romantic pursuit into the essence of humanity and civilization,
untainted by the vulgarities of labcoats and test-tubes. In some
conceptions of this view, human beings are special because they are
unique and unpredictable: they simply can not be generalized about or
subsumed in statistics. Further, many of the things that are most
‘distinctively human’ and therefore most worthy of humanistic study
(great art and literature, for example) are precisely those that in this
view are least amenable to scientific enquiry.

Such a view is easy to ridicule, and it certainly does not stand up to
more than a few seconds of critical thought (if humans really were
unique and unpredictable, opinion polls would produce completely random
results and any attempt at social or economic policy by government
agencies would start and end in chaos), but is a very popular and
emotionally powerful one. Human beings often like to think that they are
unique, are beyond statistics; but wishing something does not make it
true.

Such a view, or a more sophisticated version of it, is nevertheless
foundational to many elements of modern archaeology. For example,
Classical archaeology was in its historical origins an outgrowth of the
study of the ‘Classics’. The texts, history and monuments of Greece and
Rome were studied because they were held to constitute the foundations
of civilized and humane behaviour, for example in the origins of the
idea of democracy in fifth century BC Athens. Further, for men of the
upper classes in the Renaissance, Classical texts provided role models –
how great men should act, what it meant to be civilized. Very few
Classical archaeologists would subscribe to such an unmodified view of
the rationale of their discipline today, but elements of such a view are
nevertheless still very powerful, in that they are inscribed into the
institutional set-up and identity of Classics and of Classical
archaeology, for instance in the separation between centres of ‘pre- and
proto-history’ and ‘Classical archaeology’ in many institutions in
continental Europe.

A series of more intellectually powerful objections to the positivist
conception of archaeology-as-science are commonly brought up. I shall
deal with them in turn.

1 Science is based on testing and observation of results. The past,
however, is dead and gone. We will never be able to directly observe it.
Can we ever test propositions about the past as we can (it is argued) in
science? Possibly not; this is a question I shall address below and more
particularly in the next chapter. It is worth noting that archaeology in
this respect shares some of the interpretative problems with other
sciences that interpret phenomena observed now in terms of processes and
events that occurred in the very distant past. Geology interprets data
observed today (layers, sediments) in terms of processes that happened
millions of years ago; astronomy observes phenomena many light-years
away. In both cases, it is possible to argue that ‘direct’ observation
of phenomena is problematic.

2 Atoms, chemicals and even biological organisms can be seen as objects,
insensate things that behave in predictable ways. Human behaviour,
however, can be seen as purposive or intentional. In other words, human
actions can only be fully explained by reference to the ideas and
intentions that humans have. Ideas and intentions do not have any
physical existence (except, arguably, as electronic traces in the
brain); they only exist as thoughts, between our ears. They can not be
directly observed or ‘measured’ by the archaeologist. Interpretation in
archaeology is therefore, in this view, always hermeneutic (about ideas,
meanings and symbols) in nature rather than scientific. This argument,
or variants thereof, is one of the central planks of interpretive
archaeology.

Kuhn and Feyerabend

The final and perhaps most serious objection to positivism is that it is
not a theory but a myth. In other words, positivism is an ideal model of
scientific philosophy, but is a bit of a fraud in practice: it gives a
false idea of what scientists actually do. To ask archaeology to follow
the rules of positivist science is therefore asking them to follow a
chimera.

There is much confusion here over whether positivism describes what
scientists actually do, or whether it is merely an ideal statement of
what they should do. Some philosophers claim that it is merely an ideal
statement. If positivism is only an ideal account, what do scientists
actually get up to in their laboratories?. Many have argued that what
counts as an ‘observation’ and ‘fact’ is decided at least in part by
social rules, not by purely objective enquiry however defined. Instead,
scientific debates are decided through processes that are thoroughly
enmeshed in social relations, not disengaged from society.

Two philosophers of science are often cited in non-positivist accounts
of science. The first is Thomas Kuhn. Kuhn argued that the history of
science is not just a simple progressively upward success story of
hypothesis testing leading to expanded knowledge. Rather, it is one of
successive paradigms. A paradigm is much deeper than a single theory or
proposition: it is a set of beliefs about the way the world works that
underlies the whole everyday process of science very deeply, so deeply
that it is rarely overtly put into words. During a period of ‘normal
science’ in Kuhn’s terms, one paradigm enjoys such undisputed sway over
science that its assumptions are rarely even stated explicitly, let
alone questioned or debated. Everyone just gets on with scientific
labour within the assumptions of the paradigm.

Kuhn suggested that a paradigm will break down eventually. When it does,
it is eventually replaced by a new paradigm in a ‘paradigm shift’. Such
a period of paradigm shift is intense, emotional, revolutionary, rather
than cool and detached; a spirit of revolutionary fervour militates
against ‘rational’ argument.

The story of science, then, is one of successive paradigms succeeding
one another via revolutionary upheavals rather than of steady
accumulation of better and better knowledge of the world around us.
Colin Renfrew and others argued in the 1960s and 1970s that the New
Archaeology represented a ‘paradigm shift’ and that we should therefore
expect processual archaeology to settle down to a new period of ‘normal
science’ (something that, as we shall see, has arguably not happened).
There was an irony here, in that Renfrew was citing with approval a
philosopher of science whose work actually tended to undermine many of
the positivist assumptions of New Archaeology.

Kuhn himself repudiated the idea that science didn’t progress; his view
was that paradigms broke down under the steadily increasing weight of
contradictory evidence, and that each paradigm was a successively better
and more accurate way of looking at the world. Renfrew and others agree
with him in this respect. Other scholars, however, took Kuhn’s ideas and
extended them in ways that Kuhn himself opposed. They drew different and
more wide-ranging morals from his work: in particular, that:

1 What constituted valid ‘facts’ or ‘observations’ depended on the
prevailing paradigm. In other words, what was relevant evidence, and
what was ruled out of court, depended at least in part on one’s initial
paradigmatic assumptions. In this view, then, facts are therefore always
theorydependent.

2 Social and political forces, not just disinterested scientific
enquiry, played a key part in prompting and shaping paradigm shifts.

Kuhn’s main influence on the philosophy of science, therefore, has been
in a move away from positivist assumptions about the nature of
scientific progress, a questioning of the use of a single positivist
method in scientific enquiry, and a scepticism towards the narrative of
science as an unqualified success story.

The second key figure is Paul Feyerabend, whose description of the way
science actually works is always popular since it consists of two words:
Anything Goes. Feyerabend questioned whether science had a single method
at all. He suggested that if we looked historically at the development
of science, change in scientific beliefs had always been marked by a
diversity of methods.

Feyerabend used the example of the astronomer Galileo, who, he argued,
moved science forward by breaking all the rules, using political
rhetoric and appeals to emotion and working within the social and
political context of seventeenth-century Italy: ‘Galileo prevails
because of his style and his clever techniques of persuasion, because he
writes in Italian rather than in Latin, and because he appeals to people
who are temperamentally opposed to the old ideas and the standards of
learning connected with them’ (Feyerabend 1988: 13).

For Feyerabend, the lesson of the history of scientific ideas was that
to achieve better results, scientists should reject the use of a single
method. Rather, we should encourage an unlimited diversity of methods
and groups within sciences, and to allow and even encourage
‘unscientific’ strategies such as appeals to emotion. Feyerabend
stressed the social and political forces that, in his view, actively
shape scientific enquiry. He pointed out that the relative merits of
scientific ideas are not tested out on a level playing field. He
stressed what he saw as the enormously powerful nature of scientific
institutions and argued that they hid their partiality behind their
‘objective’ façade. Positivism in the form of a single method, in
Feyerabend’s view, masks ‘institutional intimidation’ by pretending to
be neutral, hinders the development of science, and encourages scientism
(the belief that Science is not simply different, but superior) and the
‘cult of the expert’.

Social Constructivism

It is important to stress that Kuhn and Feyerabend saw their work as
describing what scientists actually do, rather than as a prescription of
what they should do. Their work encouraged the development of
sociological studies of science – that is, ethnographic or historical
examinations of what actually happens in the scientific process. In the
1990s, these studies coalesced into a school of thought calling itself
social constructivism or constructionism: the belief that scientific
knowledge is not purely objective, but is at least partly or entirely
socially constructed. (‘Weak social constructivism’ holds that it is
partly socially constructed; ‘strong social constructivism’ that it is
entirely so.)

Examples from the natural sciences include:

1 Quarks. Andrew Pickering (1984) discussed the ‘discovery’ of this
subatomic particle. He stressed that rather than quarks ‘really
existing’ and waiting to be discovered, a full account of the scientific
activity leading to the definition of quarks must look at such things as
the decisions of funding bodies, personal and institutional
relationships, university and state politics, and so on. Quarks in this
view were not ‘discovered’; rather, they were actively ‘constructed’ by
the scientists involved. And this construction was a social one; it
depended on the interaction of scientists, politicians, funding
agencies, universities and the wider public.

2 Races. Scientific definitions of different races in physical
anthropology are, it can be argued, impositions on a continuum of
physical types across the globe. Where, then, do classifications by
physical anthropologists into different races come from? It can be
argued that scientific classifications of ‘types’ are not neutral
devices for objective classification, but are in fact derived from the
end points of trade routes from Europe to and from the ‘colonies’ in the
nineteenth century, that is at precisely that time when the basic
classifications of physical anthropology were being formed: Northern
Europeans, West Africans, Hong Kong Chinese, American ‘Indians’… If
social constructivism is a correct analysis of science, then the
question ‘should archaeology be a science or a humanity?’ is rendered
meaningless. Constructivism questions the claim of science to be a
distinctive form of knowledge in the first place. It therefore denies
any basic, a priori differences between science and non-science. It
suggests that we should look at what human beings do in laboratories in
the same way as we look at what they do in other walks of life.

Social constructivism unleashed what was often a very angry and bitter
debate between different groups of scientists and others, often referred
to retrospectively as the ‘science wars’. ‘Strong’ social
constructivists were seen by their opponents as threatening the very
foundations of rationality and academic enquiry itself. Since the 1990s,
the intensity and ferocity of this debate has subsided on both sides,
though the issues at stake remain fundamental and we will return to them
in future chapters.

All this is fine, but I find it difficult to understand how this might
apply to archaeology. Which version of science do archaeologists
currently prefer? Do they come down on one side or the other of the
debate?

There is no one answer to your question; you will have to read the
literature, and then make up your own mind.

Different archaeologists advocate different forms of scientific
philosophy. Shanks and Tilley argued in the late 1980s that positivism’s
stress on separating method from theory is fraudulent, because theory
and method can never be separated. Like Feyerabend, they see positivism
as a covert, underhand way of controlling what we can and cannot say and
do in archaeology. Positivism for them is an archaeology of NO. They
wrote in a spirit of sarcasm:

It doesn’t matter what you say as long as you say it in the right way;
as long as you conform to the rules of positivist/empiricist discourse,
rational method; as long as what you say is reasonable, not fantasy or
extreme, is open to ‘testing’ against the data, is not overtly
political, is not subjective. And if you transgress these laws of
discourse, the epistemology … police are waiting. (Shanks and Tilley
1992: 23)

For Shanks and Tilley, the way we write about the past is largely about
political rules. They want to unmask the political nature of these
rules.

Opponents replied: if we abandon positivist criteria, what alternatives
are there? If we accept such views, aren’t beliefs in magic or in
mystical forces just as ‘scientific’ as rational debate?

As a result of these debates spilling over into archaeology in the 1980s
and 1990s, there has been a growing interest in philosophies or
conceptions of scientific method that acknowledge that all
archaeological data are socially constructed in some sense, but which
try to move beyond a simppmple either/or position. The ‘science wars’
seemed to many to be based on a false choice, an unnecessary opposition
or polarity – either Science had to be absolutely objective and
untainted by cultural context, or it had to be nothing more than one
more discourse among many, including magical and superstitious beliefs.
Both of these views or positions are, in the view of many, including
myself, unsatisfactory. For archaeologists this translates into the
question: if we have to reject a crude or naïve positivism, can we
nevertheless salvage something from the wreckage – keep hold of some
idea of rigour and method?

For example, Alison Wylie has combined an insistence that science is
inevitably value-laden in different ways, with an exploration of ways in
which in practice, archaeologists do move back and forth in an
empirically informed manner between data and interpretation. More
broadly, there has I think been a subtle shift in the language and tone
of different strands of processual and postprocessual archaeology. Fewer
processualists talk of ‘testing’ their arguments, but they do insist on
proper and rigorous ‘evaluation’. Conversely, interpretive and
‘postprocessual’ archaeologists acknowledge and affirm that arguments do
need to be evaluated with reference to the data, and that the data at
the very least form a network of resistance.

At the same time, this theoretical position has been complemented and
strengthened by practical developments. There has been a growing body of
work that has used ‘scientific’ techniques however defined to look at
interpretive questions. For example, archaeologists have used human
skeletal material to explore issues of gender, the body and identity.
Materials science has been deployed to examine the socially constrained
choices that craftspeople made in the production of pottery and other
artefacts. Techniques of archaeological computing such as geographical
information systems have been used to explore the experience of place.
These are all themes we will examine in later chapters.

But if you find the same range of views within archaeology, it is also
worth pointing out that the debate over scientific method in archaeology
is a re-run of a similar debate in virtually every other social science.
Behavioural psychologists claim that thoughts are beyond the domain of
science, so we should concentrate on people’s behaviour. In sociology,
Auguste Comte and Emile Durkheim laid out sociological method in a
positivistic framework; their aim was to construct a science of society
in which predictions and generalizations could be made about social
phenomena in the same way as natural phenomena. The sociologist Anthony
Giddens and others have, in opposition to Durkheim and Comte, argued for
the impossibility of a neutral, value-free science of society. Similar
debates occur within all those disciplines classified as social
sciences: history, linguistics, economics, politics. Many feminists
claim that Science is not merely political, but that it is moreover a
male construct: the rules of ‘rational method’ mask male bias behind a
cloak of objectivity.

Archaeologists can comfort themselves that their epistemological worries
are at least shared across the domain of the social sciences. Whether
this makes them easier to resolve is open to doubt.

4

Middle-range Theory, Ethnoarchaeology and Material Culture Studies

In this chapter, we return to figure 2.1 and the gap between present and
past, ‘data’ and ‘interpretation’, but we take a rather different route
from chapter 3 in asking how archaeologists bridge this gap. We have all
this stuff, this archaeological material – pots, stones, bones. It
exists here in the present; how do we get it to tell us about the past?

If any statement about the past is unavoidably made in the present, it
is also unavoidably an analogy. An analogy is the use of information
derived from one context, in this case usually the present, to explain
data found in another context, in this case the past.

To clarify: all archaeologists of whatever theoretical stripe make a
link between present and past by using analogies. We always make an
assumption that things in the past were like – analogous to – the
present. Analogy underpins even the most mundane interpretation.
Consider, for example, the way archaeologists assign function to
objects: ‘this was a storage vessel’. We argue that it was a storage
vessel in the past because its form (large, sturdy, undecorated) would
make it seem ‘natural’ to us to use it in this way in the present.
Further, we strengthen our argument through other analogies. The object
was found with others of the same type in the room of an ancient palace
adjacent to a food preparation area, which we label a ‘kitchen’ –
another analogy with the present. Chemical analysis reveals the object
contained food remains – again, by analogy with the present, we infer
that the vessel was used to store food.

The more links we can make, the more we argue or assume that the two
situations are analogous. This mode of analogical thinking is perhaps
pretty obvious once it is spelt out in this manner, but nevertheless
absolutely central to the way we write about the past. And like other
such ‘obvious’ points, the issue of analogy needs further critical
examination.

Binford and Middle-range Theory

Lewis Binford addressed this issue with great force in the 1970s. While
the general arguments covered in the last chapter were raging over the
grand theoretical issues of epistemology and positivism, Binford
suggested that such debates were in many ways secondary to a more
central issue. Binford insisted that archaeology’s claim to be a science
rested or fell on this issue of analogy. His argument, in brief, ran
like this:

Archaeological data – stones, bones, potsherds – form a static record in
the present. We carefully record stones, bones, potsherds and their
position and arrangement in the ground in the here and now. But we are
not interested in the here and now, we are interested in the past: our
task is to ask questions of this material in the present, questions
about the past. Specifically we are interested in the dynamics of past
societies, that is the way past cultural systems functioned, developed,
were transformed.

Further, since science is a discipline which seeks to generalize for the
reasons discussed in the last chapter, we want to develop generalizing
theories about past dynamics (figure 4.1, which is a different version
of figure 2.1).

All archaeologists offer possible links between statics and dynamics,
every time they put forward an interpretation of archaeological
evidence. In practice, Binford argued, archaeologists do this by making
assumptions about the middle range, that is, the ‘space’ between statics
and dynamics. For example, we excavate a cemetery consisting of a few
graves with lots of grave-goods and many graves with very little (static
data); from this we infer a society characterized by wealth or social
inequality (past dynamics). We do so by assuming a middle-range link
between the number and/or value of grave goods and the social/economic
status of the person buried. A second example: we excavate a pueblo in
the American Southwest and discover that it increases in size and number
of rooms through time. We infer population increase from this. Again, we
make a middle-range assumption, namely that settlement size, measured in
terms of the number of rooms in a settlement, correlates positively with
population size.

Right or wrong (and however obvious they may look at first sight, the
assumptions in both of the examples above can be debated), these
statements can be called middle-range assumptions. Such middle-range
assumptions guide archaeologists from observation of the static
archaeological record (burials in excavated cemeteries, data on
settlements derived from surveys) to general statements and theories
about the past (social structure and ranking, population estimates,
possible links between these variables, generalizing propositions about
links between rank, population size, and social complexity: figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1 Present statics, past dynamics and middle-range theory

[c04_image001.jpg]

Such propositions are called middle-range by Binford because they link,
in his words, statics to dynamics, and particular observations of the
archaeological record to general theories about the past. In much of
‘practical’ archaeology, Binford argues, many propositions are often not
theorized and remain implicit, as they have an apparently
common-sensical, banal or trivial nature: ‘the larger the settlement,
the more people are likely to have lived there’.

Now many middle-range propositions may be banal or trivial, but any good
scientist should make his or her disciplinary assumptions formal and
explicit however obvious or common-sensical they might be. Many of the
interpretive problems that arise within archaeological traditions that
do not consider themselves to be ‘theoretical’ can be traced to a lack
of clarity about middle-range assumptions, which are treated as ‘common
sense’. For example, villages in medieval Europe may be referred to as
‘planned’ because they are identified as of regular design and are
further seen as evidence of ‘lordship’. The implicit assumption that
regularity (a static pattern, observable in the present) implies
planning (a dynamic process in the past) and further implies ‘lordship’
(a social institution) needs to be critically examined. Similar comments
might be made about the assignation of high or low status to buildings
on the basis of their size and decoration, or something so mundane as
the designation of features as ‘roads’ or ‘trackways’ on the basis of
their size and appearance.

If such assumptions remain implicit, untested, taken-for-granted, then
we can never do more than tell untestable stories about the past,
because the criteria for deciding that this argument is good and that
argument is bad are never made clear, let alone objective and rigorous.
One scholar can assert (as ‘atheoretical’ archaeologists frequently do)
that this argument is ‘plausible’ and that other argument ‘wild’,
‘improbable’ or a ‘flight of fancy’ by reference to an implicit common
sense which is never evaluated. Binford therefore suggested that we
should consciously develop an explicit ‘middle-range theory’ (MRT) to
link present statics with past dynamics. (It is important to note in
passing that this archaeological definition of the middle-range is
subtly different from that used by sociologists such as Robert Merton,
who developed the term ‘theories of the middle range’ to delineate
theories that fell in the range between empirical generalizations and
‘grand theory’.)

Now the only place that we can see a definite, certain, measurable link
between a set of activity patterns or dynamics and what they look like
archaeologically is in the present. We can never see a Neolithic farmer
making a flint arrowhead with the debris flying in all directions, or a
Palaeolithic hunter skinning and butchering an animal, leaving bones to
kick around in the dust, be gnawed by dogs and finally be buried and
enter the archaeological record. But what we can do is look at
comparable activities – manufacturing of stone tools, hunting and
butchering activities, the gathering, winnowing and sowing of seeds – in
the present.

In the present, archaeologists can make a detailed and accurate record
of how particular activities or systems of activities give rise to
particular patterns of archaeological debris. We can look at how modern
peasant societies prepare and process their grain and other foodstuffs,
or how modern huntergatherers butcher their kills. We can observe and
measure precisely what sort and how much debris then enters the
archaeological record as a result of these activities, and what then
happens to that debris as a result of attrition and decay.
Archaeologists must therefore look at the ethnographic present for the
source of an explicit middle-range theory. Binford wrote: ‘My aim was to
study the relation between statics and dynamics in a modern setting. If
understood in great detail, it would give us a kind of Rosetta Stone: a
way of “translating” the static, material stone tools found on an
archaeological site into the vibrant life of a group of people who in
fact left them there’ (Binford 1983a: 24). In other words, just as the
Rosetta Stone had the same inscription in three different ancient
languages enabling the modern linguist to use the stone to translate
from one language to another, so we should be trying to find things that
enable us to translate from the observed archaeological record to the
past.

Binford called such ethnographic studies actualistic; that is,
observation and recording by archaeologists of ethnographic situations
taking place in the actual, the here and now. He compared the
archaeological record to that of a footprint in the forest. One might,
seeing a particular size and shape of footprint, conjecture that it
belonged to a large, heavy animal without having any clear idea of the
animal concerned. Later, one observes a bear making that precise shape
and form of a footprint; from that observation in the present, one can
say with greater certainty that the previous footprint had been made by
such an animal in the past.

One form of actualistic study that remains an enduring element of
archaeological practice is experimental archaeology. For example,
experimental studies have eludicated the manufacture and use of flaked
and polished stone tools. The debris produced at each stage of
experimental manufacture could be compared with the debris in the
archaeological record; microscopic traces of wear on prehistoric tools
could be compared with those on modern tools that had been used
experimentally for butchering, scraping hides and so on. Actualistic
study can also take the form of ethnoarchaeology, or the study of
material culture in the present by archaeologists.

Archaeologists have always been interested in the study of modern
peoples and their material culture, and have used ethnographic material
as analogies for things they saw in the archaeological record. Long
before David Clarke wrote about the Iron Age lake village of
Glastonbury, the huts there had been compared to huts of ‘natives’ in
East Africa. Indeed, such parallels were at the heart of the emergence
of archaeology as a discipline. Nineteenth-century ideas of social
evolution, in which all societies went through the same fundamental
stages, carried the implication that we could use present day
‘primitive’ societies as analogies for the prehistoric past. Thus, for
example, Lubbock’s famous 1865 book Prehistoric Times was subtitled As
illustrated by ancient remains, and the manners and customs of modern
savages. It contained illustrations of artefacts from both prehistory
and from contemporary groups such as the Inuit.

Binford and others, however, suggested that such ‘ethnoarchaeological’
work had to be done primarily not by ethnographers, but by
archaeologists with a specific eye to the analogies between present and
past. Archaeologists could not rely on ethnographers collecting relevant
material, since their aims and purposes were different – ethnographers
were concerned with a range of issues, and were not in Binford’s view
specifically interested in the link between human activities and
archaeological material.

For Binford, the development of ‘robust’ middle-range theory was far
more important than metaphysical debates about the status of archaeology
as a science. While colleagues were arguing about the finer points of
philosophy and epistemology, then, Binford set off for Alaska to study
the Nunamiut ‘Eskimo’ hunters.

Interpreting the Mousterian

Binford’s account of why he did so (related most accessibly in In
Pursuit of the Past) is instructive. Binford had been interested in the
‘Mousterian Question’ for some time. The Mousterian period at the
junction of the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic could be found in
different contexts in the Old World, but had been most closely analysed
in southern France; it was named after the French cave site of Le
Moustier.

Figure 4.2 Bordes’ Mousterian assemblage types, as redrawn by Binford
(1983a)

[c04_image002.jpg]

The Mousterian was defined and characterized by certain distinctive
types of stone tools, which had been classified by the French
archaeologist François Bordes. Bordes had then looked at the different
proportions of different stone tool types in different layers, and shown
that these could be classified into different patterns or assemblages:
‘typical Mousterian’, ‘Charentian’, ‘Mousterian of Acheulean tradition’,
‘denticulate Mousterian’, and so on (figure 4.2).

How might we interpret this pattern found in the present in terms of
past processes? Bordes had assumed that different stone tool assemblages
reflected the presence of different cultural groups. That is, he
followed the assumptions of other traditional or culture-historical
archaeologists in assuming that certain artefact types and assemblages
represented distinctive ‘cultures’. Different stone tool types reflected
different cultural norms, and assemblage variability therefore reflected
cultural variability. Others disagreed in how this ‘interassemblage
variability’ might be interpreted. Binford, for example, suggested that
different assemblages were not the detritus of different cultures, but
should be seen within an adaptive framework – as different ‘tool-kits’.

Binford wanted to test his hypothesis. He collected huge numbers of
statistics from Mousterian assemblages in France and put them on to a
computer. (We see here the stress on grasping variability and on
quantitative methods characteristic of New Archaeology.) He expended a
huge amount of labour feeding the information in, and found that there
were some interesting patterns in the material he had collected. But
herein lay the central problem. Binford found that there was nothing he
could do with them.

Binford had no secure idea what activities or processes might have
created those patterns. Bordes’s suggestion that different proportions
of tool types were reflective of different cultural groups, Binford’s
argument that different groups of tools were different ‘tool-kits’, and
reflected different kinds of cultural adaptation, and other Palaeolithic
specialists’ interpretations might all be appropriate explanations, all
of which appeared to be ‘satisfactory’ explanations of the data, no
matter how many statistics the computer churned out.

Using Binford’s own terminology, he had lots of information about
statics in the present, but lacked the means – the middle-range theory –
to translate these into past dynamics. As a result his ideas of what his
patterns meant could be contrasted with the ideas of others such as
Bordes, without being able to test between the two. The arguments of
Binford and Bordes remained just different stories, with no clear way to
judge which was the more accurate.

Binford’s work with the Nunamiut, then, was animated by a desire to
produce middle-range information that would give him a ‘handle’ on this
question. The Nunamiut, as a group who practised hunting of deer in an
environment similar to that which pertained in southern France during
the Mousterian period, offered a chance to attack the question of what
these patterns might mean. Observation of the Nunamiut could answer the
question: ‘what kinds of hunter-gatherer activities give rise to what
kinds of archaeological assemblages?’

Before we can consider whether Binford’s Nunamiut work gave him this
secure handle, we must consider its underlying theory a little more.

Uniformitarian Assumptions

Binford lays down two conditions that middle-range theory must satisfy.
Middle-range theory must be:

1 Formally independent from our development of general theory. Remember
that in the positivist view, science is about testing things, and the
importance of keeping method separate from theory. How can
archaeologists test between two general theories if our middle-range
theory is based on one of them? This would give rise to the danger of a
circular argument.

2 Based on a uniformitarian assumption. In other words, archaeologists
have to assume that conditions in the past were like those in the
present. If conditions in the past varied, all bets are off; anything
could have happened; actualistic studies in the present offer no secure
guide to what might have happened in the past.

Consider this second assumption for a moment. Archaeologists can assume
that physical properties and processes (gravity, the structure of
molecules, geological processes such as soil formation and
sedimentation) were the same in the present as in the past. Indeed, it
was this assumption that was central to the development of modern
geology, and hence stratigraphy in archaeology, in the nineteenth
century. The nineteenth-century geologist Lyell had argued against
ascribing geological features such as layers of sedimentary rock to
catastrophes and cataclysmic events such as the biblical Flood, events
that had no parallel in the present. Instead, we had to assume that
features such as layers of rock were created by processes observable in
the present (such as marine sedimentation). Of course, a few physical
processes and conditions are demonstrably not uniform – the proportion
of carbon-14 in the atmosphere has varied over the millennia, for
example, which is why carbon-14 determinations have to be ‘calibrated’
against dendrochnology in order to turn determinations into dates.

Physical processes may have largely been the same in the past, but human
behaviour is much more diverse. Uniformitarian assumptions about human
behaviour are much more difficult to make. The law of gravity applies
regardless of time and place, but different human cultures do things in
very different ways. This difficulty is particularly apparent for the
Lower and Middle Palaeolithic periods where archaeologists are dealing
with extinct hominid species that are not Homo sapiens sapiens. We can
debate whether ‘human nature’ or ‘basic human needs’ are constant for
other periods, but at these early times we are dealing with hominid
species that are not our own. Archaeologists cannot therefore assume
that practices we might suppose common to all human groups were even
present at that time. Binford himself makes the point that practices
such as ‘home-base behaviour’ (regular return to a ‘home’ such as a
transitory camp) may be ‘natural’ or assumed for modern humans, but
cannot be assumed for the hominids of the Lower Palaeolithic.

Somewhere in the middle, between the physical and human worlds, are
assumptions about the behaviour of animals and plants, resting in the
domain of ecology. Plant and animal ecology is not quite as ‘hard’ and
invariate as the laws of physics and chemistry, but not as ‘soft’ and
variable as cultural behaviour. For example, modern sheep will herd when
threatened by a predator, whereas other species will scatter; in so far
as this behaviour has a genetic basis, this has obvious implications for
which species were easier to domesticate in the Neolithic (sheep being
amenable to being herded by humans and dogs).

It follows that the development of middle-range theory may be relatively
plausible for areas of the archaeological record that are governed by or
dependent on physical or biological processes, but less so in other
areas. Let’s consider some examples:

1 The preparation of grain for human consumption can only be performed
in certain ways: harvesting can only take place during certain times of
the year, the wheat must be separated from the chaff, the grain must be
dried, and so on. The different processes involved in the harvesting and
processing of grain give rise to certain recognizable by-products like
chaff or charred remains. The processing of crops can readily be
explored through ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology (figure
4.3).

2 Ageing of animals. Archaeologists can assume that measures of animal
age such as tooth eruption sequences did not vary in the past, and
further assume that mating and breeding patterns took place in the same
seasonal rhythm. It is therefore possible to take a collection of bones
and determine not only age at death, but at what time in the year
animals were being killed. This in turn might lead to secure inferences
about whether animals were being bred for meat or dairy products, and so
on.

3 As a more marginal example to explore the limits of the uniformitarian
assumption, we can differentiate between ‘kill sites’ and ‘residential
sites’ on the basis of the bones found at each site. Archaeologists can
safely make the uniformitarian assumption that the ratio of meat to bone
remains fairly constant for an animal’s body part, and therefore reason
that hunters will carry back the meat-bearing parts of the animal while
leaving behind less ‘meaty’ parts of the animal (something often
referred to as the ‘Schlepp effect’). Whether a site is a kill site or a
home base will therefore be reflected in the different kinds of bone
left on site, and much ethnoarchaeological research has gone into
establishing just how this might work. (But this might not work because
of ‘cultural’ factors. A group might have cultural taboos against
consuming a particular part of an animal, or conversely a part might be
prized for its ‘ritual’ properties. A high cultural value placed on part
of an animal that did not correspond to its calorific or protein value
might confuse these signatures. I shall explore this problem further
below.)

Figure 4.3 Part of Hillman’s (1984) ethnoarchaeological model of grain
processing, derived from ethnographic research in Turkey, with F
indicating those points at which products are exposed to fire and
therefore preservation by charring. After Hillman (1984: figure 2)

[c04_image003.jpg]

Many of these studies can be grouped under the heading of taphonomy.
Taphonomy is the study of how the archaeological record is created from
‘cultural’ and ‘natural’ behaviour. It stresses how we cannot make easy
connections between what we find in the archaeological record and past
activities, and is most strongly developed in areas like botanical and
faunal remains and animal behaviour.

To take one small example: the gnawing of bones by dogs. Sebastian Payne
has shown how gnawed bones will more easily decay than complete bones.
Sites, therefore, on which dogs are present may have many fewer bones,
and perhaps different sorts of bones, than sites where no dogs are
present. The negative conclusion of this is that we may misinterpret the
very similar economy of sites whose only real difference is that dogs
are present at one of them.

Case Study: Bones at Olduvai

To be successful, then, middle-range theory must not only develop
propositions linking present statics and past dynamics. It must then
take those propositions and use them in a formal way to judge between
different interpretations of the same archaeological assemblage. Let us
look at a case study to see whether such a judgement actually happens.

In the last chapter of his book Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths,
Binford claims that ‘my analysis will represent the application of a
methodology developed from control information obtained in actualistic
studies’ (1981b: 253). In other words, he will use his
ethnoarchaeological work to help determine which process gave rise to
which pattern in the archaeological record. Does it?

Binford develops a series of propositions from his Nunamiut material,
thereby predicting the static results of certain dynamics. For example,
he proposes that if tool-using hominids were living in base camps,
hunting and killing animals and transporting some parts of the kill,
then one would expect a home-base assemblage similar to that of modern
hunter-gatherer residences. Among other things, one would expect the
hominids to be bringing back parts of the animal with lots of meat, and
leaving behind parts with little meat. If, on the other hand, the
hominids are only scavenging, other hunting animals will have taken off
the high meat-bearing parts, leaving only low-utility parts for the
hominids to pick over, resulting in an inverse situation.

Binford then looks at different sites, dividing them into sites where
the animal caracasses have also been scavenged by other animals and
sites where this has not happened (‘ravaged’ and ‘non-ravaged’). He
treats unravaged sites in detail, arguing against the association of
hominids with the animal remains. He concludes that there are some less
noticed assemblages ‘consistent with the removal of essentially
marrow-yielding bones from the already ravaged kills of other
predator-scavengers’, an interpretation reinforced by stone tool
evidence.

In my view, this is an interesting and logical argument, but not a
formal example of the application of middle-range theory. One would
expect a series of formal propositions correlating statics with
dynamics, then an observation of the statics, and finally a formal
analogy with the dynamics. (To pursue Binford’s own analogy, first we
propose that bears leave certain prints, then see a print, and conclude
that it was made by a bear.) But Binford does not do this. Instead, the
evidence is explored contextually, with the Nunamiut work serving in a
looser role than that of formal analogy. For example, the wolf-kill
parallel is not even mentioned in the initial set of formal
propositions. So Binford’s use of ethnoarchaeological data is
interesting and even rigorous, but not a formal use of middle-range
theory if we adopt the strict criteria that Binford himself laid down.

We might extend these observations to the Mousterian case study outlined
above. It might be expected after Binford’s work that secure inferences
could be drawn about how the Mousterian might be interpreted. But in
fact the debate has simply gone on, or one might argue in more positive
terms that it has progressed and expanded its terms of reference. The
conclusion we can draw from this is that while middle-range research can
help us think about the archaeological record in new and interesting
ways, it is difficult to see it working in practice to formally judge
between alternative hypotheses in a way that will ‘prove’ one theory and
‘disprove’ another. Rather, as Binford himself came to insist in his
later work, middle-range research can act to expand and deepen our
explanations by identifying ambiguity in the archaeological record, and
by pointing towards avenues of further research to define and explore
that ambiguity. What other reasons are there to be sceptical about the
value of middle-range theory?

Middle-range Theory: Problems

In my view, Binford is quite accurate in suggesting that archaeology
stands or falls as a positivist ‘science’ as conceived in the last
chapter on the successful development of middle-range theory. If we can
reliably relate present statics to past dynamics through the use of
middle-range propositions, then we really can isolate archaeological
reasoning from its social and political context and stop just telling
stories about the past. If we cannot do so, then the aim of developing
archaeology as a neutral science in the narrowly positivist sense might
appear doomed.

Two issues can be raised with respect to the debate over analogy and
middle-range theory:

(1) An analogy, whether based on the rubric of middle-range theory or
not, doesn’t prove or test anything. We can never know whether the
uniformitarian asumption discussed above is in fact correct. If I
interpret an excavated feature as a storage pit, and show that the
feature shares 5, 10, 15 characteristics in common with ethnographically
‘known’ storage pits, there is still a possibility that the feature
could be interpreted in some other way.

This criticism gets stronger the more sceptical one is about general
theories of cultural evolution. If human cultures really do all go
through the same stages, and cultures at each stage of cultural
evolution are basically similar to one another, it follows that features
from excavated, prehistoric contexts will probably be very like those
known from ethnography. A uniformitarian assumption based on cultural
similarity will therefore be very strong. To put it another way, if the
Inuit really are just like all hunter-gatherer groups, then the use of
their material culture and patterns of activity as an analogy for past
hunter-gatherer groups is very plausible.

If on the other hand one believes that all cultures are historically
unique, and cannot be compared one with another or lumped into
evolutionary stages, then there is no reason to accept that this feature
was a storage pit merely because it looks like one from another culture
2000 years later, 3000 miles away and from a completely different
cultural context. Perhaps we should treat the Inuit as unique or at
least distinctive, and if so, be very cautious about arguing that any
patterns derived from their means of living can be used in any way as a
template for any other hunter-gatherer group past or present. We might
certainly point to the fact that groups such as the !Kung San are not
‘pristine’ hunting and gathering groups, but have complex histories of
their own. Here is a case where it can be argued that middle-range
assumptions are not in fact independent of general theory; on this
argument, they are inextricably linked to general theories, in this case
views of cultural evolution.

Advocates of middle-range theory would reply, following from the last
chapter, that it does not matter where ideas come from – what matters is
how they are tested. Of course we shall never be absolutely sure that
this feature was a storage pit, but we can evaluate its plausibility
against alternative hypotheses.

In his later work, Binford suggests that we don’t absolutely test a
proposition one way or the other, but we can focus on where the
archaeological record is ambiguous. In other words, archaeologists
should focus on the lack of fit between the data and what they expected
to find, and the things in the archaeological record that we cannot
easily explain. These elements of ambiguity and lack of fit, he argues,
generate fresh research questions and prompt further research. Over
time, then, a scientific archaeology will never provide a full, final
explanation, but it can and does demonstrably move forward in its
understanding of past processes, as in the wolf-kill example discussed
above.

An analogy can be strengthened if some form of cultural continuity can
be demonstrated between two groups. It has been argued for example that
the modern Hopi tribe of the southwestern United States are the cultural
descendants of what archaeologists have called ‘Anasazi’ populations.
Now on ‘Anasazi’ sites archaeologists find semi-subterranean circular
chambers, very similar to the ones found on modern Hopi pueblos. It is,
therefore, plausible to refer to modern Hopi rituals in their own kivas.
Again, such a link does not conclusively ‘prove’ anything, but it does
derive interpretative strength from such a link because continuity in
cultural ideas and practices is probable.

An important element of traditional archaeology in North America was the
direct historical method, where one started by delineating groups of
Native Americans in the present and then tried to trace their cultural
antecedents to, effectively, prehistoric groups. Such a method has no
direct parallel in European archaeology, though Christopher Hawkes once
suggested we should write prehistory backwards, working from ‘known’
historical groups back to the Iron and Bronze Ages. Such an approach
also underlies recent European interest in ‘ethnogenesis’, or the study
of the creation of ethnic identities. Scholars work backwards from
‘known’ cultural or ethnic groups in the historical or folklife records,
combining the evidence of linguistics, archaeology, and ethnography, to
examine the ‘genesis’ of these groups in prehistory.

Both Alison Wylie and Ian Hodder have stressed a distinction between
formal and relational analogies, suggesting that the latter are
stronger. Formal analogies rest simply on the notion that if some
elements of the two situations are similar, others must be also.
Obviously such analogies are weak, though they tend to be stronger the
more points of similarity that can be demonstrated between the two
contexts. Relational analogies rest on a cultural or natural connection
between the two contexts, as with the direct historical method, where
connections based on cultural continuity can be suggested.

For example, we might interpret pits on African prehistoric sites as
grain storage pits, citing a range of ethnographic examples. As it
stands, such an analogy is pretty weak, though it might be strengthened
with the number and range of parallels we might draw (are the pits of
the same size and shape? Do we consider past and present societies to be
at the ‘same level of social development’? Do the ethnographic examples
come from the same kind of environment, settlement type, economy?). An
understanding of the relations between different variables would make
the analogies still stronger. Do the ethnographic examples come from
African societies with direct historical links to the prehistoric
culture we are studying? Can we ask why grain is stored in this way,
citing ‘natural’ reasons (the most efficient way to keep grain dry in
this type of climate) or ‘cultural’ factors?

In practice, of course, formal and relational analogies are two ends of
a range of analogical arguments of lesser or greater strength.

(2) The issue of cultural continuity leads on to the second issue. It
can be argued that people are influenced by cultural ideas in their
behaviour. These ideas don’t just affect obviously ‘cultural’ things
like religious beliefs manifested in the manner of burial or other
‘ritual’ practices. They also affect apparently mundane activities such
as the organization of household space and attitudes towards rubbish.
They therefore affect archaeological deposition, and must be taken into
account when considering the formation of the archaeological record.

Take for example Henrietta Moore’s ethnoarchaeological study of the
Marakwet in East Africa. Moore found that the way Marakwet houses and
compounds were laid out related to their ideas of gender – what it
meant, culturally, to be a man or to be a woman in Marakwet society.
Different areas of domestic compounds were thought of as ‘male’ and
‘female’. This set of cultural ideas affected where individual
residences lay and how the compound was laid out. Again, Ian Hodder
looked at the distribution of pig and cattle bones in different
settlements of the Nuba. He found lots of pig bones in the compounds of
one tribe, but very few in another. Hodder suggested that this was due
to different cultural attitudes. In this culture, women were associated
with pigs – women were responsible for the pigs’ feeding and
maintenance. In one area, there was a strong (male) belief that women
were polluting: hence, by association, compounds were kept clean of pig
bones and other debris. In another area, such pollution beliefs were
weak, the people of that area seemed not to care that their compounds
were left covered in refuse. Hodder argued that an archaeologist
excavating different compounds would need to understand something of
Nuba beliefs in order to interpret the faunal remains ‘correctly’.

Much ethnoarchaeological and experimental work continues on the
relationship between statics and dynamics. A particularly strong area is
the taphonomy of bones, but other areas include the production of stone
tools, plant remains and site economy in general. Such work tends to
concentrate on problems raised by the archaeological record of the
Palaeolithic and early farming communities – in other words, relatively
early elements of the archaeological record. It tries to focus on quite
specific archaeological questions, often relating to subsistence
economy.

Behavioural Archaeology

Let’s return to figure 2.1, the gap between present and past, and the
issue of how to infer past processes from archaeological data in the
present.

A second method to bridge this gap was outlined by Michael Schiffer, who
coined the term behavioural archaeology. Behavioural archaeology began
in the 1970s as the study of site formation processes – how artefacts
move from their ‘systemic context’, that is, their use in actual human
behaviour, to their ‘archaeological context’ in which they are
excavated. Schiffer drew attention to the intervening factors between
these two contexts: for example, ‘depositional processes’, ‘reclamation
processes’, ‘disturbance processes’ and ‘reuse processes’. In seeking to
link up behaviour with patterning in the archaeological record, the
project of behavioural archaeology obviously shares common ground with
much of middle-range theory and taphonomy. Binford himself rejected this
term and chose to attack much of Schiffer’s philosophy in quite
outspoken terms; but behavioural archaeology, taphonomy and middle-range
theory can be considered as closely related bodies of thinking.

Behavioural archaeology, however, goes on from this point to encompass a
much broader set of interests, and to define itself as a distinctive
approach to archaeology as a whole. Skibo and Schiffer (2008, 6) have
stated:

the core component of this approach is the redefinition of archaeology
as a discipline that studies relationships between people and things in
all times and all places … The relationships between people and
artifacts are discussed in terms of regularities discerned in processes
of manufacture, use, and disposal that make up the life histories of
material things, as in flow models and behavioural chains.

The most famous example of behavioural archaeology is the Tucson Garbage
Project initiated by Bill Rathje, where the link between behaviour and
material debris is examined in the present through study of the garbage
the modern people of Tucson throw away.

In other words, behavioural archaeology looks for regularities in the
relations between people and objects in all times and places. In this
way, it brings together study of the prehistoric past with studies of
much more recent artefacts, including objects in the present. Some of
Schiffer’s most fascinating work has been on objects such as the early
electric car, the lighthouse, and the portable radio, which sits
alongside that of his and colleagues’ studies of more ‘traditional’
topics such as pottery manufacture and the discard and reuse of objects.

Material Culture Studies

Behavioural archaeology has also come to share a set of interests with
‘material culture studies’ in general. Ethnoarchaeological work such as
Henrietta Moore’s and Ian Hodder’s, mentioned above, led to the
proposition that to understand material culture, one had to look at
cultural meanings. The way was thus laid open to a range of studies
which looked at material objects, buildings and landscapes in both the
prehistoric and recent past and present, in which the methods of
archaeology, ethnography and related areas were combined.

It is often difficult to see any distinction in this work between
archaeology and anthropology – whether, that is, scholars are looking
archaeologically at material culture in its social context, or
anthropologically at society with a theoretical emphasis on the
importance of materiality and material things. Indeed, an
interdisciplinary journal edited by this ‘school’ (the Journal of
Material Culture) brings together different disciplines in this very
way, and includes work by art and design historians, scholars from
cultural studies, archaeologists, cultural anthropologists, and many
other areas.

It can also be argued that these interests have very deep historical
roots they go back to the importance attached to the collection of
material culture by early ethnographers, giving rise to many of the
great collections of artefacts found in museums like the Pitt Rivers or
the great North American collections such as the Smithsonian. They also
go back to the origins of archaeology in early modern antiquarianism and
its emphasis on the close study and discussion of monuments and
artefacts from a wide range of areas and periods.

A particularly important element of recent work in material culture
studies has been the archaeology of the recent past. Scholars have
looked, for example, at the material traces of the Second World War and
of the Cold War, combining written history, the testimony of
participants, and archaeological study of surviving structures and
artefacts. Much of this work brings together interdisciplinary interests
such as a concern with how people’s memories and accounts of the past
are embedded in material objects and landscapes.

As a result of this convergence of approaches and interests, the study
of material culture in the present, allied to a recasting of archaeology
as not simply about the past but about the relationship of people and
things, is one of the most important and vibrant areas of archaeological
theory today. There are a diversity of approaches drawing theoretical
inspiration from a diversity of sources, from a continuing tradition of
middle-range research through to studies of modern material culture
informed by postmodern and interpretive theories. I will come back to
these approaches again and again in future chapters, and try to pull
them together at the end of the book under the general banner of
‘materiality’.

Which approach to material objects offers the most convincing way
forward depends, in part, on the general theory of society that one
finds convincing. Can one generalize between societies? Are societies to
be seen as systems fundamentally adapted to their environment, or is
symbolic meaning important? These are questions we will examine in the
next chapter.

5

Culture and Process

In the last two chapters, we have seen how different forms of
archaeological theory differ in their approach to questions of
epistemology (the nature of knowledge claims) and questions of testing
or evaluation (analogy and middlerange theory). We will now look at how
theories differ in their approach to cultural forms and social change.

How do human societies work? How do human beings relate to one another?
How can any human being have the power of command over a hundred, let
alone a thousand or a million, others? Were social groups in the past
formed through consent and cooperation, or through conflict and power?
Is social change a gradual, cumulative process, or does it arise
violently through the clash of ideas and groups, through conflict and
contradiction? How do the day-to-day actions of ordinary individuals
making pots or feeding children relate or add up to long-term,
large-scale changes like the origins of agriculture or the rise of
modern capitalism? These are some of the core questions within
disciplines that deal with humans and the relations between them, not
just archaeology but particularly sociology, cultural anthropology, and
history.

All these questions can arguably be re-phrased as: what is culture, and
how and why does it change? The definition of ‘culture’ was a core
concern of anthropology, most obviously in the achievement of Franz Boas
in making the idea of ‘culture’ the centrepiece of the fourfield
approach in North America at the end of the nineteenth century.

The word ‘culture’ appears simple at first sight, but it is desperately
complex and difficult to define. One group of meanings clusters around
what it means to be ‘cultured’ or ‘civilized’, and are value-laden; it
is an insult to call someone ‘uncultured’. This general use of the term
bleeds into much of humanistic archaeology – as we have seen, the
genesis of Classical archaeology depended on a notion of what it meant
to be cultured, and the term ‘civilization’ and adjective ‘civilized’
are also ambiguous in this respect.

Franz Boas rejected this view. For Boas, culture was not something which
one person or group had and others did not. He insisted that all human
groups have cultures, in the sense of systems of ideas and symbols,
cultures which make sense in themselves. Boas established what
anthropologists now regard as commonplace: that culture cannot be
equated to or directly derived from race, and nor can it be judged on an
ethnocentric yardstick. Further, ‘culture’ is not some kind of add-on to
human existence, something which humans only have time for once they
have satisfied their other needs such as subsistence.

Archaeologists try to talk about ancient cultures and societies, and
attempt to understand how and why they existed and changed as they did.
They are thus immediately locked into the sociological and
anthropological questions raised above. Yet again, we cannot choose to
avoid theory in this regard. ‘Atheoretical’ archaeologists, for example,
will not address such questions explicitly, but they do use metaphors
that imply a particular view of how societies work.

We have already seen one such metaphor in action: the aquatic view of
culture, in which ripples of diffusion spread across the cultural lake,
crosscutting one another. Another popular metaphor is that of society as
a body. For example, we might talk about societies or social stages
reaching ‘maturity’ or use other bodily metaphors, of social ‘sickness’
or ‘disease’. (Supposedly descriptive and atheoretical accounts of the
rise and fall of the Roman Empire are full of such metaphors.) The
bodily metaphor often involves organic rhythms of ‘youth’, ‘maturity’
and ‘decline’. Works of traditional history speak of ‘the birthpangs of
Protestantism’. Architectural metaphors are also popular: a society
‘collapses from within’, or a particular archaeological phase or event
‘lays the foundations for’ certain subsequent changes.

The different metaphors used by ‘atheoretical’ archaeologists to
characterize societies in this way are more than just words. Consciously
or unconsciously, they refer back to theoretical ideas that are part of
a common intellectual currency. Many relate, for example, to
nineteenth-century European conceptions of history and art history.
German Romantic philosophers, in particular Hegel, talked of a zeitgeist
or essential spirit. Such a spirit might be characteristic of a
historical period or stage of world history, or a people or race. Such a
spirit might then be used to explain a particular art style or aesthetic
preference; so for example Classical columns and proportions used in
Greek and Roman architecture were held to be expressions of some
underlying system of humanist rationality.

An underlying conception of zeitgeist profoundly influenced European art
and architectural history and its applications to archaeology, for
example of the Classical, medieval and Renaissance periods. Mediated by
this tradition, theoretical ideas of a culture being defined and
characterized by some essential or inner spirit were implicitly
translated into everyday words and phrases often used by archaeologists,
particularly in popular texts: ‘the spirit of the Bronze Age’, ‘the
ethic of Romanitas still held sway’, ‘the inner essence of the Celtic
peoples’, ‘the medieval mind’.

To repeat, all these ideas, whether implicit or explicit, and whether
right or wrong, are theoretical ideas and need to be examined and
criticized as such. The idea of zeitgeist in particular is morally
questionable (as well as intellectually unsustainable) when applied in
racial terms: it may sound innocent enough to talk of ‘the Celtic
spirit’, but reference to ‘the Indo-European spirit’ would rightly be
viewed with suspicion. These ideas continue nevertheless to stand in as
substitutes for more developed and explicitly theorized concepts in many
traditional narratives, and to be uncritically deployed in popular
debates over an ‘essence’ of cultural identity which often descend into
questionable stereotypes (‘typical English reserve’, ‘natural Latino
exuberance’, ‘Gallic flair’).

Culture History

You will recall from chapter 2 that more traditional forms of
archaeology have a normative view of culture in which a culture is
defined as a set of shared ideas. These ideas are imperfectly expressed
in material culture; the varied forms of artefacts imperfectly reflect
different norms (figure 5.1). In this view, one tends to stress the
particularity of cultures – why and how they are different from the
adjacent group. Culture history can also be seen as an idealist view, in
that it is ideas and norms that are seen as being important in the
definition of cultural identity.

There are two problems with the culture-historical view of how human
societies work. The first problem is that it tends to be mentalist. That
is, it explains why a culture is the way it is primarily by reference to
what people are thinking. The identification and criticism of mentalist
explanation can be found time and again in archaeology and the human
sciences generally. The fatal objection to a mentalist explanation is as
follows: a culture decorates its houses this way because of its cultural
norms. But why does it have these cultural norms? Why not a different
set of norms? Again, why is this pottery decorated in this way? Because
of the norms inside the potter’s head; the potter wanted it to look that
way. Why did the chicken cross the road? Because of what was inside its
head: it wanted to get to the other side.

Culture-historical archaeology is full of arguments that can be
criticized as being mentalist. They are especially prevalent and
pernicious where religion is involved, since here the author can
implicitly appeal to an unspecified inner spiritual need that the reader
is lulled into assuming is ‘natural’:

No system such as [the minster system], being designed to economise both
in buildings and clergy [why was it designed this way? Because clerics
wanted it to be this way?], could hope to meet the needs of every
Christian believer [why not? What are these needs? Are these needs
really self-evident if one is not a fundamentalist Christian?] And it
was inevitable that, alongside these centres, a network of private
chapels, or oratories, should very quickly have developed [why was it
inevitable?]. (Platt 1981: 1; comments mine)

The answers to the questions in italics can only follow if the ‘need’
for churches is taken as self-evident, in need of no further
explanation. Why did people have certain ideas inside their heads that
led them to ‘need’ more churches? Why were the old belief systems, pagan
or otherwise, now deemed inadequate? And who deemed them inadequate –
why did the religious élite assume that the common people ‘needed’ these
ideas? Were changing ‘needs’ of this kind anything to do with
contemporary socio-economic changes, and if so, what were those changes?

Figure 5.1 David Clarke’s (1976) diagram of the normative view of
culture. Members of a group produce handaxes. Each has an idea of what a
handaxe should look like; by observing others and communication this
idea approximates to the group idea or norm. Individual handaxes are
imperfect representations of this norm, being flawed, or made with more
or less skill

[c05_image001.jpg]

In short, to explain an archaeological feature or historical phenomenon
by reference to a untheorized need or intention in someone’s head is to
explain nothing at all. Mentalist arguments of this kind can be found
lurking implicitly within many traditional archaeological and historical
syntheses: they can even be built into the core of their assumptions.

The second objection raised by New Archaeologists to the normative
approach to culture is that culture is just treated as a rag-tag
assemblage of ideas. Why do ideas fit together in a certain way? What,
if anything, does the zigging versus the zagging on the pottery have to
do with varying settlement and house types? Why, in short, do certain
things fit together in the way they do?

The New Archaeology’s definition of culture was therefore very
different. For New Archaeology, culture was a system (figure 2.5). A
system was defined by David Clarke as ‘an intercommunicating network of
attributes or entities forming a complex whole’ (Clarke 1978: 495). For
Flannery and Marcus, systems were characterized by exchanges of matter,
energy and information among their components.

This is a very different view of culture. Instead of looking for shared
norms, systems thinkers looked for different elements or subsystems and
studied the relations between them. Instead of looking ‘inside’ at what
people thought, what was going on inside their heads, at centre stage,
they often prefer to look ‘outside’, at how their cultural system was
adapted, to an outside environment.

Cultural Systems: Summary

There are six aspects of thinking about cultural systems that it is
important to grasp.

(1) Cultures are, at least in part, the way they are because they are
adapted to an external environment, whether that is the surrounding
natural environment or that of neighbouring, competing social systems.
We have seen how Lewis Binford defined culture as ‘Man’s extrasomatic
means of adaptation’. Much thinking on cultural systems thus tends to
have close intellectual ties to Darwinian ideas of adaptation. Many
thinkers have moved away from this stress on adaptation to the external
environment in recent years, as we shall see.

(2) Elements of culture, in this view, are more or less observable.
Obviously you cannot dig a cultural system up directly – you will never
see a ‘trade’ or ‘subsistence’ subsystem in the archaeological record.
You can argue that they are observable, however, in the sense that they
depend on systems of energy and information flow rather than on thoughts
or norms.

To clarify: you can’t see ‘norms’ inside the mind of the potter; it’s
difficult to think of a way of ‘testing’ what was going on inside his or
her head, particularly if he or she has been dead for several thousands
of years. On the other hand, you can think of possible ways to measure
the incidence and importance of ‘trade’ for a given archaeological
group. You might, for example, look at the presence and proportion of
non-locally made pottery from excavated contexts. Again, you can’t dig
up ‘subsistence’, but you can measure and quantify the area of land
suitable for arable cultivation round a site, or the meat weight and
calorific value represented by the data gleaned from a faunal
assemblage. So one can see how an archaeologist might begin to construct
and measure a link between, in this example, subsistence economy and
trade – and might then ‘test’ this hypothesized link by reference to the
archaeological record.

(3) Such systems can be modelled and are amenable to being compared from
culture to culture. In this way, they can lead to comparative
observations and generalizations about cultural processes.

(4) Elements of cultural systems are interdependent; subsistence, trade,
ritual, social subsystems are related one to another. As a result,
change in one part of the system will affect the whole leading to
positive or negative feedback, homeostasis or transformation. What do
these terms mean?

Many systems thinkers have suggested that cultural systems can be seen
in fundamentally similar terms to other kinds of system in the natural
world. Natural systems in ecology, for example, tend towards a state of
balance. When they are affected by some external change, such as a
change in climate or the introduction of a new predator, the whole
system will, after a period of fluctuation, tend to reach a new state of
overall balance through modifications in the relations between the
subsystems.

So, by analogy, an environmental change (say an improvement of the
climate) will affect subsistence (making farming more productive). This
will enable farmers to produce more agricultural surplus, and to use
that surplus to engage in more trade in luxuries or prestige goods, thus
changing the trade subsystem. The new prestige goods may also affect the
social subsystem; accumulation of such prestige items might bolster the
position of élites, increasing the social distance between élites and
commoners. The changed social and trade subsystems will then of course
react back on subsistence – newly powerful élites might encourage or
insist on further agricultural intensification, or initiate large-scale
projects like irrigation. With negative feedback, the system reaches a
new balance; this tendency towards a new equilibrium is called
homeostasis. On the other hand, positive feedback might occur – for
example, the new flow of prestige goods produces a transformation in the
social system, new forms of ranking that are unstable, which reacts back
proportionally on trade and farming as new social groups demand more
surplus and trade goods.

(5) Different elements of cultural systems are linked to one another and
explained by function. For example, if you want to explain ritual
elaboration in a particular period, it might be explained in terms of
the function of religious systems in giving legitimization to social
ranking (‘we are of high status because only we have access to the
gods’). Again, an intensification in agricultural production (that is,
producing more food) might be linked to the need to produce a surplus
for prestige purposes – again one subsystem is explained by reference to
its function in terms of others.

This is important because it suggests that we can look at the
significance of certain practices in the archaeological record without
necessarily having to make assumptions about their symbolic meaning,
which for many taking this view, is untestable. In this case, we see
ritual elaboration, say through the size and form of temples and
religious paraphernalia, and interpret it as legitimating an élite. We
don’t need to worry about what this or that religious practice ‘meant’,
what the form of the temples symbolized.

(6) Archaeologists can examine the links between subsystems in terms of
correlation rather than simple causes. We might observe, for example,
that over time in a particular context intensification of subsistence
agriculture goes hand-in-hand with population rise. Arguing about which
‘caused’ the other is pretty fruitless, being a chicken-and-egg
argument. In delineating a cultural system, however, one can note the
correlation between the two and build it in within a larger model of
systemic change or stability.

The Idea of Process

Closely related to the idea of culture as a system is the idea of
cultural process. We have seen that New Archaeology sought to replace
‘culture history’ with ‘culture process’. Since that move, the idea of
process has remained central to much of archaeological thinking.

Like so many terms in archaeological thought, ‘process’ is important and
habitually used, but it remains a difficult term to define. It refers to
a cluster of interconnected propositions:

(a) Process is about the ‘why?’ questions – it is about explanation, not
simply narrative description. Archaeologists want to ask ‘why?’ rather
than merely ‘when?’ or ‘who?’. A traditional culture sequence such as
that of Childe’s (figure 2.3) may be valuable in describing a sequence,
but it tells us nothing about why one culture succeeded another, or why,
for example, innovations like agriculture or metallurgy spread quickly
or slowly. The idea of process, then, relates closely to ideas of
cultural evolution.

(b) Archaeologists want to look at the underlying process rather than
the ‘noise’ on top. Why pottery decoration zigs or zags is unimportant
in this view; instead, what is important is to look at pottery as one
artefact of trade or of craft specialization, and to chart the process
by which, for example, the long-term development of market networks
relates to such specialization. Particular phenomena will always vary:
as with economics or sociology, what may be important is the underlying
trend.

(c) Archaeologists want to look at change in the long term. Many
archaeologists would argue that if you want to do anthropology, the
obvious place to start is in the present. Archaeology’s great, possibly
its only, contribution to the wider study of human beings had to be
through its long-term perspective which cultural anthropologists,
working only in the present or recent past, do not have.

In this sense, processual thinking shares many of the concerns with the
rhythms of long-term history as discussed by Annales historians such as
Fernand Braudel, though at the time these parallels in thinking were
little noted and it fell to a later generation of theorists writing in
the 1980s to point out the similarities (see chapter 11).

Example: Cultural Process around the North Sea

In his book Dark Age Economics Richard Hodges developed a processual
interpretation of the rise of towns, trade and social complexity in
post-Roman northwest Europe. Again, Hodges’s arguments must be seen in
context. Hodges was working against a backdrop of traditional
archaeological thought that had spent a great deal of time excavating
early medieval trading sites and analysing documentary evidence. Much
ink had been spilt trying to determine the exact date of settlements,
very often in an attempt to prove that this or that settlement was ‘the
first’ and that urban life spread outwards from that centre. This work,
however, had done almost nothing in explaining the re-emergence of towns
and trade before ad 850, had treated the evidence in a particularistic
manner and in ways that were riddled with questionable mentalist and
essentialist arguments (reference to innate ‘rekindling of the spirit of
trade’ or ‘the trading spirit of the Frisian peoples’).

Hodges suggested that the whole of the North Sea area should be seen as
a cultural system, within which social complexity, the rise of urbanism
and the growth of trade were linked. Drawing on ethnographic parallels
such as the Kula exchange network, he suggested that as with chiefdom
societies in general, the position of the chief or king at the apex of
society depended on his ability to control the production and
circulation of luxury or ‘prestige’ goods. The more successful the chief
was at controlling this flow, the more he could reward his followers
with gifts that in turn created reciprocal obligations.

The rise of a limited number of towns in the seventh to ninth century ad
could be seen as an attempt to control this production and flow; Hodges
drew attention to the planned nature of these settlements, suggesting
that planning reflected central control and their royal origin. He also
pointed out their location: on estuarine or riverine sites suitable for
long-distance trade, away from existing centres of authority.

Note that this explanation generalizes. It puts early medieval Europe
within a general classification of ‘chiefdom societies’ and seeks to
understand them in that light. Now ‘chiefdom societies’ can be seen in
Polynesia, the Americas, the Bronze Age in the Aegean; that is, in a
variety of ethnographic, ethnohistoric and prehistoric situations
spanning the globe. In all these areas other scholars have drawn
attention to the importance of the flow of prestige goods, the links
between prestige and chiefly power, the processes leading to greater
social complexity. Citing this literature, Hodges criticized traditional
scholars who had emphasized the uniqueness of northwestern Europe,
suggesting memorably that we should not consider the underlying
processes of cultural change to be any different in this context just
because a few Northern European monks took it into their heads to write
down what they thought of current events.

Such an evolving social system is more or less observable in the
archaeological record. We cannot directly see trade or urbanism, but we
can develop archaeological indexes of trade through statistical studies
of artefacts. We cannot see social ranking directly, but we can develop
an index of it in terms of burial practices, the richness or paucity of
grave goods.

Cultural Process: Strengths

It has been argued by some writers that all archaeologists think in
terms of cultural systems and processes. We all think of societies as
functioning units, and as we have seen many ‘traditional’ writers use
the metaphor of bodily systems implicitly. Much thinking in these terms
is implicit within explanations, even if the writer does not use the
appropriate jargon or is even consciously aware of the intellectual
background to what he or she is doing.

There are three strengths of thinking in terms of systems and process
which are worth outlining:

(1) It avoids the problems of mentalism discussed above. Hodges tries to
explain the rise of towns and trade; he does not take the easy and
fallacious route of ascribing it in mentalistic fashion to some
indefinable ‘Viking spirit’; it is linked to other processes within a
total picture of an evolving social system.

(2) It avoids monocausal explanations, in other words explanations that
try to single out one or other cause for an event. In so doing
processual thinking can combine the strengths of such explanations and
avoid their weaknesses.

One example is the study of the collapse of civilizations. In studying
why civilizations suddenly collapse, much fruitless academic argument
has been spent in arguing over single, specific causes. The eruption of
Santorini and its relation to the collapse of the Minoan civilization,
the ‘Classic Maya collapse’, or the convenient attribution of collapses
to sudden invasions of vast hordes of barbarian peoples, are obvious
examples.

Processual thinking directs our attention back to ‘why?’ questions. It
points away from sudden invasions and disasters towards an understanding
of why certain stresses or events were or were not critical (figure
5.2). For example:

(a) The fall of the Roman Empire. Traditional accounts are often
consumed in endless detail on this or that barbarian invasion. A
processual thinker asks: Why was this barbarian invasion a fatal blow
rather than easily repulsed? What internal factors lessened the ability
of the Empire to respond? Conversely, what systemic or structural
factors underlay the barbarian invasions – population rise, territorial
stress, changes in political structure?

(b) The collapse of the Minoan civilization. In the past, many looked to
specific causes, such as chance invasions of barbarians or the eruption
of the volcano of Santorini. In all these cases, practical arguments
raged back and forth – for example, Spyridon Marinatos’s suggestion that
the Santorini eruption was primarily responsible was brought into
question by new dating evidence. But thinking more broadly, pointing to
particular events does not help us understand the underlying process.
Why should particular events like invasion or natural disaster lead to
irrecoverable decline rather than rapid regeneration?

(c) The ‘Classic Maya collapse’. Many of the great monuments of the Maya
civilization of Central America were suddenly abandoned, apparently
almost overnight. Again, traditional explanations looked to specific
historical causes such as earthquake, invasion or natural catastrophe to
explain this ‘collapse’. Processual thinkers redirect attention to what
they saw as more fundamental underlying factors – the relationship
between population rise and agricultural productivity, for example. By
modelling the Maya civilization as a system, they draw attention to
relationships between changing ‘variables’. Analysis of these variables
makes an apparently sudden collapse explicable as the culmination of
certain long-term processes.

(3) Cultural process is a potential source of optimism for archaeology.
If all aspects of a culture are functionally linked one to another, we
need not be restricted in what we talk about as archaeologists. Indeed,
there is no reason why we cannot infer the rest of society from the
meagre archaeological record. This is what I call the fairycake argument
(with apologies to Douglas Adams): if all parts of the universe are
linked to one another, the argument goes, we can infer the entirety of
the universe from one small piece of fairycake. Binford used this
argument when he wrote: ‘granted we cannot excavate a kinship
terminology or a philosophy, but we can and do excavate the material
items which functioned together with these. … The formal structure of
artefact assemblages together with the between-element contextual
relationships should and do present a systematic and understandable
picture of the total extinct cultural system’ (Binford 1964; his
emphasis)

Figure 5.2 A systems model of the ‘rise of civilization’ in Mesopotamia.
After Redman (1978: figure 7.7)

[c05_image002.jpg]

The Context of Cultural Systems

So far I have described processual thinking in isolation. However, it is
important to place systems thinking in its context. As with so many
archaeological theories, a lot of the intellectual background to systems
thinking lies in associated disciplines sharing the same fundamental
intellectual issues.

As we saw earlier, the links between different cultural elements or
subsystems are functional ones. In functional explanation, culture is
seen as comparable to an organism such as the human body or any other
complex organism – there is an organic analogy, to use a common piece of
jargon. Biologists explain different parts of an organism by reference
to their function within the system as a whole. For example, the form of
the heart – a powerful pump – is explained by reference to its function
in pumping blood which takes oxygen around the body. Sociologists
explain subsystems within modern social systems by reference to their
functions. For example, the form of the modern state – an administrative
bureaucracy – is explained by reference to its economic, social and
political function(s). Processual thinkers similarly explain elements of
past cultures by reference to their function; for example, religious
practices and institutions are seen in terms of their function in
legitimating social hierarchies, or the presence of élites is explained
with reference to their function in managing complex activities such as
irrigation agriculture.

Functionalism, as a theory of culture, has been defined as the
proposition that cultures are like organisms, so that the part is
explained in terms of its function in relation to the whole. Cohen
defines it as ‘the notion that all of the institutions, beliefs and
morals of a society are interrelated as a whole, so that the method of
explaining the existence of any one item in the whole is to discover the
law which prescribes how this system coexists with all the others’
(Cohen 1968: 34). Functionalism developed in the later nineteenth
century with the rise of the human sciences as a whole. Different
versions were expounded by Auguste Comte, Herbert Spencer, Emile
Durkheim, Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski (note that many of these
thinkers were also associated with early attempts to fashion
anthropology and sociology in a positivist mould).

We can understand functionalism better if we think about its
intellectual and social context. British social anthropology in
particular went hand-in-hand with the training of administrators for the
Empire. Thus the one very powerful implication of functional thought was
that the apparently irrational, weird and wonderful customs of ‘native’
peoples, such as belief in magic and witchcraft or elaborate rules
surrounding exchange systems, were functionally connected to the
workings of the group as a whole. Would-be administrators were taught to
think about the customs of their subjects in context and not to apply a
simplistic moral or evolutionary scale. Customs should not therefore be
thought of as simply irrational, relics from a previous stage of social
evolution, or as the perversions of ‘savage’ life.

If customs were not irrational, neither could they be satisfactorily
explained as relics of previous societies. Evolutionists had often
suggested that certain customs were ‘hangovers’ from previous stages of
the evolution of a society. Functional thinking was synchronic – that
is, it examined how different elements of society fitted together at one
particular slice of time. In other words, it said ‘Never mind about
historical origins. How does this or that institution or custom function
here and now, at this particular moment in time?’

Processual Thinking: Drawbacks

Thinking in terms of cultural processes therefore appears to be a very
strong way of thinking about cultures in the past. It avoids many
problems of traditional approaches, provides convincing explanations,
and allows us to develop generalizing and comparative arguments. Yet in
many theoretical circles, particularly in Britain, many of the ideas
outlined above have been either abandoned or at least heavily qualified.
Why?

First, there is a series of well-rehearsed criticisms of functionalism.
These criticisms, some argue, can equally be applied to theories of
cultural process. They include the following:

(1) There is, it is argued, a flaw at the heart of functional
explanation. If we explain something by reference to its function in
keeping a total system going, this does not explain where it came from
historically. An over-simplified example: we explain the rise of élites
in state societies by reference to their managerial functions in
coordinating agricultural activities. But where did these élites come
from?

One possible answer is that it was a conscious decision; but it is
difficult to see a cultural group sitting down round the hearth and
saying ‘OK, we’re having problems coordinating large-scale irrigation
agriculture, so we’ll invent an élite and believe in them as gods. They
will then function in the following ways to keep our system in
equilibrium …’

A more plausible answer is to link functional with adaptive
explanations; that is, to say that societies that happen to have
developed such élites, for example through historical accident, are
better adapted and compete more effectively within their environments.
In the long run therefore they tend to be ‘selected for’ in the
Darwinian sense, and in the long run they are the ones we will find in
the archaeological record. Processual arguments are therefore often
closely related to adaptive explanations, in terms of the way they are
expressed and the sort of archaeologists who put them forward. This is a
point to which we will return in chapter 10.

(2) Processual arguments depend on functional linkages. But these links
are always open to doubt in specific terms. There may be alternative
strategies available to individuals and cultures that are not
considered.

For example, one of the classic functional linkages is that made between
increasingly marginal environments and agricultural intensification. As
an environment becomes more difficult to live in, it is argued, human
groups will elaborate and intensify their efforts to cultivate food. At
Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico, archaeologists have found that
in the period ad 700–800 there is an upsurge in the building of
ceremonial monuments, and a transition from pithouses to stone pueblos.
This activity is taken as indicative of the development of a higher
level of social complexity. This level of complexity often has been
understood in systemic terms. The environmental record suggests that at
this time the climate at Chaco was getting drier. A drier climate, it is
argued, meant that if agriculture was to be successful crops had to be
irrigated rather than rely on rainfall. The large-scale coordination of
labour needed to run such systems required a managerial élite.

However, alternative strategies were available: why not simply abandon
the area? Or adopt population control? Why adopt this form of
agriculture rather than that form? Why, specifically, does the
management of irrigation agriculture require an élite; can it not be run
through egalitarian cooperation between groups? It has recently been
argued that reorganization, rather than collapse, is the most common
human response to climatic or environmental change.

It is objected, then, that alternatives are always available: that the
forms of processual thinking outlined above fail to explore why this
particular strategy was adopted rather than that particular strategy.
Such choices between particular adaptive strategies may depend on the
particularity of cultural groups, or on cultural preferences.

(3) Functionalism cannot, it is objected, explain change adequately. A
functional or systemic model can explain why a system remains stable.
However, why do societies become increasingly complex?

For example, Kent Flannery wrote a classic early study of the origins of
agriculture in Mexico, explaining the transition from a hunting and
gathering way of life as part of a wider systemic change. He treated
‘Man and the southern highlands of Mexico … as a single complex system,
composed of many subsystems, which mutually caused each other’. Culture
being adaptive in this view, change was seen in terms of ‘gradual change
in procurement mechanisms’, regulated by seasonality. The strengths of
this argument were (a) it directed attention away from the rather
tedious search for the earliest example of agriculture in the form of
‘the first corncob’; (b) it thus tried to explain the origins of
agriculture merely than describe its diffusion; (c) it directed
attention to agriculture as part of a gradual change in culture rather
than a sudden invention; and (d) the important role of a changing
environment could be stressed. One weakness, however, was the assumption
that ‘without external change, [the development of agriculture] might
never have occurred’ (Flannery 1973a).

It can be argued, then, that models of cultural process often require an
external ‘kick’ to start them off. Again, this has led to an interest on
the part of many archaeologists, particularly those working on the
origins of early states, to explore how change and conflict might be
‘built in’ to processual models. I will explore this interest further in
chapter 9 and below.

(4) The political implications of thinking about cultural systems can be
seen as objectionable. Suppose for a moment that systems thinking in its
more inflexible forms were ‘true’. What would its lessons be for us
today?

(a) That the nature of social stability and transformation is
inflexible, composed of long-term processes beyond the consciousness or
control of mere individuals, who are only pawns in the game. These
long-term processes are very complex and can only be understood with
lots of impenetrable jargon (mutual causal deviation amplifying
processes). However, such processes are scientifically understandable.
The only people, then, who really understand how society works and are
therefore in a position to make judgements on how we should organize it
are scientists, ‘men in white coats’. Ordinary people, it is further
implied, are not qualified to make critical comments on the judgements
of ‘experts’ who should therefore be left in sole charge of social
management.

(b) That history is about harmony rather than conflict. If each element
of culture is functionally related to the next, it is difficult to see
where conflict between groups might come from. In addition, if the moral
of functionalism is that all parts of the system are adapted to one
another and that there is a ‘natural’ tendency towards balance or
homeostasis, then by definition we live in a well-adapted system. Rather
than think in terms of class conflicts and contradictions between
groups, we are encouraged to treat social discord as something that can
be ‘managed away’ by the white-coated experts mentioned above. One
person’s systemic management problem is another’s revolution.

This is an over-simplified version of an argument developed by Jürgen
Habermas and others within the ‘critical theory’ school of social
philosophy, namely that systems theory is an ideology of control. In
this view, systems thinking is an authoritarian political statement
masquerading as neutral science. It must be opposed, in this view, on
basically political grounds.

(5) Processual thinking is an attempt to understand society from the
outside. Regardless of whether one is studying Neolithic Europe or
Formative Oaxaca, systemic thinkers still seem to divide up their
cultures into the same elements subsistence, trade, social, ritual …
Right or wrong, these are general categories imposed by the
archaeologist on to particular cultures. And, of course, they are (in
this argument) specifically Western, bourgeois categories.

Now it may be that we should be trying to understand culture from the
inside. To clarify, if we want to understand why cultures changed in the
past in may be necessary to understand something of ‘their’ worldview,
‘their’ ideas of how the world works. Now their ideas may not have
divided the world up into such neat little blocks, or they may have
divided the world up into different blocks.

This distinction between ‘outside’ and ‘inside’ views of a culture is
one that is made time and time again in different areas of the social
sciences. The anthropologist Marvin Harris describes such a distinction
in terms of emic (inside) and etic (outside); sociologists talk of a
distinction between behaviour (what can be objectively observed) and
action (what the behaviour means to the participants). The argument that
it is necessary to look at ‘their’ view of ‘their’ world is one that is
central to ‘interpretive’ and ‘postprocessual’ views of archaeology.

Processual Thinking Modified

The force of the criticisms raised above was felt greatly by most
scholars, and has meant that more monolithic and hard-line forms of
systemic and processual thought held less and less popularity in
archaeology after the early 1980s. Most current versions of processual
thinking are rather modified, and have developed partly in response to
some of the issues raised above.

In practice, two responses can be taken:

1 Some archaeologists claim to reject all models of culture process and
have tried to adopt entirely different ways of thinking about societies
(most obviously within ‘postprocessual’ approaches; see chapter 7). In
this attempt they have followed the lead of sociologists, most notably
Anthony Giddens. They have managed to distance themselves from thinking
in terms of cultural process with varying success.

2 Others have tried to separate modified, looser versions of processual
thinking from much of the intellectual and historical ‘baggage’ of
functionalism. Several propositions are involved here:

(a) We can separate functional explanation from the sins of
functionalism as described above.

(b) Processual models of culture can incorporate conflict and
contradiction within their parameters.

(c) If (b) holds, then change from within the cultural system can be
understood and fruitfully explored in processual terms. We don’t need to
rely on an external ‘kick’ as Flannery did in his early work; we might,
for example, look for class or gender inequality within a culture, and
view that as a source of tension that leads to transformation.
Processual models can therefore, on this argument, develop
understandings of very sudden transformations, and are correspondingly
less dependent on ideas of adaptation to an external environment to
explain where change comes from.

(d) We can look at cognitive factors (‘their’ view of ‘their’ world)
within a processual model, either by modelling ‘cognition’ as a separate
subsystem or by some other means. ‘Cognitive archaeology’ will be
further discussed in the next chapter.

As a result, processual thinking in archaeology, particularly in North
America, has moved on from a view of cultural systems as purely or
primarily adaptive to an external environment, and as monolithic
entities that are characterized by harmony and homeostasis. Three more
contemporary trends can be distinguished.

(1) First, a move away from purely or primarily adaptive models, and an
exploration of conflict. Elizabeth Brumfiel expressed this move in
processual thinking well in the title of her review essay: ‘Breaking and
entering the ecosystem – gender, class and faction steal the show’
(1992).

In this view, culture process remains central as a way of thinking about
past cultural systems. However, there are many qualifications from
earlier versions. In particular, we can look at conflict and competition
between different elements within the cultural whole. The dimensions of
such conflict and competition include political and social faction,
class, gender, and other social groups. Conflict of this kind can lead
not to homeostasis but to social transformation. So instead of seeing
systems as monolithic, a stress on ideas such as heterarchy and
factional competition leads us towards a much more dynamic idea of
systemic change – and further, one that is much less dependent on ideas
of adaptation.

I will consider this work further in chapter 9, as it can also be
considered as a logical outgrowth of developments in thinking about
cultural evolution and early state societies. It also owes a great deal
to developments in Marxist thought, and particularly a Marxist view of
political economy.

(2) ‘World systems theory’ claims to unite elements of systemic and
Marxist thought. We shall discuss Marxism in the next chapter, but
Marxist models clearly involve many of the factors that early systems
thinking in archaeology had been criticized for ignoring: class
conflict, contradiction, inequality, exploitation.

World systems theory had its origins in the analysis of the origins of
modern capitalism; it is associated with the work of Emmanuel
Wallerstein. Wallerstein pointed out that capitalist social formations
involved more than the nation-states of Western Europe. Rather, if we
wanted to understand how capitalism emerged in the fifteenth, sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, we had to look at the way different societies
across the globe were brought together into a single world system. Such
a system had a core, in this case of the nascent capitalist states of
early modern Europe, and a periphery, the other ends of the developing
trade routes with Africa, Asia and the Americas. Core and periphery were
related through trading networks that had social implications at each
end of the link: thus capitalist development in Europe was transformed
through the arrival of increased quantities of gold and of traded
commodities, while ‘native’ societies changed rapidly, often developing
new élites and nascent states, partly in response to the influx of
European goods. The entire globe, taken as a whole, could be modelled
systemically, with stress on the interdependence between core and
periphery, so that change in one could be seen to lead to change in the
other, often many thousands of miles away. The social systems of both
were understood by reference to functional linkages.

Archaeologists have suggested that we can use a world systems model to
explain a variety of ancient social networks. In particular, they have
looked at the interaction and networks of dependence between core state
societies and peripheral pre-state societies in a variety of contexts
(Bronze and Iron Age Europe, pre-Hispanic Central America, for example).
Santley and Alexander, for example, develop a generalizing typology of
units (the ‘dendritic political economy’, the ‘hegemonic empire’, the
‘territorial empire’) and then a set of processes involved in
transformation (disenfranchisement, population redistribution, labour
organization and power).

(3) Simulation and mathematical modelling: from the late 1970s onwards
Renfrew and others argued that systems could be simulated on computers,
and that moreover we could build chance, historical contingency and
human decision-making into these models. This led in turn to an interest
in new models of the natural world being produced by natural scientists.
For example, chaos theory looks at how apparently random and small-scale
phenomena can trigger much larger patterns. By analogy, many systemic
thinkers have explored stochastic models (that is, models with elements
of chance or random variation built into them) and asked how systems
might be set off on different trajectories by contingent or chance
events.

These strands of thought are very different one from another, but what
is certain is that over the last 30 years there has been a ‘softening’
of processual thinking. Cultural systems are no longer seen as
monolithic structures, and contingency and historical accident is
allowed for; room has been made for cognition (see next chapter); and
heterarchy and conflict have become popular buzz-words.

However, I want to stress that an idea of process remains central and
even foundational to much academic archaeology, particularly in North
America; in later chapters, I shall argue that much of ‘postprocessual’
archaeology is much more dependent on concepts of culture process than
many of its proponents care to admit.

Culture, Process and the Individual

Stop – you’ve finished before discussing the most important criticism of
processual thinking of all. Human beings don’t act like this. They’re
not just pawns in a system. They are irrational and unpredictable.
Processual theory can never work because human actions are random. You
can’t fit human beings with all their idiosyncrasies and peculiarities
into a model.

Ironically, the one criticism of processual thinking that is most
popular is also the one that, in my view, is utterly misconceived.

Are human beings unpredictable? Almost certainly not, though we like to
think so. Cupid is supposed to be blind, but the vast majority of us
manage by some amazing coincidence to find partners of very similar
ethnic and social origins to ourselves.

In any case, unless you are a methodological individualist (see
Glossary), you cannot reduce the understanding of long-term social
processes to what we do as individuals. This is a classic debate not
just within archaeology, but within the human sciences as a whole.

Consider an example from the modern world, one examined by Emile
Durkheim in a classic pioneering study in the social sciences: the
suicide rate. The reasons why individuals commit suicide are as varied
as they are tragic, but the overall rate of suicides within society as a
whole rises and falls with other factors (such as the unemployment rate,
whether the country is at peace or at war). A social scientist cannot
predict individual suicides, but can, given sufficient data on
contemporary social trends, predict rises and falls in the suicide rate,
more often than not with a great deal of success. Consider also powerful
individuals. Scholars may seek to explain events in terms of powerful or
charismatic people – emperors or great leaders – but this always begs
the question of where their power comes from, what makes their power
possible.

If such a view works for the present, it is surely even stronger in
prehistory, where archaeologists manifestly have to deal with trends and
processes that span hundreds and even thousands of years, rhythms of
time than are beyond the compass of any individual.

Western thought has an emotional attachment to the idea of ‘the
individual’ that is simply not borne out by the reality of the world
around us, and still less is a valid basis for thinking about the past.
We can’t say in advance whether individuals were or were not important
in the past. Other cultures have had different ideas about individuality
and the importance of the individual versus the community. Westerners
may find some of these ideas strange, even disturbing or objectionable,
but this is no excuse for taking the modern Western ‘cult of the
individual’ as self-evident, or true for all times and all places.

There is a more sophisticated argument within much of contemporary
archaeology, namely that we have to understand social agency and the
individual subject. Pots are made by people, and I believe that the
archaeological record is as much about the detritus of individual
actions as it is about long-term aggregates or processes. There is also
a moral or philosophical argument that ‘freedom’ is a meaningful term to
use in historical analysis, but only in the presence of the absence of
freedom, for example in discussions of slavery. But before we can
consider such ideas, the Romantic notion of unqualified individual
freedom has to be firmly squashed. It may sell Hollywood blockbusters
(count the number of mentions the word ‘freedom’ gets in Braveheart) but
it is no basis for a serious analysis of past societies.

6

Thoughts and Ideologies

The last chapter mentioned in passing the question of how we might
understand or account for the thoughts of people in the past. Looking at
thoughts in the minds of people long dead is obviously very difficult.
Is it necessary?

The question ‘do we have to look at thoughts in the past?’ is
deceptively simple. It is embedded in deeper questions, for example:

1 What are ‘thoughts’, anyway? Are these conscious or unconscious? The
major influence of Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud on the human sciences was
to show that our conscious thoughts were only the tip of the iceberg;
human mental processes were much deeper, more complex and more difficult
to understand than the ‘rational’ surface. Should we take a ‘deep’ view
of thoughts or a ‘shallow’ view?

2 Are all human beings united by the same cognitive systems, or are
these diverse? To use some common jargon, are we justified in making
essentialist claims about the nature of cognition, or is human knowledge
of the world socially constructed and therefore variable between
different societies? If it is variable, how can we be justified in
making assumptions about the individual or group psychology of
prehistoric cultures on the basis of studies of modern populations?

These are all very deep questions that are not exclusive to archaeology.
They are questions that all ‘human sciences’ have had to grapple with in
different forms.

In this chapter, I want to expand on this theme and look at some of the
ways theory in the human sciences at large has coped with this problem.
These themes are, first, the influence of the structuralist and semiotic
traditions of thought, second, the influence of Marxism, and third, the
move towards cognitive approaches.

Looking at Thoughts

Do we really have to look at cognition, at thoughts? Many would say
‘No’. A large number of positivists both within archaeology and within
the human sciences in general argue that you can never test thoughts.
They give two reasons:

1 You can never scientifically verify what is between someone’s ears; in
archaeology, we can never go back to talk to the long-dead people who
created the monuments and artefacts that we study. Thoughts are
therefore untestable. They are consequently beyond the domain of
Science. This is a common view of some though not all positivists.

2 We don’t study human actions, we study the archaeological record – a
mute collection of stones and bones, matter arranged in time and space
(back to figure 2.1). We can explain what we see in terms of past
cultural systems; their dynamics of change, how they were adapted to
their environment. We do not need to do this with direct reference to
mental factors. Reference to mental factors would involve the error of
mentalist explanation in any case (see chapter 5). Forms of this
argument have been advanced by Binford and others.

Many traditional archaeologists also argue that it is difficult if not
impossible to use the archaeological record to recover past beliefs.
Archaeologists like Christopher Hawkes argued for seven levels of
archaeological inference ranging from the relatively straightforward to
the very difficult. Archaeological material, said Hawkes, could be used
with reasonable security to tell us about technology in the past.
Economic inferences were more difficult; inferences about cultural and
religious life were almost impossible except in exceptional
circumstances. This view of the limitations of archaeology was held with
fanaticism by some:

I was back in Devizes, along with a packed audience of several hundred
people, to hear the principal living authority on Stonehenge, Professor
Richard Atkinson, give a lecture… When this was done the chairman, the
equally authoritative Professor Stuart Piggott, called for questions.
There came some requests for various elucidations of technical points,
which were given. Then a young man stood up at the back.

‘Would Professor Atkinson care to say anything about the peoples who
built the three main phases – their culture and religion?’

He might as well have asked a synod of Methodist ministers whether they
could consider publishing a new edition of De Sade’s 120 Days of Sodom …
All such speculation was futile, the wicked fellow was peremptorily
told. Such information was strictly dependent on written records, the
Stonehenge peoplesdid not have writing, we knew nothing, we would never
know anything; to speculate on such matters was not only totally
unscientific, but far worse, it encouraged the lunatic fringe. In the
slightly shocked silence that followed this icy douche … Professor
Piggott rose to announce that the lecture was at an end. No more
questions. (Fowles 1980: 9–10)

Whatever orientation one takes, there are clearly immense difficulties
in recovering thoughts. Behavioural psychologists argue that we can
never ‘know’ what someone else is thinking in the present; we can only
record their behaviour, which can be externally measured and observed.
How much more difficult to recover the minds of women and men not just
long dead, but members of an extinct culture, with an utterly different
view of the world! Such a task is difficult enough for archaeologists of
historic periods; prehistorians have to do so using material remains,
with no documentary records to assist.

Why, then, should we be trying to get at past thoughts and beliefs? In
my view, to argue about whether or not it is difficult to do so is to
miss the point. It is simply necessary. I suggest there are three
reasons for this.

(1) We all actually make assumptions about past thoughts whether we like
it or not. Take, for example, a dry, straightforward typology of pots.
When archaeologists classify decorations of a certain type together,
they generally do so on the assumption that shared design must have
something to do with shared meanings in the minds of the makers and the
users of the pots, for example ideas of zeitgeist mentioned in Chapter
5.

What a lot of ‘atheoretical’ archaeologists do in practice is assert
that we can never recover past thoughts, but do so in practice by
slipping assumptions about mental attitudes back into their arguments as
‘common sense’. Thus, for example, putting fireplaces and chimney-stacks
in houses rather than rely on open hearths is common sense because it
makes the house warmer, less full of smoke, more ‘comfortable’. The
problem with such arguments is that they depend on assumptions about
what is ‘natural’ or ‘normal’ in human beings: in this example, a desire
for domestic comfort is assumed as ‘natural’. It is ‘common sense’,
then, to satisfy those desires. These assumptions tend to fall apart
when closely examined, since one can always point to the diversity of
human practice; in particular, different ethnographic examples where the
practice is not ‘n ormal’ or ‘natural’.

The problem with common sense in this context is that what is ‘common
sense’ to ‘us’ may not have been common sense to ‘them’. Anthropologists
study other cultures in the present that have very different cultural
attitudes. For the Azande, when some unfortunate accident occurs, it is
common sense to go to a witch-doctor or diviner to find out who was
responsible for the magic behind it. It is logical to assume that other
cultures in the past may have had other common senses.

Lurking in the wings behind the common-sense argument are implicit
beliefs in essentialism and ethnocentrism. Essentialism is the belief
that there are certain attitudes or emotions (such as the desire for
privacy, for domestic comfort, or the sex drive) that are ‘natural’ or
biologically endowed, either to humans in general or to a specific sex.
Thus the statement ‘in prehistory, men must have been more warlike than
women as they lacked the mothering instinct’ is an essentialist
statement since it assumes that ‘the mothering instinct’ is endowed
naturally or biologically to all women. Now there may or may not be
certain ‘human universals’ of this kind; that is a matter for debate; I
am sceptical about most of the possible candidates. Whatever the case,
however, such essentialist statements need to be argued through rather
than simply assumed.

Ethnocentrism is the belief that the values and attitudes of one’s own
culture are normal and universal. Thus an assumption that, for example,
witchcraft belief is ‘irrational’ is ethnocentric, since it assumes that
Western logic is the only form of rationality around. Belief in
witchcraft must therefore be irrational since it fails to satisfy the
criteria of Western logic. (Of course, Western logic fails to satisfy
the criteria of Azande witch doctors.) Again, belief in the human desire
for privacy is ethnocentric, since it assumes that the high stress on
the individual and hence his or her right to privacy in Western society
is universally normal and natural.

(2) Any archaeologist working outside the deeper recesses of prehistory
(that is, before ethnohistorically attested, protoliterate or literate
societies) has to deal with evidence that is strictly ‘historical’ in
nature; that is, with documentary or textual evidence in some form. But
such documents are nothing if not statements of thoughts – however
mundane or ‘obvious’ those thoughts are. If we are therefore going to
relate archaeological to documentary evidence, then, some critical
attention must be given to the mental attitudes and ideas that played
their part in producing that evidence.

(3) There is a philosophical point to do with the way we study human
societies. As we explored in the last chapter, it is almost impossible
to describe human behaviour without referring to mental concepts.
Imagine trying to describe – to get a third person to ‘understand’ – the
actions of a woman withdrawing money from a bank solely with reference
to physical movements and actions. This is a point made most elegantly
by one of my favourite and most entertaining writers, the sociologist
Erving Goffman:

Take … an act which is tolerably clear: a man driving through a red
light. What is he doing? [Goffman lists 24 different reasons,
including] 1. Where he comes from they have signs, not lights. 2. The
daylight was bad and he couldn’t see. 3. He’s lately become
colour-blind. 4. He was late for work. 5. His wife is giving birth in
the back seat and he’d like to get to a hospital. 6. The bank robber in
the front seat is holding a gun on him and has told him to run the light
… 15. He’s an inspector testing the vigilance of the cops on duty … 22.
He was drunk, high. 23. His mother has a lamentable occupation, and he
has a psychiatrically certifiable compulsivity with regard to red lights
…’ [He concludes]: So our man has passed through a red light. But at his
hearing when the judge asks him what he was doing running a red light,
he will provide an argument as to what was really happening. Obviously,
what makes driving through a red light a discernible, isolable event is
that a rule stipulated in regard to the light was broken. The objective
‘fact’, then, must be as variable as is the individual’s possible
relation to the rule. (Goffman 1971: 132; italics mine. Note in passing
that we understand the action by reference to its context, a point
developed in the next chapter.)

The belief that thoughts and ideas are more important than the material
world is called idealism. Historically, the idealist tradition of
philosophy is a long one, including the names of such philosophers as
Plato, Vico, Berkeley, Kant, Descartes and Hegel, through to the
linguist Ferdinand de Saussure and anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss.
Paradoxically, although it stresses the importance of thoughts and
concepts, a belief in idealism can lead to a very conservative
theoretical position. Because thoughts in the idealist view are very
important but also very difficult to get at, all the archaeologist can
legitimately do is describe and classify:

Do you wish to understand the true history of a Neolithic Ligurian or
Sicilian? Try, if you can, to become a Neolithic Ligurian or Sicilian in
your mind. If you cannot do that, or do not care to, content yourself
with describing and arranging in series the skulls, implements, and
drawings which have been found belonging to these peoples. (Benedotto
Croce, 1917, Theory and History of Historiography, trans. R.G.
Collingwood 1921: 135)

The idealist philosophical tradition has been profoundly influential in
continental Europe, particularly on traditions of French and Italian
archaeology. Postprocessual archaeology was not claimed to be an
idealist philosophy by its advocates, but it was profoundly influenced
by idealist notions.

The rest of this chapter will examine three bodies of thought that
archaeologists have used to approach the question of thoughts:
structuralism, Marxism, and ‘cognitive’ approaches.

Structuralism

One of the key ways in which idealism has affected archaeological
thought is via the school of thought termed structuralism. Like both
functionalism and Marxism, this theoretical current has developed and
changed as a critical tradition over the years. It has few adherents in
its original, classical form today, but (like systems theory) has had
such a profound influence on archaeological thought that it cannot be
ignored. Like Marxism also, structuralism is a term much misused and
abused, referring more to a vague impression of pretentious Paris
intellectuals sitting in cafes on the Rive Gauche than a given set of
ideas. I am going to go back to the roots of structuralism so that its
present influence can be more easily understood.

For functionalists, culture is like an organism, different parts of the
body/society performing different functions and the whole adapted to its
environment. For structuralists, culture is like language.

Structuralism was originally a body of thought developed in linguistics
by Ferdinand de Saussure. The most important point for our purposes is
to observe that for Saussure, language is composed of hidden rules that
we use but don’t articulate. As I write and you read this sentence, I
use a set of grammatical rules to compose my text. You know that set as
well. Your knowledge of that set of rules enables you to decode, to
‘read’ what I write. You can do this even though each sentence that I
produce is unique; each sentence is one that has never been composed
before in the history of the English language. Indeed, I can generate a
theoretically infinite set of different statements or sentences from a
fairly simple set of grammatical rules.

Both of us, however, understands those rules at a deep, implicit rather
than surface, explicit level. We both have a pretty hazy idea of what a
gerund or a subjunctive clause is. Neither of us puts those rules ‘into
words’ though we ‘know’ and use them constantly and habitually, and in
general we both get them right. (Otherwise, if we did not get them
right, we would not be able to decode each other’s utterances and
understand each other.)

In short, the rules that govern language are hidden, deep inside the
human brain. If you want to explain the different forms of language,
then, you need to refer to the hidden (cognitive) rules that generate
sentences.

Archaeologists influenced by structuralism suggest that the same is true
of the material things that we find in the archaeological record. They
see artefacts as another expression of human culture in general. If you
want to explain human culture, then, you need to uncover the hidden
(cognitive) rules that generate cultural forms.

Structural models have been used to produce classifications of different
kinds of archaeological material. Henry Glassie, for example, used the
analogy of ‘grammar’ to examine the layout of ordinary houses in
eighteenthcentury Virginia. He proposed that ordinary people designed
these houses by taking a series of basic spatial units and applying a
system of grammatical rules to those units to produce different house
plans. He called this scheme a transformational grammar: that is, it
described the way in which units were transformed through a series of
cognitive stages into houses. Similar exercises have been performed for
other classes of material, for example Leroi-Gourhan’s work on
Palaeolithic cave art and schemes of pottery decoration.

But the implications of structuralism are deeper than simply offering
tools for fresh classifications. So whereas a processual thinker’s
immediate instinct might be to ask ‘How does this social practice
function within the culture as a whole? And how does this help the
cultural system to work, to be better adapted, within a wider
environment?’, the structuralist will ask ‘What are the underlying rules
governing this structure? And what do those rules tell us about the way
this culture sees the world?’ For functionalists, culture is
fundamentally adaptive, a coping device; for structuralists, culture is
fundamentally expressive, a system of (hidden, cognitive) meanings.

Marxism

It is impossible at the present time to write history without using a
whole range of concepts directly or indirectly linked to Marx’s thought
and situating oneself within a horizon of thought which has been defined
and described by Marx. One might even wonder what difference there could
ultimately be between being an historian and being a Marxist. (Foucault
1980: 53)

A second school of thought that has had a profound effect on
archaeological thought is that of Marxism. Like structuralism, Marxism
has developed almost beyond recognition since its original formulation
and development by Karl Marx in the nineteenth century. I want to
highlight a very few aspects of Marxist thought that are of relevance to
archaeological theory.

In its original form, Marxism is a materialist philosophy. That is, it
proposes that material things are more important than ideas. If so, then
human history is about the growth of human productive power, the growing
human ability as history unfolds to produce material things: Gerry Cohen
suggests that ‘history is, fundamentally, the growth of human productive
power, and forms of society rise and fall accordingly as they enable or
impede that growth’ (Cohen 1978: x). In Karl Marx’s own phrase, humans
are what they do rather than what they think: ‘it is not the
consciousness of men that determines their being, but on the contrary,
their social being that determines their consciousness’ (cited in
McClellan 1977: 389).

At any time, Marxists argue, people produce things in a certain
distinctive way, which Marx calls the mode of production. Marxists have
spoken of ‘tribal’, Asiatic, Ancient, feudal and capitalist modes of
production among others. The ancient mode of production, to take one
example, is distinctive for Marx because it relies on slave labour at
its base, whereas feudalism depends on the labour of unfree peasants or
‘serfs’ tied to the land. Each different mode of production results in a
different kind of class antagonism: in ancient societies between slave
and master, in feudalism between peasant and feudal landlord, in
capitalism between proletarian and bourgeois.

The mode of production, Marx argues, can be split into the forces of
production, that is the raw materials, apparatus, labour power, and the
social relations of production. For example, the forces of production in
capitalist society consist of the machines and hardware of the
factories, while the relations comprise the factory system – the
division into workforce and management.

For Marx, there will always be antagonism and conflict between these two
elements: ‘the forces of production, the state of society, and
consciousness, can and must come into contradiction with one another,
because the division of labour implies the … fact that intellectual and
moral activity – enjoyment and labour, production and consumption –
devolve on different individuals, and the only possibility of their not
coming into contradiction lies in the negation in its turn of the
division of labour’. For this and other reasons, there will always be
conflict at the heart of human societies. Contradictions and class
antagonisms will tear at the heart of any social formation, developing
slowly or quickly in different circumstances. Eventually, however, they
will bring the whole structure crashing down, and a new social formation
will rise on its ruins.

This ‘classical’ model has been much criticized; the road from classical
to modern Marxism is too long to pursue here. I do want to pick out two
key points that emerge from this account of classical Marxism, however,
that have direct relevance to the development of archaeological thought:

(1) Marx’s account, if it works, provides a scientific basis to
communism, or more loosely, in this later time, a scientific basis to
political assertions about a more just society. In this sense classical
Marxism shares many parallels with the belief in a positivistic basis to
Science that was discussed in chapter 3. Contrary to positivism,
however, Marx argues forcefully that intellectuals cannot divorce
academic thought from political action.

Archaeologists influenced by Marxism, then, have seen a close link
between archaeology and politics. They have seen archaeological practice
and interpretations as partly or wholly political in nature, and in turn
have often seen their own archaeological work as in part a wider
political exercise. And they argue that to try to deny this is to bury
one’s head in the sand.

(2) The process of historical change in the Marxist model is
dialectical. A dialectical model is one that depends on the development
of contradictions and conflict within an entire social formation or
totality. These contradictions can only be understood within that total
social formation. For example, the terms ‘peasant’ and ‘landlord’ do not
have the same meaning regardless of time and place. We can only define
and understand peasant and landlord classes within a total understanding
of the feudal social formation. When that formation breaks down, it
leads to a completely new formation and the development in their turn of
new conflicts.

A dialectical model of social process contrasts with other models of
change. In culture history, and earlier forms of systems thinking,
change is often presented as a smooth process of accretion and
adaptation. In place of this, a dialectical model stresses contradiction
and conflict – it was partly as a result of the influence of Marxist
concepts that systems thinking came to be modified as we traced in the
last chapter. The dialectical model also leads us to question social
categories and definitions that claim to be true for all times and all
places.

Marxism has thus led archaeologists to question either/or oppositions
such as subjectivity and objectivity. They point out that such terms
only oppose each other within a total framework, and it is that total
framework that they seek to question and transform.

As a result, Marxism has had a wide and pervasive influence on different
archaeological traditions around the world. ‘Latin American social
archaeology’ uses a Marxist analytical framework to understand social
formations, and insists on an engagement with social justice issues. It
will be considered in chapter 9.

In the old Soviet Russia and other areas of eastern Europe, Marxism was
an official orthodoxy until the break-up of the old Stalinist regimes at
the end of the 1980s. In many cases, the influence of Marxism was
shallow, being confined to ritualized acknowledgement in a Preface or
introduction before a more orthodox descriptive or culture-historical
approach being taken in the text. Ironically, since the fall of
Communism in eastern Europe, there has been more fruitful and sustained
examples of analyses informed by Marxist thought from these countries.

Marxism has also been a profound influence on Mediterranean archaeology,
though its influence is not always explicitly laid out in the
literature. For example, there is an ongoing debate over the origins of
Rome and its transformation from a small protohistoric village into an
Imperial city and the hub of the Roman Empire. A major figure in the
archaeology of Roman Italy has been Andrea Carandini, who developed an
interpretation of the rise of Rome that was directly influenced by
Marxist ideas. Subsequent debate over this interpretation was, in part,
an implicitly theoretical debate over the utility of these ideas and
their alternatives.

Ideology

Later Marxists (or ‘neo-Marxists’), particularly those from different
traditions in western Europe, have focused attention on the role of
ideology in this model. For Marx, the forces and relations of production
were the ‘infrastructure’, the heart of the system: the political and
legal system sat on top of this, along with a set of ideological
beliefs. In a simple view, while social foundations are creaking and
society becomes increasingly unequal and unjust, people’s beliefs act to
‘paper over the cracks’, to make the existing system appear legitimate.

‘Vulgar’ ideology is obvious: in our society, one might cite
flag-waving, advertising, appeals to patriotism, motherhood and apple
pie. But Marxists believe ideology also works on a far more subtle level
than this. In particular, ideology:

1 naturalizes; that is, it makes the existing social order with all its
inequalities appear timeless, God-given, ‘just scientific fact’, or
without any conceivable alternative;

2 makes interests that are sectional (for example, the economic
wellbeing of the upper classes) appear universal (of benefit to
everyone); and

3 masks what is ‘really going on’, for example by denying that social or
economic inequalities exist.

To take a straightforward (and therefore overly simplistic, ‘vulgar’ and
easily decoded) example, a Marxist would argue that we only have to open
the pages of most newspapers to see ideology at work (‘competition and
the rules of the free market are not arbitrary human constructions that
can be changed, they are out there in nature; look at how cold, wet,
miserable life was in the Middle Ages, in other words, before the
benefits of capitalism’). Sectional interests are presented as universal
(wage rises are presented as ‘harming the nation’ rather than just
harming the profits accruing to the wealthy capitalists). An ideology of
equality (‘anyone can become President, everyone is equal under the law,
I want to build a classless society’) masks what Marxists see as very
real divisions and inequalities in gender and wealth.

This interest in ideology has led to the detailed exploration of how
ideology works, and a stress on the unmasking of the relations behind
ideology. Paradoxically, then, Marxism started as a materialist model,
but has ended up influencing Anglo-American archaeology through its
analysis of ideological beliefs and practices. This move away from
materialism is one of the key points behind the Frankfurt School of
critical theory. The Frankfurt School, most famously in the work of
Jürgen Habermas, sought to look behind the mask of ideology, to show how
modern Western systems of belief were not neutral or objective, but
actually ideological constructions that legitimated modern capitalism.
It aimed to emancipate ordinary people and promote democractic values by
heightening consciousness of the power and pervasiveness of ideology.

Of course, interest in ideology in archaeology has two aspects. One can
look at ideology in the past, how for example a particular belief system
legitimated the position of an élite in ancient societies. But one can
also look at the present – how archaeological writing is itself
ideological. For example, Bruce Trigger has written extensively on how
different interpretations of North American prehistory served to
ideologically portray Native American cultures as backward and
unchanging.

Cognitive Archaeology

A third body of thought, developed largely by archaeologists themselves,
has emerged in the last 20 years: that of ‘cognitive archaeology’.
Cognitive archaeology aims to ‘develop a secure methodology by which we
can hope to learn how the minds of the ancient communities in question
worked and the manner in which that working shaped their actions’
(Renfrew 2005: 41). Cognitive archaeologists often describe themselves
as working within the general assumptions and framework of
processualism. Consequently, much of this work describes itself as
cognitive-processualism by its advocates.

These authors look at ‘mind’ in two ways. First, cognitive
archaeologists are interested in human origins, and specifically the
role of cognitive development in the evolutionary origins and
development of hominids. For example, archaeologists have asked about
possible correlates in the archaeological record for the development of
language, such as the development of more complex chaines operatoires in
the production of stone tools. This work has close links with the
application of Darwinian models to archaeology, in that it deals with a
process that is at least in part about the biological development of
species, and uses insights and observations from evolutionary psychology
(see chapter 10).

The second interest is in cognitive processes in human societies after
the emergence of our own species, Homo sapiens sapiens. Renfrew and
Zubrow have argued that, for example, we can identify religious or cult
behaviour in the archaeological record. They have suggested that there
is no contradiction between a broadly scientific view of archaeological
theory and an insistence that we need to look at cognition. Kent
Flannery and Joyce Marcus, for example, have looked at functional
linkages between the ‘ideological subsystem’ and other areas of cultural
subsystems, and stressed the compatibility of their work with
subsistence and settlement analysis:

Our own first effort [in cognitive archaeology: Flannery and Marcus
1976] was an attempt to understand the ancient Zapotec Indians more
fully by combining their cosmological beliefs with a more traditional
analysis of their subsistence and settlement. … We simply tried to show
that one could explain a higher proportion of ancient Zapotec
subsistence behaviour if, instead of restricting oneself to a study of
agricultural plants and irrigation canals, one took into account what
was known of Zapotec notions about the relationships of lightning, rain,
blood sacrifice, and the ‘satisfizing ethic’. We also stressed that we
could only do so because the 16th-century Spanish eyewitness accounts of
the Zapotec were so rich. (Flannery and Marcus 1993: 260)

Flannery and Marcus identify the study of cosmology, religion, ideology
and iconography as legitimate areas of cognitive analysis, stressing
that all such work must be empirically grounded. Again, Steven Mithen
has talked of ‘thoughtful foragers’ – looking at how we might model the
decision-making processes of hunters and gatherers within an adaptive
framework, yielding a range of cognitive inferences (Mithen 1990: see
also chapter 10, this volume).

The argument of all these authors is that we can look at thoughts while
retaining the essential components of a processual approach: belief in
scientific objectivity and ‘testing’. But other archaeologists have
claimed that the need to look at thoughts has led them to question the
very basis of processual archaeology, as we will see in the next
chapter.

All this is very interesting, but we’ve heard very little in this
chapter about archaeology. How, precisely, do the different views lead
to concretely different archaeological explanations?

I’ll be discussing some more practical examples in the next chapter, but
here is an ‘interim summary’ for the time being.

For many in the processual tradition, the artefacts we find are evidence
of different parts of a cultural system that existed in the past. For
some, artefacts form a fossil record of human behaviour. Many
processualists argue that as we cannot see thoughts scientifically, so
we can’t explain artefacts in terms of the ideas in the minds of the
makers – though following Flannery and Marcus, we can include ‘cognitive
variables’ in our analyses, if used with caution. Instead, we look at
different parts of past cultural systems and the links between them.
Processualists claim to have the ability to test between alternative
hypotheses about the way those systems worked through the development of
middle-range theory.

For structuralists, artefacts are evidence of systems of belief in the
broadest sense, evidence of ‘mind-sets’ or ‘worldviews’. Just as
language is structured by rules that remain hidden, so is material
culture. Structuralists look at oppositions in the particular form of
artefacts, the placing of artefacts within graves, for ideas about the
constitution of gender, oppositions between nature and culture, and so
on. Since we can never prove the existence of hidden rules, this
tradition suggests that we can never really ‘test’ any single
interpretation of the past; there is a tendency towards developing
multiple, complex interpretations rather than trying to reduce culture
to one single pattern.

Marxists look for contradictions and inequalities in culture. For
example, is burial practice legitimating or masking what happens in
life? Marxists ask: how does the belief or worldview expressed by this
piece of material culture relate to what is really going on? For
example, does an egalitarian burial practice mask inequalities in
society?

Conclusion

In the second part of this chapter, I have picked out developments
within three schools of thought within social theory as a whole –
Marxism, structuralism and cognitive archaeology. I could have looked at
other profoundly influential movements treated elsewhere in this book
(feminism, the reaction against unilinear social evolution). These three
movements, however, give some flavour of the intellectual currents that
came to influence archaeological theory in the 1980s.

Marxism gives us an interest in conflict and contradiction, a stress on
ideology, an insistence that academic discourse is fundamentally also
political discourse in the present, and a model of structure and agency.
Structuralism gives us an interest in the hidden workings of language,
an interest in cultural meanings and in culture as expressive. Cognitive
archaeology, though fully developed as a body of theory more recently
than the 1980s, originated in part as an insistence that looking at
thoughts is not just an admissible scholarly activity, but a central
part of the archaeological endeavour.

All these themes were taken up into a group of new theoretical strands
in the 1980s, that came to be known collectively as ‘postprocessual
archaeology’.

7

Postprocessual and Interpretive Archaeologies

‘Postprocessual archaeology’ grew out of a very specific context that it
is important to understand. Part of that context within the human
sciences as a whole – developments in structuralism and Marxism – was
presented in the last chapter. Now, I want to look briefly at
developments within archaeology in the 1980s.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, a number of archaeologists became
increasingly dissatisfied with the direction archaeology was taking. In
particular, they pointed to the need to address cognitive factors, the
difficulties of positivist epistemology, and the problems with
developing middle-range theory – issues dealt with in chapters 3 to 6.

One such archaeologist was Ian Hodder, and his intellectual development
epitomizes this shift in many ways. Hodder’s early work was very much
within a processual mould. Hodder was heavily influenced by the ‘New
Geography’ and the work of New Archaeologist David Clarke on spatial
models in archaeology. Hodder used statistics and computer simulation to
develop a series of spatial models, particularly relating to trade,
markets and urbanization in Iron Age and Roman Britain. This period was
seen very much as an evolving system, with trade and urbanism being
linked as part of an overall process of ‘Romanization’.

But as the research progressed Hodder became more and more doubtful that
such models and simulations did really ‘test’ or ‘prove’ anything. The
same pattern or trace in the archaeological record, for example a
pottery distribution or network of urban centres, could be produced by a
range of different simulated processes. Therefore, a given pattern in
the archaeological record could be satisfactorily interpreted or
explained in different ways, with reference to a number of different
possible processes. Hodder felt that there was no way to test absolutely
between these alternatives. This is often referred to in subsequent
literature as a problem of equifinality.

A reading of Hodder and Orton’s Spatial Analysis in Archaeology,
published in 1976, shows this shift. In case after case – attempting to
simulate trade patterns and settlement systems using computers – Hodder
and Orton showed how difficult it was to ‘prove’ or ‘test’ anything
conclusively.

A good example was the study of goods used in prehistoric trade. Goods
such as obsidian flakes or polished greenstone axes were often found on
sites thousands of kilometres from the original source of the raw
material. Such finds clearly represented trade or contact in some form,
but ambitious New Archaeologists wanted to go further than this. Renfrew
and others had suggested that different forms of trade would leave
different traces in the archaeological record. If, for example,
‘down-the-line’ exchange was occurring, with community A collecting the
material at source before giving community B half, then community B
keeping half and handing half on … then different quantities of traded
material would be present in site assemblages than if everyone was going
back to source and making their own collation of material.

Hodder found that if ‘down-the-line’, directional or other modes of
exchange were modelled by computer simulation, similar rather than
different curves were produced. Different forms of process left the same
archaeological trace: in other words, they were equifinal (figure 7.1).

Lessons also came out of Hodder’s ethnoarchaeological work. Hodder
realized that however many archaeological facts you collected on a
computer, the only way to get a handle on what they meant in terms of
past activities is to look at the relationship between pattern and
process in the present. This, of course, was a similar and parallel
observation to Binford’s perception of the problems underlying the
‘Mousterian debate’ as discussed in chapter 4. Like Binford, Hodder
decided to turn to studies of ‘archaeology in the present’ to try to
establish correlations between behaviour in the present and
archaeological patterning. So Hodder went out to East Africa to examine,
among other themes, how real living ‘cultures’ could be mapped
archaeologically, what factors affected refuse disposal, and so on.

What Hodder found, again in a variety of instances, was that to
understand patterning on the ground it was necessary to refer to
people’s attitudes and beliefs. We looked at Hodder’s work with the Nuba
in chapter 4. This led him to:

1 a rejection of Binford’s confidence in the ability of middle-range
theory to act as a neutral arbiter between different explanations;

2 a belief in the importance of people’s thoughts and symbolism, and
with this a belief that cultures could not be viewed purely as adapting
to an external environment: ‘their’ view of ‘their’ world was important;

3 a belief that material culture was actively manipulated by people;
that is, that people used things in different ways as part of particular
social strategies, rather than material things being a passive
reflection of a set of rules.

Figure 7.1 The results of Hodder and Orton’s simulation exercise showing
that ‘different spatial processes can produce very similar fall-off
curves’, implying that ‘this advises great caution in any attempt at
interpretation’ (Hodder and Orton 1976: figure 5.35 and p. 145

[c07_image001.jpg]

How might we do archaeology in this way? Several theories dealing with
‘thoughts’, ‘ideologies’ or ‘mind’ were looked at in the previous
chapter. In the early 1980s a new generation of students, many of whom
were studying with Hodder at Cambridge, and others with Mark Leone as
part of the Archaeology in Annapolis project, turned to these theories.
Many turned to structuralism as a way into understanding the mind.
Others ‘read around’ Marxist and neo-Marxist texts and in particular
critical theory. Others were influenced by feminist thinking, while
others still looked at the writings of figures like Clifford Geertz in
‘interpretative anthropology’. Together, these very diverse strands of
thought coalesced into a very loose cluster of traditions that came to
be known by both supporters and critics as ‘postprocessual’ or
‘interpretive’ archaeology.

Postprocessual Archaeology

There is no such thing as a ‘postprocessual archaeologist’. Whenever I
see the phrase ‘the postprocessualists’ used in the archaeological
literature I expect some out-of-date and usually hostile
over-generalization of theoretical attitudes to follow, and I am rarely
disappointed. Just as New Archaeology was actually a very diverse set of
concerns and ideas that coalesced around certain slogans, so the
catch-all term ‘postprocessual’ conceals a great diversity of viewpoints
and traditions. Indeed, ‘postprocessualism’ is better characterized as a
historical term, referring, like New Archaeology, to a set of themes
characteristic of a specific period that have evolved into a much
broader and very diverse set of concerns and approaches.

So instead I shall try to characterize postprocessual thinking as a
historical moment, a crystallization of concerns raised in the 1980s and
1990s, that has gone on to inform archaeological thought as a whole. I
shall do so in the form of eight key statements that convey the flavour
of postprocessual traditions, a way of looking at and thinking about the
world. They should also indicate the debt owed to the intellectual
movements described in the previous chapter.

(1) We reject a positivist view of science and the theory/data split.
The data are always theory-laden. Postprocessualists rejected the claims
of Science as a unique form of knowledge, for the reasons advanced in
chapter 3. Generally, they aligned themselves with other non-positivist
conceptions of what science is or does, particularly social
constructivism whether in its ‘strong’ or ‘weak’ forms.

Or to put it another way, postprocessualists did not argue that ‘we
should not test things’; rather, they suggested that in practice neither
scientists nor archaeologists ever test things in ways that satisfy
positivist criteria. They pointed out, for example, that Renfrew’s
‘testing’ of his territorial model of megaliths in figure 2.7 was no
such thing; the territories delineated are far from uniform, with many
megaliths centred within totally unconvincing territories;
archaeologists use a much looser set of criteria to agree (or disagree)
that Renfrew’s is a convincing argument. Postprocessualists suggested
that archaeologists can never confront theory and data as two clearly
independent and opposable categories; instead, we see data through a
cloud of theory (figure 7.2; contrast with figure 4.1).

Figure 7.2 The relationship of theory and data in postprocessual
archaeology; data exist, but are perceived fuzzily through a cloud of
theory (contrast with figure 4.1)

[c07_image002.jpg]

(2) Interpretation is always hermeneutic. This is a variant on
Proposition (1). Hermeneutics is the study of meanings. When
archaeologists interpret things, it was argued, they do this by
assigning meanings to them, meanings that it is assumed were also in the
minds of the ancient peoples who made and used them.

Postprocessualists argued that all archaeologists do this whether they
overtly admit it or not. When the Italian philosopher Croce, cited in
the last chapter, talks about simply describing and classifying and
going no further, the response is that even these simple actions of
description and classification are making assumptions about what was in
the heads of Neolithic Sicilians. Postprocessualists deconstructed
accounts of ‘scientific’ testing to show that even Binford and others
implicitly assume meanings and values in the minds of ancient peoples.
Hodder, for example, looked at the day-to-day process of reasoning
during an archaeological excavation and argued that this is always a
‘hermeneutic circle’ regardless of whether or not the excavators
consider themselves theorists, a proposition that he has developed and
explored in the ongoing project at Çatal Höyük.

(3) We reject the opposition between material and ideal. We have seen
how normative and culture-historical approaches were rejected by
processual archaeology as idealist, and how processual archaeology
introduced a materialist emphasis. We have also looked at the idealist
approach taken by structuralism, and at how Marxism moved away from a
purely materialist base.

Postprocessualists claimed that we should reject the whole opposition
between material and ideal in the first place. A good example is the
idea of landscape. On the one hand, a materialist view of landscape
tends to stress how it may be seen in terms of a set of resources, for
example for huntergatherers or early farming groups. This leads one to
turn, for example, to optimal foraging theory and other economic models
for an understanding of how people exploited the landscape ‘rationally’.

Postprocessualists suggested that landscapes are always viewed in
different ways by different peoples. They rejected the ‘rational’ view
of ‘landscapeas-set-of-resources’ as that of our own society and one
that is ideologically loaded in its own way, loaded towards ideas of
commodity and exploitation found in our own society. They suggested
instead that ancient peoples would have had different views of what was
‘real’ in that landscape.

On the other hand, an exclusively idealist view of landscape does not
work either. Postprocessualists stressed that such an understanding of
landscape was not formed in the abstract, as an ethereal or detached set
of preconceptions – that the way people moved around and used that
landscape affected their understanding of it. They argued that ancient
people’s understanding of a landscape was not just a set of thoughts
they happened to possess; everyday movements through the landscape,
farming, domestic activities were all media through which understanding
of the landscape was perpetuated and transformed.

Postprocessual archaeology therefore developed an interest in practice
for example the everyday rhythms of moving around a village or a
landscape, the repetitive actions of daily rounds. It stressed that
thoughts and ideas do not arise in the abstract, but through these
practical activities and rounds.

(4) We need to look at thoughts and values in the past. The most
coherent example of this proposition was Hodder’s advocacy of R. G.
Collingwood’s position of historical idealism. Collingwood was a
philosopher by training, though he also practised history and
archaeology. He argued that, in practice, historians always try to
rethink the thoughts of the past. Take for example a classic historical
question: why did the British naval leader Lord Nelson not change into
plain dress before the naval battle of Trafalgar? (In the battle
Nelson’s medals and gaudy appearance made him a natural target for
snipers, and he was fatally wounded.) Historians, says Collingwood,
explain that it was considered dishonourable for a commanding officer to
go below deck once battle had commenced; and that Nelson had no such
opportunity before the first shots were fired. So, argues Collingwood,
when historians ‘understand’ or ‘explain’ Nelson’s actions, they explore
by definition the culture and assumptions of a British naval officer,
they rethink his thoughts – in other words, they use empathy.

Hodder, following Collingwood, argued that archaeologists do this all
the time no matter what theoretical pose they claim to adopt. When, for
example, traditional archaeologists ‘explained’ the placement of Roman
forts on the northern frontier of Britain, they did so in terms of an
evolving military and political strategy – in other words, they ended up
trying to rethink the past thoughts of Roman commanders and emperors.
Again, the argument is that all archaeologists actually practise
empathetic thinking whether they admit it or not.

(5) The individual is active. Postprocessualists disliked the way they
felt ‘the individual’ is lost in much archaeological theory.
Individuals, they complained, were just pawns in some set of normative
rules or adaptive systems or set of deep structures. They argued that
all these different views of the world portrayed people as passive dupes
who blindly follow social rules.

Instead, postprocessualists stressed agency. Agency is a term used to
refer to the active strategies of individuals. In this view, women and
men are not passively duped by the system around them. Some
archaeologists borrowed the idea of a recursive relationship between
structure and agency from the sociologist Anthony Giddens. Giddens
suggested that there are social rules in the world around us, but that
people understand these rules and manipulate them creatively rather than
follow them passively. In so doing, they reinforce or alternatively
transform the structure itself – the relationship is therefore
recursive, or back-and-forth. Giddens’s ideas on structure and agency
are often referred to as structuration theory.

A different way of saying a similar thing was borrowed from the work of
the French anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu. Bourdieu was reacting to the
orthodox structuralist anthropology of his time, in which he felt humans
were simply seen as passively acting out a set of structural rules.
Bourdieu showed how in different ethnographic situations different
actors had their own ideas about social rules and situations. He argued
that we needed a theory of practice – a theory of how individual social
actors actually practised living in, reproducing and transforming the
culture around them.

In terms of interpreting the archaeological record, then, archaeologists
need to look at rules that are not just followed, but are creatively
manipulated by social actors. A good example of such manipulation comes
from an unpublished anecdote from Hodder’s work with the Nuba. In one
area, there was a cultural belief that women were associated with the
‘inside’ of the domestic compound, and with the hearth; also, that women
were ‘polluting’. Women were therefore enjoined to dump the ash from the
hearth inside the compound, rather than outside where it would pollute
the male sphere. But Hodder once saw a woman self-consciously gathering
up the hearth ash and dumping it outside, some way from the compound
where all the men could see it. Now in so doing she was acknowledging
that the rule existed, but deliberately breaking it. We cannot
understand her action and the archaeological signature it produced
without (a) understanding the cultural system of rules, but (b)
understanding her position towards those rules.

(6) Material culture is like a text. How do we understand the meanings
of material culture? Think about the way you read any written text:

(a) A text can mean different things to different people, and different
people can read texts in different ways.

(b) These meanings can be actively manipulated. Individuals do this with
material culture in obvious and trivial ways, most obviously with
clothes (we can define the formality of a meeting according to whether
we put on a skirt or a jacket and tie, for example).

(c) Such manipulation is often implicit and unspoken. Readers do not
consciously think through grammatical rules as they read a text;
similarly, we don’t consciously think through rules governing material
culture.

Consider for example the action of coming into a room without knocking;
we might consider somebody doing this to be ‘impolite’. At the same time
we might deliberately break the rule, for example not knocking if we
thought the room was ‘our’ space and we wanted to make that point to the
person currently occupying it. Underlying this grammar of actions are
assumptions and cultural values about the nature of space, rules of
‘privacy’, respect for the individual, and so on. We know what those
rules are in our own society, and we manipulate them, though we do not
consciously articulate them – we would not give a lecture on cultural
anthropology to someone breaking that code, we would simply ask them to
be more polite in future. Similar things go on with ancient material
culture in general. Postprocessualists pointed to ethnoarchaeological
studies in which the meanings of space in houses and compounds are
rarely overtly discussed, for example, but which are manipulated by
social actors with reference to certain rules.

(d) If the meanings of material culture are really this complex, then
its different meanings can never be definitively or finally tied down in
some final ‘conclusion’, a single all-embracing analysis. Therefore
there can be no ‘final’ reading of a text – each generation, and even
each individual, brings fresh readings to a Shakespeare play, and each
reading has its own validity. There can, in this view, also be no single
‘right’ or ‘wrong’ reading of a text in any absolute sense. A text can
always be deconstructed and shown to contain hidden meanings opposite to
those on the surface, as we have seen in the last chapter. Similarly,
the meanings of a pottery design or a burial rite can never be finally
tied down; there is no one ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ reading.
Postprocessualists therefore encouraged experimentation with multiple
interpretations, and denied the necessity of coming up with one final
conclusion that explains ‘everything’.

(e) The meanings of a text are outside the control of its author – the
wellknown phrase coined by poststructuralists: the ‘death of the
author’. If a text is open to multiple interpretations, some of these
may be quite at odds with the reading that the author might consciously
prefer. We cannot therefore refer to the author’s conscious intention in
producing a text, whether literary or archaeological, as the only
correct reading.

(7) We have to look at context. How do archaeologists get at different
meanings? Through, postprocessualists argued, looking at the context of
the artefact or the practice being discussed. Let’s return to our
burial. We see that a particular grave good, say an axe, has a
particular meaning through its context – where it is buried in the
grave, the person it is buried with, the objects with which it is
associated. We then widen that context and look at other axes in other
graves from the same cemetery. We find that the axe is used differently
in different contexts – it is associated with different assemblages, or
is placed in a different position in the graves of women, men and
children. We infer differences in meaning from these differences in
context.

Archaeologists might then expand the argument contextually by looking at
axes within our ancient culture generally – whether they are deposited
in other contexts such as ‘domestic’ or ‘refuse’, or by looking at how
they are used in domestic arenas. Gradually, a whole web of associations
and placements for the axes is built up.

(8) The meanings we produce are always in the political present, and
always have political resonance. Interpreting the past is always a
political act. If scientific neutrality is argued to be a myth, then
statements about the past are never cool objective judgements detached
from the real world. They are always made here, in the present, with all
its heady and complicated, jumbled mixture of political and moral
judgements.

Note that this does not mean that individual archaeologists are
insincere in their attempts to be objective. If the meanings of a text
are outside the control of its author, then readings of a text can
proliferate in ways never consciously intended by its ‘author’. It has
been argued for example that some New Archaeologists working on Native
American sites stressed that the value of their work lay in their
ability to use this material to generate cross-cultural generalizations,
that is statements that were true about all human populations in all
places. By doing so, some argued, these archaeologists implicitly
devalued the importance of looking at Native American tradition in its
own right – the implicit message could be read as ‘the only valid way to
look at this archaeology is to stress its relevance to white people’.
Such a ‘reading’ is not to argue that such archaeologists were being
consciously racist; indeed, many such archaeologists were active
campaigners for Native American rights.

Case Studies: Rock Art and Medieval Houses

In Material Culture and Text: The Art of Ambiguity Chris Tilley (1991)
explored the interpretation of a group of rock carvings in Nämforsen in
Sweden (figure 7.3). At this site, figures and motifs were pecked into
the stones in the third millennium BC. This material was recorded by the
Swedish archaeologist Hallström around the turn of the century; many of
the carvings have now been destroyed. Tilley does not choose to organize
his analysis in an orthodox way, with chapters on approach preceding
those on material. He starts instead with a consideration of the
material itself and of Hallström’s recording of it, moves on to develop
a grammar of design form, and then tries to understand that form through
its ‘structural logic’. Having developed such a logic and explored
different ways in which that might relate to the communities that
produced the figures, Tilley moves on to look at different ethnographic
parallels, both of a direct historical nature with modern groups such as
the Saami and of other traditions such as the Australian Aborigines.

Thus, two-thirds of the way in, we have reached the critical point of
the book. Tilley has given us an interpretation of the meaning of the
carvings. But in the final third of the book, he proceeds to deconstruct
his own interpretation. Tilley refuses to give the reader one ‘pat’
answer to the meaning of the carvings: ‘the point I am really trying to
make is that these rock carvings invite a response from us. … There is
no fixed meaning and we must remember that images cannot in fact be
reduced to words, “read”… I do not present a proper conclusion because
this is an impossibility’ (1991: 172). Tilley, then, has given us one
final answer, but has then deconstructed that answer and shown that it
is not final at all.

A second example comes from my own work: the interpretation of the rural
house in the later medieval period in England (c. ad 1350–1530).

In southern and eastern England, thousands of ordinary houses built
during this period still stand and are used as modern homes, albeit
usually heavily modified. Their plan varies, but invariably has one
central element: a large hall or central room, open to the roof. This
room was usually heated by a central open hearth, the smoke rising to
and dispersing in the rafters and thatched roof (figure 7.4).

Figure 7.3 (a) Carvings from Nämforsen, (b) part of Tilley’s structural
scheme for interpreting the carvings

[c07_image003.jpg][c07_image004.jpg]

Figure 7.4 A medieval hall (after Johnson 1989: figure 2)

[c07_image005.jpg]

Traditional archaeologists and historians had done much work identifying
these buildings and assigning dates to them, often on the basis of
technological, stylistic and typological features. We knew much also
about who lived in them. Such houses had been built by socially middling
groups – tenant farmers, often combining farming with rural industry,
particularly cloth production. We had analysed the technology and
building practices embodied in the houses – the carpentry and framing
techniques. Much work had also been done on the economic background to
these houses – how and why such non-élite groups could afford a
substantial, permanent house for the first time.

These questions were interesting, but I wanted to ask: why was the hall
the form that it was and what meanings did that form have for those that
built and lived in it? Many previous writers had claimed that the hall
was simply a matter of common sense: the openness to the roof space was
needed to allow smoke from the open fire to disperse among the rafters.
I felt this was not the whole story – chimneys had been known in this
society and used at upper social levels in buildings like medieval
castles and palaces for several centuries. The peasants occupying such
houses were wealthy enough to afford chimney-stacks if they so desired;
they simply chose not to have them.

The hall was an open space, but was divided into upper and lower ends by
a series of architectural features. The doors were symmetrically placed
at the colder, draughtier, ‘lower’ end, which also offered access to
‘service’ rooms. At the other, ‘upper’ end there were often fittings for
a raised chair or bench to seat the master and wife; the area was lit by
a large window. The bay in the upper end was often one rather longer
than that in the lower; the bench at the upper end was fixed by pegs to
the wall.

It was easy enough to see the hall, then, as a piece of ideology. Upper
and lower ends reflected upper and lower social divisions. The hall
presented the social divisions of the household as fixed and immutable
through the architecture. The master and wife occupied the upper end and
the chamber beyond; servants worked in and around the lower end. At
mealtimes, the hall acted as a microcosm of the social order. Everyone
ate in the same place, stressing the household as community, but at
different ends, stressing differences in social status between different
elements of that household.

But the interpretation of the hall could not be this simple. There were
other divisions in the late medieval household that cut across the
upper/lower divide and could not be fitted into a single pattern so
easily. Women occupied important and powerful economic positions within
the late medieval household: they controlled brewing and dairying
activities, and were identified in idealized religious and political
texts with the ‘domestic’ side of the house as opposed to the ‘public’
outside sphere of the roads and fields. There was tension and conflict,
then, between the important economic position and everyday routine of
women’s lives and the formal ideology of patriarchy. So I tried to
explore how other groups, women and servants in particular, may have had
different ‘readings’ of the same space. These different ‘readings’ were
rarely overtly articulated; they were, rather, implicit.

I also tried to look at the context of the open hall by looking at other
kinds of use of space in the same period. First, I looked at fields, and
argued that just as the open hall was open to all but in fact
subdivided, so it was in the ‘open field’: medieval fields were often
unbounded and farmed cooperatively, but divided into strips. Then I
looked at churches, and suggested that ritual space was also divided,
between the nave and chancel of the parish church. So I was arguing that
a series of common spatial metaphors ran across ordinary people’s
experiences of the world around them, that ran between the domestic, the
agrarian and the religious.

The whole debate between archaeologists over the meanings of the open
hall could not be seen independently of its cultural and political
context. The ‘vernacular house’ occupies a central place in images of
rural England. In particular, these images implied continuity with an
essential, unchanging rural past of ‘old England’ in which ‘the English’
are seen as a traditional, conservative organic community. In the same
year that I published my work, Conservative Prime Minister John Major
linked ‘old England’ to a vision of ‘British’ continuity when he
exclaimed that:

Fifty years from now Britain will still be the country of long shadows
on county grounds, warm beer, invincible green suburbs, dog lovers and
pools fillers and – as George Orwell said – ‘old maids cycling to holy
communion through the morning mist’ and – if we get our way –
Shakespeare still read even in school. Britain will survive unamendable
in all essentials. (John Major, speech to Conservative Group for Europe,
22 April 1993)

In placing these houses within a context of profound rural crisis and
change, and emphasizing their different meanings to different elements
of the household, I was implicitly commenting negatively on that
profoundly conservative image of the English countryside and
‘Englishness’ in general. This political comment was unavoidable; it was
there whether I liked it or not. At the time, it wasn’t my conscious
intention to comment implicitly or explicitly on John Major’s views, but
a subsequent reading of ‘my’ work in such a light would nevertheless be
a perfectly valid one – though it is one of several possible readings.

Phenomenology

Stop – I’ve lots of questions already! Can I drag you back to Point Six?
Surely there are lots of problems with this analogy with text.

Yes, there are. I’ve emphasized text here because it is a good
introduction to the underlying ideas. We all read texts, and can all
grasp the analogy quickly. The analogy with text has a heuristic value –
in other words, it helps us learn.

However, many archaeologists have argued within the postprocessual
tradition that we should get away from this analogy, that it is
fundamentally limited. In particular, it can be argued that material
things convey meaning in fundamentally dissimilar ways to texts.

Material things are exactly that – physical objects. Their properties
are, in many ways, very different from words. Material things can be
functional in ways that words are not. Further, the sign is rarely
arbitrary as it is in structuralism. The material world, then, is not
reducible to language, and more broadly, the material world is a complex
thing that is not easily understood in its own right. Perhaps, in that
case, archaeologists should not talk about ‘meanings’, but rather more
broadly about ‘understanding’ and ‘experience’.

Thinking about the material world in this way has led to an interest in
the last decade in questions of materiality, from both within and
outside postprocessual traditions. How, precisely, do objects come to
carry meanings, and how do the properties of the material world and of
the social world interact? Should we even make this distinction in the
first place? I will return to materiality, along with agency, in the
concluding chapters of this book, as an area of common interest and
concern from different theoretical viewpoints.

Perception that the textual analogy was limited in this regard led
postprocessual archaeologists to explore other ways of thinking about
how we might explore meaning through archaeological evidence. One such
method or philosophy is that of phenomenology:

Phenomenology involves the study and description of phenomena. A
phenomenon is any entity (thing or event) which presents itself as a
subject in the world. So the central concern is with the
conceptualization of subjectobject relations. It involves a description
of things as they are experienced in the world by a human subject …
Processes of ordinary human description are of central significance:
seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting. Phenomenologists try to
ground their descriptions of the social and material world in the manner
in which people think and feel about it rather than in an abstract
manner. (Tilley 2005, 201–2).

The philosophical origins of phenomenology go back to German
Romanticism, but from that point branched out into a number of different
traditions, including the ‘phenomenological sociology’ of Alfred Schutz.
Archaeologists have borrowed particularly from the thinking of Husserl,
as refracted through the work of Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty and Sartre.
Instead of thinking about monuments as texts being read in different
ways, archaeologists have talked about how people move through
monuments, what they can or cannot see from different points, how the
physical experience of the monument affects its perception.

Phenomenology has been applied particularly to the study of landscape
and to monuments in the landscape. Classic case studies include studies
of the megalithic monuments of Wales, the landscape settings of the
great monuments of prehistoric Wessex such as Stonehenge and Avebury,
and the Neolithic Dorset Cursus. In all these cases, phenomenologists
direct attention away from the map and the plan view, which, it is
claimed, offers only a top-down, scientific, Cartesian view divorced
from everyday experience. Instead, phenomenologists try to describe what
it is like in human terms to walk along, around, through these
monuments, what one sees and hears at different points, how one’s
experience is affected by temporal rhythm (the order in which one sees
things, the appearance of sudden ‘surprises’ over the horizon).

One of the advantages of phenomenology is that in its stress on the body
and on bodily movement, it stresses the falsity of the opposition
between material and ideal mentioned above. The body is undeniably real
and physical – as Shakespeare said, ‘there was never yet
philosopher/That could endure the toothache patiently’ – and yet at the
same time undeniably constructed according to certain socially specific
and variable ideas – different societies have different ideas of the
individual, of gender, of how the body works.

A second advantage is that, for all its reputation as an obscure and
esoteric philosophy, phenomenology directs the attention of
archaeologists to aspects of experience which are (arguably) both
accessible and observable. What objects and landscapes look like, the
sensations of touch, taste and smell, are, on the face of it, things
that can be talked about quite readily by archaeologists. Archaeologists
do not dig up factional competition or differential access to resources
or the rise of the Roman Empire; these processes are actually quite
indirectly inferred from the evidence that we have. On the other hand,
we do know how dark it is inside a Neolithic chambered tomb, we can
experience how sound travels or fails to travel between different
spaces, or how difficult it is to climb to the top of a castle wall.

Nevertheless, phenomenology is a particularly controversial as well as
vibrant area of archaeological theory. Phenomenology started out as a
philosophical questioning of how we might understand subjective human
experience. In practice, however, practical applications of
phenomenology to archaeology have to assume some kind of empathetic
unity to human experience, an assumption that ‘our’ experience now has a
direct link to ‘their’ experience in the past, in order to be
convincing. In the examples given above, how do we know how ‘darkness’
was experienced in the Neolithic? How can we assume that sounds were
experienced or given meaning in the same way? Doesn’t the difficulty of
climbing a castle wall depend on one’s age and gender, or whether one
has a disability? The human subjects described by phenomenologists often
appear, when one thinks about it, to be quite culturally specific. The
people depicted by some phenomenologists wandering around the landscape
are often solitary; they are not carrying children; they are free from
impairment or disability. In short, critics have rather cruelly but
perhaps accurately suggested, they are curiously like some of the
archaeologists doing the analysis.

A second development from a dissatisfaction with texts is to think more
deeply about semiotics. If structuralist and poststructuralists models
of the material world are limited or flawed, perhaps there are other
theories to which archaeologists can turn.

Semiotics is the study of signs. It can be argued that the world around
us is, fundamentally, made up of signs as part of a total signifying
system. Recently, the work of the philosopher Charles Peirce has gained
in popularity among archaeologists. Peirce saw the sign, the object, and
the interpretant in a triangular relationship, and developed a complex
typology of different kinds of signs. These included the the icon (where
there is a formal relationship between sign and object), the index
(where there is a relationship of contiguity), and the symbol (where the
relationship is arbitrary, as Saussure argued for language).

A Peircean semiotics is highly complex. However, it has value as a way
of thinking about the world in terms of signs. Semiotics, then,
addresses the need to understand meanings without resorting to the
disputed textual analogy of structuralism.

So postprocessualists denied the value of testing. Doesn’t this mean
they were open to the charge of relativism?

Well, to repeat, they didn’t ‘deny its value’; they claimed that, in
practice, no archaeologist whatever their theoretical stripe actually
tests theory against ‘raw data’ in the way described by positivists.
However, the identification of postprocessualism with relativism by its
critics led to a quite bad-tempered debate in the 1990s which
occasionally resurfaces today.

I will discuss this issue further in chapter 12; but as an interim
statement, we can note a softening on all sides. On the one hand, we
have noted how within processual traditions, a hard-line, positivist
language of ‘testing’ has been softened over the decades, to an
insistence that archaeologists’ ideas about the past must be evaluated
against the evidence, and that archaeologists should do this in a robust
and rigorous manner. On the other hand, in part as a response to the
repeated criticisms of the 1990s, most archaeologists associated with
postprocessual ideas take pains to stress that interpretations of the
past are at the very least constrained by reference to the evidence.

In my view, the critical question is not ‘should interpretations be
evaluated against the evidence?’; of course they should. Rather, the key
question is, ‘what, in practice, are the methods by which archaeologists
do so? And how can those methods be strengthened?’. I have tried to
address this question in my work on traditional landscape archaeology,
arguing for a series of methods to bring theory and data more closely
and rigorously together.

Well we certainly can’t ‘test’ people’s thoughts. How can we ever
understand what people were really thinking? Not only are they now dead,
but their culture and values were almost certainly very, very different
to our own. It’s striking that the two examples you chose (Nelson and
Roman forts) were from military history.

It is very difficult – but archaeology is very difficult. It’s certainly
true that to my mind many of the most exciting and fruitful
‘postprocessual’ case studies have been done in historical archaeology,
where there is plenty of documentary and ethnohistoric data to bring to
bear on questions of mentality (see chapter 11). This shows the
importance of context – of having plenty of contextual information to
work through. It is also true, as we have seen, that archaeologists
influenced by phenomenology have preferred to talk about ‘lived
experience’ and ‘understanding’ rather than specific cultural ‘meaning’.

A more complex answer to your question is that we may never be able to
grasp fully the content of ancient belief systems: we will never ‘know’
that this figurine was a depiction of that goddess, or ‘know’ the
stories and myths told about the goddess using the figurine as a prop.
But we can move towards an anthropological description of what a
figurine or architectural space might have meant at a deeper level, for
example by noting that ‘female’ figurines are found on the left side of
a temple while male figurines are on the right. Anthropologists do this
as standard practice, for example moving beyond the overt stories told
by a community or folk tradition to inferences about the ‘underlying
meanings’ of those stories – underlying meanings that might be overtly
denied by the community in question.

So, to give an example, we might take the story of Little Red Riding
Hood and interpret it in terms of ideas about gender and fears of
adolescent sexuality in Western culture. With prehistoric or ancient
cultures, we will never know the stories, but we can use the
archaeological material and its contextual associations to get some
sense of what such underlying ideas might be.

I’ve heard an awful lot about ‘the postmodernists’ lately. Is
postprocessual archaeology the same thing as postmodernism?

Oh dear, I was hoping you wouldn’t ask that. This is a thorny issue that
had better wait till chapter 12.

8

Archaeology, Gender and Identity

In the first half of this book, I have tried to present some of the
historical background and content of current debates within archaeology.
I have tended to present this background as a series of distinct
traditions, drawing on distinct strands of social and cultural theory in
general and having distinct and sometimes contradictory notions of where
archaeology is or should be going.

In the process, I have had to over-simplify. I have presented these
different traditions as both unitary and irrevocably opposed to one
another: that all culture historians, processualists or
postprocessualists think or thought this or that. The reader could be
forgiven for thinking that the bars at archaeological conferences have
lines of empty tables running down the middle of them separating
distinct huddles, one muttering into their beer about cultural
evolution, taphonomy and middle-range theory, the other getting agitated
about hermeneutics, structuration theory and political commitment, while
the culture historians have not even seen the need to turn up.

To put it another way, I have taken a very diverse and multi-stranded
picture of archaeological thought, and have reified elements into
distinct traditions. In other words, quite diffuse currents of thought
have been converted mentally into definite things. Theoretical
tendencies or interests have been presented as unified schools with a
definite existence and autonomy of their own. Such a reification is, I
suggest, a necessary evil, to introduce different strands of theory to
the reader.

When explored in more depth, however, theoretical practice is much more
varied and diffuse than this – just as archaeological practice is also
much more varied and diffuse than many practical textbooks might
indicate. We can use the analogy of political parties. I could write a
description of what the British Conservative Party stands for, the
history, intellectual traditions of and influences on Conservatives, and
list ten or twelve points of current policy. But this is not to say that
all individual Conservatives have the same beliefs or agree on the same
policies.

First, as I stated in the Introduction, this book is very much a
portrayal of theory that is structured around debates in the
English-speaking world. Other traditions thrive in other areas of the
globe – for example Latin American social archaeology, other strands of
Marxist theory, different traditions of culture history in central and
eastern Europe.

Second, the depiction of radically different traditions engaging in
battle, in particular the processual/postprocessual divide, is rather
out of date for the theoretical scene after 2000 if not earlier. Two
decades of work since 1990 have, in different ways, combined elements of
different traditions. As we have seen, Colin Renfrew has asserted that a
broadly ‘scientific’ framework can be combined with a recognition that
cognition is important and scientifically accessible. Tim Earle,
Elizabeth Brumfiel and others have combined elements of cultural
evolution and a generalizing perspective with a stress on competition,
conflict, gender, and so on, as I discussed in chapter 5 and will return
to in the next chapter. This ‘softening’ of processual thinking may be
in response to postprocessual criticisms, or it may have happened anyway
as part of a more general move within the human sciences. Or it may have
happened as a result of practical necessities – even the most hardline
positivist now has to deal with the legal and ethical requirements of
dealing with Indigenous peoples or different elements of the community
as part of the research process, particularly in contexts like the
United States and Australia. However it happened, whatever route was
taken, the destination is the same.

Some have talked of a consensus in theory, or of traditions at two
extreme ends of a spectrum within which there is a comfortable middle
position. I feel that ‘consensus’ is often asserted as an
oversimplification, borne of an impatience, a desire to take a
theoretical short-cut, to seek out a middle ground without necessarily
putting in the hard theoretical labour needed to understand and
critically evaluate different sides of the debate in the first place.
There is also the point that a ‘spectrum’ between different positions is
necessarily one-dimensional; there may be other dimensions or tensions
which are glossed over or ignored. Nevertheless comments like the
following are now commonplace to the point of orthodoxy within
Anglo-American circles, that combine generalizing, ‘processual’ comments
with explicit attention to meaning and context:

Goods and ideas moving among societies had variable significance in the
groups to which they were introduced … what may have been a utilitarian
item near its source could serve as a badge of office within a more
distant locale. … In reconstructing interregional networks, we must be
able to place the objects and styles which define them within their
original behavioural contexts. Treating them as the undifferentiated
products of monolithic, homogeneous cultures will only obscure the
socio-political significance of ancient transactions. … Determining the
behavioural significance of objects and styles invariably depends on
careful analyses of their contexts of recovery. (Schortman and Urban
1992: 237)

Third, there are contemporary movements and interests that cut across
the battle lines of previous traditions. Recent work, for example, in
feminist archaeology and the archaeology of gender, has been done from a
variety of theoretical frameworks. And interests common to many
archaeologists in theoretical issues such as ‘space’, ‘agency’, and
‘trade and exchange’ cut across the divisions presented here. In the
Conclusion, I will look at how some of these themes bring archaeologists
of different theoretical orientations together in sometimes surprising
ways. In this sense, the current state of ‘archaeological theory’ might
be better characterized as a complex mosaic or changing kaleidoscope of
themes and interests rather than as a titanic clash of different
schools.

Fourth, the view taken in previous chapters presents different
traditions as competing with one another. This was often the way that
New and postprocessual archaeologies presented themselves in the past.
But different traditions may be as much complementary as contradictory.
For Robert Preucel (personal communication) ‘theory is best understood
not as a succession of different theories, with each new theory
superseding the previously favoured theory, but rather as a web of
interrelated theories and approaches, with each constraining and
enabling the others.’

Preucel is right: but there are, I feel, major contradictions between
different theoretical views of the way the world works which are not
easily resolved. It is very tempting to gloss over these differences,
since we all like to feel that our own view occupies the ‘middle
ground’, combines the best elements of all traditions, and that it is
everybody else who is being ‘extreme’. Archaeologists, like politicians,
like to be seen to be occupying the middle ground whatever the reality
is. It is equally difficult to oppose the seductive argument that each
theory has its own legitimate place within the grand scheme of things,
with its overtones of tolerance, moderation and ‘fair play’. Ironically,
the search for such a ‘middle ground’ carries the risk of its own
disabling relativism – a superficially tolerant view in which no theory
is better or worse than any other.

To get across some of the variety (and intellectual vitality) of this
activity I want to use the next few chapters to look at different
theoretical approaches to a number of current themes. All these issues
cut across the theoretical schema laid out before; I could have written
a book with politics, gender, history, evolution as the core themes, and
added chapters to these defining different overall traditions.

Gender

One of the most popular themes in archaeological theory is that of an
archaeology of gender. This interest has become widespread and overt
since the early 1980s. As with other interests, this rise of an explicit
concern has been paralleled by a growing interest in gender issues in
virtually every other discipline in the humanities and human sciences,
particularly sociology, literature, anthropology and history. It has
also gone hand-in-hand with the growth of the feminist movement and
feminist theory generally, though archaeological thought has lagged
behind these other areas somewhat.

The archaeology of gender encompasses several different themes. These
include: correction of male bias in archaeology; a critique of existing
structures of archaeological practice; a reassessment of the history of
archaeology; an examination of gender in the archaeological record; and
a critique of what is seen as the male-biased nature of academic
knowledge and the academic world in general. These different interests
have, to an extent, succeeded and supplemented one another
chronologically since the early 1980s. I have also listed them in a very
rough order, from less to more controversial.

Bias Correction

Interest in the archaeology of gender started, in part, with a critique
of androcentric assumptions. Androcentrism is the belief that men are at
the centre of things, either making up society exclusively or with women
on the margins.

The most obvious example is what feminists see as the sexist use of
language – the use of ‘Man’ for human, or of ‘he’ when ‘she or he’ is
meant. Consider the following quotes, collated by Fiona Burtt (1987)
from a study of children’s books:

The favourite subjects of prehistoric artists seem to have been animals
and women. This is quite logical as both were indispensable to
prehistoric man (just as they are both indispensable to 20th century
man). Animals guaranteed that he survived from day to day and women that
he survived from generation to generation. (Mitchell 1981: 31)

Early man made a home in a cave. … He made scrapers and bones. … His
wife used the scraper to clean the underside of animal skins. (Unstead
1953: 7; see also figure 8.1)

Or consider the following example, more ‘academic’, rather less obvious
and as a result more difficult to disentangle, given as an explanation
of the shift from the medieval castle to the Renaissance country house
in England, made yet again by an avowedly atheoretical writer:

In the late Middle Ages … the individual was left by default to
establish his own position and maintain his own security by means of a
personal affinity of retainers and a public display of strength. From
the late 15th century onwards, however … states that were rapidly
growing in authority were increasingly able to circumscribe the power of
the individual at the same time better able to guarantee his freedom
within strictly defined boundaries … the individual is left to make good
his claims to status and authority not only through the exercise of
powers bestowed on him by the state but by the cultivation of more
personal distinctions. (Cooper 1997: 120)

What is missing from this passage? Is ‘the individual’ here exclusively
male, or does it include women as well? (Note the ‘as well’ that the
reader is seamlessly drawn into). The author might reasonably expect his
reader to ‘know’ (or simply to assume) that this society was largely
patriarchal, and therefore he is referring largely to men when he talks
of the individual. But then again, a minority of housebuilders of the
period were women; the reader of the passage either mentally defines
such women out of existence, treats them as surrogate men with exactly
the same ideas and attitudes, or assumes they were ‘exceptions’ in some
sense. What were women’s views on this ‘freedom’ in a period when many
of them were regularly beaten with the sanction of the state and in
which they were considered in law, politics and religion to be inferior
to men? The passage does not tell us. Read the passage again, and form a
picture of the individual in your mind, and I predict that you will find
that it is a man.

Figure 8.1 Prehistoric life according to children’s books. From Unstead
(1953: 20)

[c08_image001.jpg]

By leaving women out of such discourses, any attempt to ‘put them back’
has to involve a lot of work: a complete rewriting of established
commonsense terms and turns of phrase such as ‘public display’, ‘power’,
‘authority’. These terms which at first reading seemed obvious now
appear rather opaque. It therefore becomes very difficult to place women
‘back into the picture’; subconsciously, we are disinclined to make the
effort, particularly as the passage is written so apparently lucidly and
smoothly. (It also becomes difficult to put men below the level of the
elite, or children, back into the picture: a point we will return to
towards the end of this chapter.) Women therefore become a ‘problem’;
the literature is full of discussions of the methodological difficulties
of interpreting women’s thoughts and activities during this period. But
the ‘problem’ has in fact been created at least in part by a
pre-existing discourse that is taken for granted. (It has also been
created by reliance on a particular mode of historical narrative, a
point discussed in chapter 11.)

Feminists argue that it is important to isolate these androcentric
assumptions because when someone tells you that, for example, male
dominance is normal or natural to the human species, they refer
implicitly to the way males have always been – in the distant past, or
in the primate and animal world. But this argument, they suggest, is
circular. When we look at ‘empirical’ archaeological studies of the
past, or ethnographic studies of other cultures, or anthropological
studies of primates, we find that they have been studied from a
viewpoint biased in favour of the male of the species. This bias is all
the more pervasive because it is often unconscious.

Ethnographic studies are a good example. Various cross-cultural studies
have suggested that ‘male dominance’ is universal. But consider for a
moment the nature of this information. Much of it was collected in the
nineteenth century by predominantly male ethnographers with literally
Victorian attitudes towards such issues. Ethnographers would ‘naturally’
choose to ask the men of the tribe about the nature of its political
system rather than the women, and tend to interpret the varying and
ambiguous replies that they got back in terms of their own Victorian
expectations and preconceptions. Therefore, feminist anthropologists
argue that such information derived from ethnography needs to be
questioned and theorized rather than accepted blindly and uncritically.
The same point goes for what we ‘know’ from other disciplines.

Another example of androcentrism is the history of archaeology itself.
Read many traditional textbooks and you will find that archaeology
developed via the discoveries and intellectual insights of, in the main,
‘great men’. Many have argued, however, that the contribution of women
to archaeological thought has been systematically minimized by
historians of archaeology. Figures such as Dorothy Garrod or Jacquetta
Hawkes tend to be left out of many such narratives, or treated as
somehow less important. An important recent strand of feminist
archaeology has consisted of the rediscovery and rewriting of the
history of archaeology to reflect the achievements of these women. The
motivations for this rewriting may include a simple desire to ‘tell the
past as it really was’, or to provide an inspiration for young women
archaeologists in the present. It is striking that in response to this
critique, successive editions of standard textbooks have been heavily
modified (compare, for example, successive editions of Willey and
Sabloff’s A History of American Archaeology, or the first and most
recent editions of Renfrew and Bahn (2008)).

Critique of Archaeological Practice

Feminist archaeologists question the position of women within the
archaeological profession. Overt and implicit sexism in recruitment
policies, academic funding and promotion have all been interrogated,
very much in line with the general questioning of discriminatory
practices in Britain and North America generally.

For example, Joan Gero analysed the granting of research funds to
different people. She found that men were statistically more successful
at getting grants for excavation and ‘fieldwork’ in general, whereas
women were statistically less likely to be awarded financial help, and
more likely to be awarded grants for what Gero termed ‘archaeological
housework’ – pottery and small finds analysis, environmental material.
Was it then any surprise, she asked, when the interpretations produced
by this fieldwork emphasized stereotypical images?

It is important to note that many of what Alison Wylie calls these
‘chilly-making activities’ are not dependent on overt bias, openly
chauvinist attitudes or political discrimination as such, but are
dependent on deeper and less obvious practices such as the use of
language, hidden assumptions about career trajectories, even patterns of
writing and conversation. This observation has two implications. First,
it can be argued that scholars all participate in sexist practices
however consciously they oppose sexism in principle, particularly if
they are hostile or resistant to open reflection on their conduct (‘it’s
just manners, it’s just a joke, it shouldn’t be taken seriously, it’s
political correctness gone mad’). Second, the minutiae of everyday
behaviour (how he is spoken of as assertive but she is spoken of as
aggressive in the coffee room, the way we choose to dress for work)
links in to wider practices – ‘the personal is political’.

Much of these first two points is fairly uncontroversial – few dispute
the fact that past interpretations have reflected the conscious and
unconscious sexism of their time, or that women continue to be
discriminated against in contemporary society in a variety of ways, and
that career development in archaeology reflects this. The next two
points move on to more disputed territory.

Archaeologies of Gender

The third point is a desire to look at different constructions of gender
in the past, as revealed in the archaeological record. If archaeologists
think it is legitimate to take societies long extinct and look at
‘social ranking’, at trade and exchange, even at cognitive factors, why
can’t we also look at different gender roles in the past?

These gender roles, it is argued, vary from culture to culture. A
theoretical distinction is made between sex and gender. Sex is, it is
argued, biological – most of us are born men or women, and our
biological makeup does not vary (though even this can be questioned; see
below).

There is a difference, however, between being born a biological male or
female, and the experience of being ‘gendered’, of the experience and
cultural practices of being a woman or a man in a given society. It can
be argued that there is nothing ‘normal’ or ‘natural’ about acting like
a man or a woman. For example, it was considered manly in the Middle
Ages for élite men to weep and swoon on a regular basis; by the
nineteenth century, the women were doing the weeping and swooning while
the men were keeping a stiff upper lip. In some cultures women are
considered sexually assertive and men are expected to be passive; and so
on.

Gender, then, is culturally constructed, even if we accept the argument
that gender is usually assigned on a biological basis. Gender varies
from culture to culture. There is much debate about the extent of this
variation (is it completely variable? are there some cross-cultural
universals, for example to do with ‘domestic’ and childcare activities?)
and how closely gender and sex are linked.

It follows that if archaeologists are interested in the past, we cannot
assume that women and men behaved in the same way in all societies. For
example, we cannot assume distinctions that we often take for granted
existed in the past. These include ‘common-sense’ distinctions between
domestic and public, between hunting and gathering, between the
household and the wider world.

Instead, archaeologists need to ask questions about the different roles
and experiences of women and men in a given period. These roles and
experiences may have been similar or different; but the question needs
to be asked rather than particular kinds of division assumed. Indeed, we
need to question the assumption often made that a rigid binary division
of labour (‘the men did this and the women did that’) existed at all.

Many argue that in practice all archaeology is ‘gendered’. They point
out that many archaeologists make assumptions about gender in their
work, as we pointed out above, and that there is no such thing as a
‘gender-neutral’ account of the past. Think of the quotes given above,
or the way, for example, different human activities are valued. There
are countless descriptions of craft specialization in the literature,
but few of changing methods of food preparation. There is, feminists
argue, an implicit assumption in much of the traditional literature that
specialized craft activity was done by men and is therefore important,
and food preparation was done by women and is less so. Food preparation
may or may not have been performed by men, women or both; whoever
prepared the food, it is certainly important in the constitution of
culture.

An archaeology of gender, then, has led in practice to a re-examination
of the small scale such as the archaeology of the household, and the
reinterpretation of the domestic as an important part of social and
political life in the past rather than simply a ‘domestic retreat’.

Men, Women and Knowledge

The phallocentric nature of knowledge is a difficult point to grasp,
since it involves questioning the very basis of academic enquiry, or
indeed what it is to be a student or a teacher.

Think about the way academics praise an argument, or denigrate it. We
praise ‘strong’, ‘robust’, ‘well organized’, ‘powerful’ arguments;
conversely, we denigrate arguments that are perceived as weak, woolly,
tentative, inconclusive. The language of archaeological theory itself
can often be the language of battle – theories conflict and clash,
different schools muster allies to strengthen their arguments. Debate is
adversarial and confrontational: one side gets the better or the worse
of the ‘argument’. Students are taught to be impersonal in their essays
– to separate emotions and feelings from academic argument, to omit
personal experience from their writing.

Many feminists argue that the academic structuring of knowledge in this
way is phallocentric. That is, the academic establishment treats
stereotypically ‘male’ ways of thinking and acting as legitimate, and
stereotypically ‘female’ ways as illegitimate, ‘out of court’.
Phallocentric discourse claims to be fair and neutral, to offer a ‘level
playing field’; the professor will tell you that anyone can write a
first class paper if they follow the correct academic rules and have the
necessary commitment and intellectual ability. In practice, however, the
rules of this game are discriminatory, since (among other reasons) it
requires women to think and write ‘like men’, at least stereotypically,
if they are to succeed. If men have been socialized into this way of
thinking from birth, the argument continues, is it any surprise that
they are ‘better’ at this academic game than women?

What is needed, feminists suggest, are different rules for the game. Why
can’t we be ‘emotional’ when writing? What is wrong with multivocality –
telling stories with different voices, different conclusions? Why can’t
we write stories about people’s personal experiences? What’s wrong with
ending one’s presentation with a question rather than a final, firm
conclusive statement?

In this way, much feminist critique ends up at a very similar position
to that of many postprocessual archaeologists; indeed, many of the
postprocessual arguments rehearsed in chapter 5 owe a profound debt to
feminist thinking on this and other points (see below).

Case Study: What This Awl Means

Janet Spector’s book What This Awl Means: Feminist Archaeology at a
Wahpeton Dakota Village is a study of a nineteenth-century Native
American settlement, Little Rapids, in what is now Minnesota in the
Midwestern USA. Rather than attempt to write a neutral, distanced,
objective site report, however, Spector consciously and explicitly sets
out to explore her original, emotive reasons for wanting to be an
archaeologist: ‘these motives are empathetic – a longing to discover
essences, images, and feelings of the past – not detached, distanced,
objective’ (Spector 1993: 1).

Spector breaks three rules of academic discourse in the opening
chapters. First, she goes into her own past life history and explores
her personal reasons for doing archaeology and coming to the Little
Rapids site. Second, rather than looking at ‘big questions’ such as
social complexity or the pattern of trade between Native and white
Americans, she focuses initially on one very tiny artefact, apparently
insignificant in itself – ‘a small antler awl handle’ (figure 8.2).
Third, Spector writes a story about this handle – how it was lost, what
the young woman who owned it was doing at the time, what the experience
of life at Little Rapids was like. The story is backed up by Spector’s
extensive knowledge and understanding of the archaeological and historic
data, but is self-consciously written as a story nevertheless, intended
to evoke the emotions and spirit of the inhabitants of the site.

Spector contrasts the story she has told with previous archaeological
work on awls. Previous typologies of awl handles present themselves as
neutral classifications, Spector argues, but they are in fact biased in
respect both to ethnicity and gender. Conventional typologies treat awls
first and foremost as trade goods brought in by Europeans, rather than
as artefacts related to Native American (‘Indian’) women’s activities:

An important but hidden assumption … is that European-produced metal awl
tips are more important than Indian-produced awl handles. Built into
[these] classifications and table titles, this theme leads to emphasis
on metal awl tips as markers of European influence on Indians and
implies the disintegration of native culture. This would have been
insulting, annoying, or simply wrong to Indians who used awls,
particularly to women who inscribed their bone or antler handles to
display publicly their accomplishments. (Spector 1993: 31–2)

Figure 8.2 The awl handle excavated by Spector’s crew. Spector’s
narrative links it to the young girl Mazaokeyiwin who lived at Little
Rapids and may have lost the awl in the 1840s (Spector 1993)

[c08_image002.jpg]

Figure 8.3 The elderly Mazaokeyiwin working a hide (Spector 1993)

[c08_image003.jpg]

Spector tells stories also about the progress of the dig, the discovery
of the awl, the experiences of different dig members, and frankly
explores tensions and cooperation with Native Americans in the course of
the research project. She is helped in her task by the extensive
historical and ethnographic documentation of the Dakota people and of
the site, that allows her to give names and personalities to many of the
nineteenth-century inhabitants of Little Rapids (figure 8.3).

It is striking that Spector’s openly feminist perspective leads her to
accentuate the small scale and personal (what the awl handle meant to
its owner, not the awl’s position within wider trade networks). It is
laid out in a personal and engaged way (the personalities and excitement
of the research project) rather than attempting to be rhetorically
dispassionate. It leads very quickly to other dimensions of social and
cultural identity (the transition from being a girl to being an adult
woman in Dakota society). It is also striking how Spector’s feminist
account is also immediately and unavoidably engaged in other questions
of politics and identity, most obviously that of relations between
Native Americans and whites.

This all sounds fine, but I’m getting a little confused over terminology
here. Is gender archaeology the same thing as feminist archaeology?

Not necessarily. It is without question that interest in gender issues
in archaeology grew out of the rise in feminist concerns since the
1960s. But remember that it is pretty undeniable to assert that all
archaeology makes assumptions about gender, unless it forswears any
attempt at social reconstruction. If we need to look at gender in the
past, there is no a priori reason why a specifically feminist
perspective needs to be used.

Conkey and Gero (1997) argue that the archaeology of gender is
increasingly diverse in the theoretical positions it has taken. They
show that sociobiology, social constructivism, cultural and biological
evolution, political economy, and agency and performance theory have all
been used to structure enquiry into gender in the archaeological record.
They point to the very deep differences in theoretical assumptions
behind many of these schools, and assert that many studies of gender do
not draw extensively or even at all on feminist critiques within the
human sciences in general.

Of course, it all depends on definitions of feminism, which vary. ‘I
myself have never been able to find out precisely what feminism is: I
only know that people call me a feminist whenever I express sentiments
that differentiate me from a doormat or a prostitute’ (Rebecca West
1913; cited in Humm 1992: 34). More specifically, Conkey and Gero draw
on feminist critiques of science and point to four areas that they feel
distinguish specifically feminist enquiry in archaeology:

1 The recognition that ‘politics and the substantive products of
knowledge are essentially inseparable’;

2 The recognition that rationality is a ‘mythical conflation that never
exists in actual scientific practice’;

3 ‘Association with a cognitive style that favours “intimate” knowledge
and nuanced understandings of data over categorical thinking’;

4 A challenge to ‘basic disciplinary arrangements’ and the fostering of
alternative views. (Conkey and Gero 1997: 427–8)

Conkey and Gero argue that feminist archaeology is, or should be, a
dangerous and transforming exercise. They distance themselves from
considerations ‘of gender in prehistoric studies without reconfiguring
archaeology in any way’ and assert that

An archaeology that takes feminist theory seriously is
self-transformational and communal. Radical reappraisals – rigorous,
scholarly, informed, and purposive – emerge from feminist theory
precisely because traditional assumptions and values really do look
profoundly different when viewed from a womancentred perspective. Some
have wanted to call this ‘seeing gender everywhere’, with the derogatory
term ‘genderlirium’. But ‘genderlirium’ is an equally apt term with
which to critique Western androcentrism, with its hard-headed rules for
a single way of knowing and its single vision. (Conkey and Gero 1997:
424, 430)

For Conkey and Gero, then, archaeological studies of gender come from a
variety of theoretical viewpoints, but a specifically feminist
standpoint is one that questions existing archaeological practice at a
very basic level.

OK, so we can’t assume men and women did this or that in the past. But
in that case how can we ever begin to talk about gender?

This impinges on the question of essentialism. In the view of some
feminists, there is nothing essential to ‘feminine nature’. Some attack
‘biological essentialism’, that is, the attempt to define
cross-culturally gender roles based on biological ‘facts’ such as men’s
greater upper-body strength or women’s role in childbirth and infant
care. They argue that such ‘facts’ are socially constructed. For
example, they question the way gender differences are always presented
in a binary fashion, rather than as a continuum, in biological studies.

The problem you raise is that if we cannot say with certainty which
activities were undertaken by which gender, or even that activities were
or were not gendered, then we cannot say anything positive about the
construction of gender in a given society, particularly a prehistoric
one.

One way out of this that is frequently taken is to construct a
contextual argument. For example, one can look at which artefacts are
associated with which gender in burials, and then extend this argument
outwards, to look at the same classes of artefacts in domestic contexts.
Another way out is to rely on a limited essentialism: for example, that
the necessities of childrearing do involve an association of women with
domestic and household contexts.

You’ve said that an interest in gender cuts across previous theoretical
categories. But it seems to me that it’s closely related to
postprocessual archaeology. Both movements relate archaeology to
politics, both try to look at conflict and inequality, both try to write
different narratives that include the personal…

Historically, the archaeology of gender and postprocessual archaeology
have close links both with each other and with feminist thought in the
human sciences. Many of the younger archaeologists in the 1980s and
1990s were closely involved with both movements, particularly in
Britain. Specifically, we can point to: (a) the widening of the
definition of ‘political’; (b) stress on small-scale, local and
household contexts as important; (c) stress on multivocality; (d) stress
on meaning and lived experience; and (e) stress on conflict as being
played out through everyday practice. Indeed, I suspect that when the
history of postprocessual thought in the 1980s comes to be written it
will be found that the role of individual feminists has been
under-acknowledged.

But many would argue that bias correction (point 1 above) is a
legitimate and indeed essential part of any scientific archaeology.
Within science as a whole, much work has been done to correct what are
seen as specific biases; for example, critiques of Charles Darwin’s
terminology when he attributes ‘passive’ and ‘active’ roles to female
and male apes respectively.

Similarly, there is no necessary conflict between a positivist view of
science and stress on recruitment and equal rights issues within
archaeology. It is perfectly possible to argue for ‘scientific method’
in archaeological reasoning, while acknowledging that the archaeological
profession needs to address issues of discrimination. But in accordance
with positivist method, one’s stance on ‘political’ issues such as
equality should be kept separate from one’s academic judgements.

Some feminists, particularly in the human sciences as a whole, argue
strongly against what they see as the slippery nature of the way some
arguments under the postprocessual banner see everything in a very
multifaceted, deliberately ambiguous way, in which the very real
powerlessness and exploitation felt by many women seems to them to be
glossed over. Isn’t it ironic, they point out, that just as women are
beginning to get a small slice of the cake, making a real difference at
work and so on, that it’s revealed that such bread-and-butter issues are
only a ‘language game’ anyway? Alison Wylie writes that:

strong constructivist and relativist positions embody what seem to be
patently an ideology of the powerful. Only the most powerful, the most
successful in achieving control over the world, could be constructed as
they choose. … Any who lack such power, or who lack an investment in
believing they have such power, are painfully aware that they negotiate
an intransigent reality that impinges on their lives at every turn.
(Wylie 1992b: 25)

A related argument is that of inclusiveness. Feminists often feel that
their arguments are ‘hijacked’, made part of some ‘wider argument’ such
as that of Marxism or of postprocessual archaeology and in the process
subsumed and ultimately ignored. It is striking that Spector prefers her
argument to stand on its own two feet. Her bibliography refers to very
little of the ‘postprocessual’ literature. In practical terms, just as
the majority of New Archaeologists were pushy young men, so some
feminists argue that postprocessualism was a distinctly male phenomenon
in its early years, with an aggressive and uncompromising tone to its
rhetoric; many men initially associated with postprocessual ideas have
now slid seamlessly into senior academic positions.

Archaeologies of Identity

We noted above how Spector’s argument about gender led very quickly into
other issues of social identity – for example, of age, of ethnicity.
They also led very quickly into an attempt to write in a different way
about the past, a way that was engaged and emotive rather than detached
and ‘purely objective’. What this demonstrates is that an archaeology of
gender leads inevitably into a number of other areas and dimensions of
social identity.

‘Archaeologies of identity’ take their lead from gender and feminist
archaeology, in that they all take an interest in how social identities
are constructed, how those identities might be explored in the
archaeological record, and how identity formation itself is always
‘socially constituted’ – in other words, it is variable, unstable, fluid
and changing, rather than being fixed or essential. Archaeologists have
explored, among other areas, archaeologies of masculinity, of childhood,
of race, of sexuality, and of disability.

The first and most obvious of these constructions is masculinity. If the
roles and identities of women were variable in the past, then it follows
that men’s were too. An archaeology of masculinity and of men’s changing
identities is therefore a necessary part of any full understanding of
gender.

For example, in my own work, discussed in chapter 11, I have looked at
how medieval castles, and their transformation into Renaissance palaces,
was tied up with changing notions of élite masculinity – what it meant
to be a knight or a gent. In the later middle ages, to be a man was
closely associated with the ability and training to fight. Masculinity
was associated with values like honour and chivalry. Chivalry and
martial values were given material expression in the towers and
battlements of castles, in the labour invested in suits of armour, and
in the ability to ride a specially bred warhorse and to use a lance and
shield while on horseback, for example in the ritualized violence of
jousting and the tournament. The ‘decline of the castle’ and the shift
to an unfortified Renaissance architecture gave expression to new values
of what it meant to be a man, a new ‘self-fashioning’, in which ideas of
civility, of literacy and familiarity with the works of Classical
literature, and of ‘courtly’ behaviour became much more important. I
tried to draw out two points from this discussion: first, ‘what it meant
to be a man’ was not the same in all times and in all places; second,
these meanings were materially expressed in the appearance, layout and
decorative schemes of buildings.

Again, Laurie Wilkie has looked at the architecture and material culture
associated with men’s fraternity houses at the University of California
at Berkeley at the beginning of the twentieth century. Wilkie looks at
the ceramics and other evidence for dining practices, and the changing
layout and locations of the fraternity houses. These young men, she
argues, had their identities shaped around contemporary ideas of a
‘primal masculinity’ that was in part a reaction to changing women’s
identities of the period.

If men’s identities were variable, so also ‘childhood’ has to be treated
as a constructed category. Just as theorists made a distinction between
sex and gender, so it can be argued that the physical process of growth
and ageing can be separated analytically from the socially constructed
experience of ‘childhood’. Ideas, for example, of when a child becomes
an adult vary from culture to culture, as they do for old age. In
pre-industrial England, many children were sent away from home to be
servants in other’s households from an early age, giving a socially
defined intermediate period that corresponded very roughly with
adolescence. Jo Sofaer has explored different constructions of
childhood, both through the treatment of children in burial practices
and through analysis of aspects of the lives of children, such as
nutrition and different activities, through human skeletal evidence.

Archaeologists have also rethought other dimensions of social identity
such as race and ethnicity. It has long been accepted, since the work of
Franz Boas and the rejection of racist theories of culture a century
ago, that race is a socially constructed category, rather than a simple
matter of DNA or skin colour. Since the time of Boas, social scientists
have preferred to talk of ‘ethnicity’ on the basis of social and
cultural rather than biological distinction. I have argued in earlier
chapters that essentialist statements like ‘the Celtic spirit’ have the
potential to be used in problematic ways that often seem to suggest or
imply some kind of inner racial essence. In historical archaeology,
changing constructions of African-American identity have been explored,
looking, for example at an ‘archaeology of resistance’, how elements of
African identities were maintained and transformed by enslaved peoples
in the most oppressive of contexts. I will look in chapter 12 at the
archaeology of the African Burial Ground in New York.

If ideas about gender are variable, the same also goes, it is argued,
for ideas about sexuality. I wrote above that ‘sex’ can be argued to be
biological, whereas gender is socially constructed. Inevitably, things
are not as simple as this. Sexual identities were also variable in the
past, and cannot be assumed in the archaeological record. It may be that
there were other sexual identities in the past. An archaeology of
sexuality, like the archaeology of gender, spans empirical enquiry (for
example, drawing attention to depictions of same-sex relations in
Swedish rock art or on Classical vases) to a theoretical reformulation
of archaeology.

The project of ‘queer theory’ in the human sciences has led to the
advocacy of ‘queer archaeologies’. Queer theory is a drawing-together of
insights from gay and lesbian studies. If traditional scholars in the
human sciences often make androcentric assumptions (assuming the male
experience is normal and/or central in the past), they also make
heterosexist assumptions (assuming heterosexual orientations or
relationships were normal and/or central in the past). Queer
archaeologies move from an identification of evidence for other forms of
sexuality to a wider project of ‘queering the past’, just as feminist
archaeologists move from identifying changing constructions of gender to
an attempt to change archaeological practice.

Just as ideas in feminist archaeology mirrored discussions in other
social sciences, so too have discussions of disability. Traditional
accounts have either not considered disability, or have seen disabled
people in the archaeological record as dependent on the able-bodied, and
‘care’ for disability as an index of civilized behaviour. The classic
example is the famous interpretation of the Neanderthal individual
‘Shanidar I’. Summarizing Ralph Solecki’s arguments, Trinkaus and
Shipman state that:

Careful study of his bones revealed a plethora of serious but healed
fractures … someone so devastatingly injured could not possibly have
survived without care and sustenance … a one-armed, partially blind,
crippled man could have made no pretence of hunting or gathering his own
food. That he survived for years after his trauma was a testament to
Neandertal compassion and humanity. (Trinkaus and Shipman 1992, 340–1)

The point here is not that the interpretation of Shanidar I is ‘wrong’,
but that it is one-sided. It follows older models of disability in
seeing the individual exclusively in terms of what he could not do, as
opposed to what he could do or might have been able to do, and in terms
of the need for ‘compassion and humanity’ from (it is implied)
able-bodied others. This individual’s survival might be a testament not
simply or solely to ‘compassion’, but to this person’s many other skills
and qualities that he brought to the social group. Ironically, it fell
to the author Jean Auel in her novel Clan of the Cave Bear to use the
evidence of Shanidar I to imagine Shanidar I as a shaman, a powerful
figure, a person defined socially not simply in terms of his impairment
but in terms of his magical power over the social and natural world.

In the human sciences generally, and in parallel with the distinction
between sex and gender, scholars have drawn a distinction between
‘impairment’ and ‘disability’. Disability is, in this view, a social
category or experience rather than the ‘objective’ medical condition of
impairment. To take a classic example, wheelchair users have an
impairment, but the social experience of disability is conditioned by,
for example, the choice to use steps instead of ramps, the layout and
design of buildings and pathways, all of which are commonly designed
with the needs of the ‘able-bodied’ in – mind and by the unconscious and
unconscious biases and assumptions of others (‘she can’t possibly do
this’, ‘given his handicap, doesn’t he manage well’).

An archaeology of disability, then, spans a number of related themes:
issues of access to archaeology as a profession, and workplace issues of
disability, to an empirical investigation of the relation between
impairment and social identities in the past.

Performativity

In line with discussions of gender, theorists in the social sciences
have insisted that all these categories (gender, race, age, sexual
identity, disability) are performative. ‘Performativity’ is a centrally
important idea in understanding identities; it is particularly
associated with the theorist Judith Butler. For example, what it means
to be a man or a woman is only partly determined by biology, as
discussed above. It is also determined, at least in part, by the daily
performances men and women put on – their manner of speech, choice of
dress, behaviour in social situations. These performances can be thought
of as little pieces of theatre, even if the audience is one (the self).

There are four important implications for archaeological practice that
arise from an appreciation of performativity. First, performance leads
to a stress on the importance of material culture. Performances occur in
material settings (the open halls of houses; structured stages like
Roman parade grounds or Maya temples or Greek stoa). They frequently
occur in relation to material objects and are defined through material
use (dress, make-up). So performativity gives an important dimension to
archaeologists’ appreciation of materiality and the nature of the
material world.

Second, performances structure and define ‘who you are’. Further, they
are manipulated by people. Gay and lesbian subcultures use dress and
behaviour to redefine ‘what it means’ to be gay and lesbian. ‘What it
means’ to be African, or British, or a citizen of the USA can change or
be manipulated by performance – the choice of ‘traditional’ or Western
clothes, the choice to celebrate chicken tikka masala rather than fish
and chips as the nation’s favourite dish, to wear a Barack Obama T-shirt
or a Stetson. Therefore, for archaeologists, material culture cannot be
interpreted as the manifestation of some pre-existing essence – for
example we cannot assert ‘who the Slavs were’, or talk of ‘middle-class
identity’ or ways of life, and then look for their archaeological
‘expression’, or lack of expression, in the archaeological record. I
will return to this point in discussing materiality in the Conclusion.

Third, performances often take place through the body. ‘The body’
emerged as a key theme in current thinking when I discussed the ‘lived
experience’ explored by phenomenologists. Here, the body is important
because it too is a piece of material culture that can be manipulated.
Much of the archaeological record is about different constructions of
the body – most obviously with grave goods, but also ‘personal’ items
like jewellery, grooming items such as combs and tweezers, and more
broadly dress and other personal items. People’s bodies, then, become a
key, even central, element of their performance.

Fourth, performativity applies just as much to contemporary practice as
it does to interpretations of the past. Performances occur in the
lecture theatre or classroom, or indeed on the archaeological
excavation. The roles of professor and student, site director and finds
assistant are just as open to a performative analysis as roles in the
past. Therefore, as with feminism and Marxism, there is an important
reflexive component to archaeologists’ thinking about performativity.
Reflexivity refers to the back-and-forth, doubleedged nature of academic
enquiry, in which what we learn about the past is always and immediately
bound up with practices in the present (for example, where critique of
past ideologies immediately reflects back on ideology in the present, or
where critical thinking about past gender roles requires us to reflect
on sexist assumptions in the workplace and in our own heads).

Conclusion

What all these approaches and themes share in common is:

-   a stress on identities as socially constructed;
-   a scepticism towards the idea that identity is somehow ‘given’ by
    some core or essential feature, for example through biological sex
    or DNA;
-   a stress on agency and performativity in the active creation of
    identities;
-   a belief that while these themes were initially explored in other
    disciplines, archaeologists need to engage with them;
-   a continuum or tension between ‘orthodox’ empirical studies of a
    particular theme and a wholesale recasting of the rules of academic
    enquiry;
-   a stress on the connections between study of identities in the past
    and identity politics in the present;
-   a stress on the reflexive relationship between both the study of the
    past and the present, and between academic study and the everyday
    politics of the ‘real world’.

As we have seen, there is a tendency with each of these interests to
style itself as a different sub-field or species or method of
archaeology: thus ‘queer archaeologies’, ‘archaeology of sexuality’,
‘archaeology of disability’.

This proliferation of archaeologies of identity can be highly fruitful
and enabling. It has the potential to make archaeology not just more
sensitive to different aspects of identity in the past, but open and
relevant to different elements of the community in the present. However,
it can also be problematic for several reasons.

In the first place, it is possible to argue that a particular
structuring principle is not just another -ism or another archaeology,
but is in some sense primary. Most obviously, many feminists continue to
assert gender as a primary structuring principle to human societies in
the past, to place a feminist agenda as primary in the present, and to
resist assimilation to a ‘wider project’ or classification as just one
of a series of themes. Many such feminists would be sceptical of the
presentation of an ‘archaeology of gender’ alongside other archaeologies
of identity, as I have done here. Again, it is possible to argue that
race is a fundamental structuring category, not just another dimension
of identity to be set against others.

Second, some archaeologists are wary of what they fear will be an
endless proliferation of ‘archaeologies’. If many different kinds of
identity can be explored, and each has its own distinctive archaeology,
it can lead paradoxically to the trivialization of all of them. Social
theorists have criticized an unrestrained identity politics as leading
to a position where people can just pick-and-mix different identities,
like products off a supermarket shelf. Paradoxically, then, a
proliferation of identities can be argued to be a feature of what
Marxists call ‘late capitalism’. (It has to be said in reply, however,
that archaeologists with such worries turn out, all too often, to be
able-bodied white men.)

For me, the critical point is that current thinking in feminist and
gender archaeology, and in archaeologies of identity, express some of
the key tensions in current archaeological theory. They embody some of
the difficulties, and potentials, of doing archaeology in a complex
modern world. I will return to these difficulties and potentials in
chapter 12.

9

Archaeology and Cultural Evolution

In this chapter I want to look at the way different theoretical
approaches treat the question of cultural evolution. As with the
archaeology of gender, we shall find that different attitudes to
evolution tend to betray different attitudes to archaeological theory
and practice as a whole. Again, we shall also find that different
theoretical attitudes within archaeology are paralleled by a similar
range of attitudes within the human sciences as a whole.

As with other terms, the word ‘evolution’ is not easily defined.
Evolution has come to have an array of different meanings, some at odds
with or even completely contradicting others. The best way to explain
what these different meanings are is to look at the history of
archaeology and of evolution. The origins of evolutionary ideas can be
traced back to the Renaissance of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
and in particular to the first encounters between Europeans and other
peoples around the world. If we consider these origins, we find that
early evolutionary ideas were closely bound up with the development of
archaeology as a discipline, to the extent that it is difficult to
conceive of one without the other.

Before the fifteenth century in Europe, there was a consciousness of a
historical past. Texts, most obviously the Bible, gave a range of dates
for events and occurrences that stretched back to the creation of the
world (famously glossed by Archbishop Ussher as the night preceding 23
October 4004 BC). There was also an emphasis in the medieval world on
the importance of custom and tradition, ideas which served to articulate
past and present and to provide a justification for practices and
community identities in a world where most ordinary folk were
illiterate. However, it is possible to argue that there was little or no
conception of the past as fundamentally different from the present.
People in the past were considered to be ‘just like us’; look at any
portrayal of St George, a Roman soldier, in a medieval stained glass
window, where he is given medieval armour and weaponry (figure 9.1).
Roman emperors were described in terms that made them sound like
medieval princes. The idea that past peoples practised different ways of
life, had different cultures and beliefs, and that these needed to be
studied on their own terms was, therefore, problematic before the
Renaissance.

Figure 9.1 St George and the Dragon, as depicted on St George’s
Altarpiece, National Gallery, Prague, c.1470. from Bohemian Art of the
Gothic and Early Renaissance Periods, Press Foto, Praha,
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:St_George_and_the_Dragon-altar_wing-NG-Praha.jpg

[c09_image001.jpg]

Fifteenth-and sixteenth-century European explorers and colonists faced
an intellectual paradox when they encountered peoples in other areas of
the globe, in particular Native Americans. Native peoples were clearly
different. This difference posed a very basic intellectual challenge to
Renaissance intellectuals, a challenge articulated for example by
Shakespeare’s play The Tempest, in which the encounter and struggle for
power between the Milanese magician and book-lover Prospero and the
native ‘monster’ Caliban is placed literally at centre stage. In the
view of many European thinkers, here in the forests of what the poet
John Donne called the ‘newfound land’ of America were human beings who
practised none of the civilized arts – they went naked, had no formal
code of law, no state, and above all, no (Christian) religion. And yet
such ‘savages’ could act in noble and civilized ways. This was difficult
to explain within the sixteenth-century European scheme of things to say
the least.

One way out of the intellectual conundrum was to suggest a powerful
idea: perhaps ‘we’, the civilized peoples of Europe, were like this in
the past. Perhaps, in other words, such ‘savages’ represented some sort
of earlier or lower order of human existence from which Renaissance
‘Man’ had evolved. Hence, for example, the portrayals by early
antiquarians of ‘early Britons’ were often closely modelled on those of
Native Americans (figures 9.2 and 9.3).

At the same time as Europeans were exploring other parts of the globe,
early antiquarians were exploring historic and prehistoric monuments in
the landscape around them in Europe. As a result of the colonial
encounter and the intellectual challenge it posed to European thinkers,
early antiquarians began to think about a distant prehistoric past while
simultaneously they began to explore its antiquities through
barrow-digging and surveying of ancient monuments. From reflection on
these discoveries emerged the idea that is central to many versions of
cultural or social evolution, namely that different peoples in different
areas of the world went through similar sorts of social changes and
processes. At its most simple, these social changes and processes were
conceived of as a single, fundamental transition that all societies went
through, between ‘savagery’ and ‘civilization’, ‘them’ and ‘us’.

In its earlier forms, evolutionary thought was presented as an abstract
story. The seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes for
example talked about how, before the emergence of a central power, the
life of humans was ‘nasty, brutish and short’, there being no rule of
law to ameliorate a general anarchy, with every man for himself. Hobbes
related how, therefore, men’s independence was given up to a
‘commonwealth’ or a State power over everyone. Hobbes’ story was never
intended as a factual account of the past; its intended focus and
message was largely about the political events of Hobbes’ times. Hobbes
sought to justify and legitimate political obedience and the rule of law
in a very turbulent seventeenthcentury world, in which a
divinely-appointed King Charles had just been executed in the name of
the Commonwealth, and in which therefore divine legitimation for
obedience to the state had been abruptly and violently removed.

Figure 9.2 A Native American chief, drawn by John White in the 1580s

[c09_image002.jpg]

Figure 9.3 An ‘Ancient Briton’, drawn by John White in the 1580s

[c09_image003.jpg]

It is possible to trace Hobbes’ abstracted account of evolution through
later thinkers, for example Rousseau’s social contract, and more
generally the rise of the idea of progress in human affairs; however,
for the purposes of this chapter, we will move to a critical moment in
the middle of the nineteenth century.

Darwin, Marx and Spencer

A number of intellectual strands came together in the middle of the
nineteenth century. First, the colonial expansion of Europe across the
globe went along with an ethos of ‘discovery’. For the natural world,
scholars mapped and classified different species (though it is worth
noting that both prior to and including Darwin, observation of the local
landscape such as that of southern England was equally important to
their findings). Intellectuals also mapped the different human cultures
to be found across the world, and needed a ordered and coherent system
in order to classify what they had found.

One such scheme was that of Lewis Henry Morgan, published in 1877 as
Ancient Society. Morgan drew on the earlier work of Tylor, and
classified different social forms and institutions such as subsistence
practices, family and kinship forms, language and religion. His ordering
scheme was in terms of human progress, with ‘savagery’ being followed by
‘barbarism’ and then ‘civilization’.

Morgan’s work was drawn on heavily by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. We
saw in chapter 7 how Marx’s scheme of human history could be classified
as evolutionary, in its delineation of a succession of ever more complex
social forms from ‘primitive communism’ upwards to capitalism. In The
Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State, Engels argued
that the modern institutions of marriage and properly relations were not
‘normal’, but rather were specific historical creations, which came into
being alongside State society. The evidence for Marx and Engels’
arguments, and before them those of Morgan, was arguably flawed, but the
implications of their arguments that, for example household and gender
relations were intimately tied to the State went on to be highly
influential on feminist thinking. This body of work also influenced
Gordon Childe, who in Man Makes Himself and What Happened in History
adopted Maine’s savagery-barbarism-civilization scheme and attempted to
link it to the three-age system of Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages.

Though he did not deal primarily with archaeology, Herbert Spencer’s
work was especially important in that he elaborated and popularized the
idea that all human societies move from a less to a more complex state
of organization. He further linked this idea to notions of morality and
human ‘progress’, and set the tone for a generation of self-confident
Victorian intellectuals. In Spencer’s thought, ‘civilized’ society was
not only a historical development: it was more moral than ‘savagery’. It
is partly as a consequence of Spencer’s thought and its impact on later
nineteenth-century intellectual life that terms like savagery, barbarism
and civilization remain loaded, ambiguous terms, even today.

Spencer went further. He suggested that the idea of Progress was more
than just a moral belief or value judgment. The new positivist Science
of Spencer’s time, building on eighteenth-century Enlightenment
philosophy and observation of the natural world, had given Western
society the ability to objectively measure and confirm its belief in
progress. Spencer therefore gave this belief in progress a scientific
mandate – the visible, scientific proof of Progress lay in observation
of the world.

Further, Spencer claimed to build on the evolutionary concepts of
Charles Darwin – the famous phrase ‘survival of the fittest’, often
popularly attributed to Darwin, was actually coined by Spencer in his
1864 Principles of Biology. Spencer interpreted Darwin to give a mandate
to ideas of cultural evolution and particularly of progress. There were
undoubtedly close intellectual and cultural links in the nineteenth
century between the versions of evolutionary ideas developed by Spencer
and Darwin. However, later generations, particularly current proponents
of versions of Darwinist evolution as applied to archaeology, draw a
very sharp distinction between the two versions as we shall see.

Spencer’s ideas were popular in an age of Victorian imperialism. The
thought of Spencer and others contributed to a view of the world where
Europeans perceived themselves as being admirably fitted to govern
subject peoples. Not only did Europeans have Christian religion and the
moral order on their side, but they also believed that they were
confirmed in their right to rule by the objective findings of the
natural sciences. Any objective observer of the world, in this view,
could see irrefutable evidence that different societies could be ranked
on a ladder of progress, and further that European societies were at the
top of this ladder. Native peoples such as the subjects of the British
Empire might in this view aspire to progress to civilized states, but
their upward progress might well be very slow, so slow as to be
imperceptible to the contemporary observer, just as upward progress had
been slow in the origins of civilization in the first place.

Spencer’s ideas were also popular among North American and European
political élites in an age of class divisions, inequality and the
growing consciousness and political confidence of an urban working
class. Spencer argued that legislation to foster social reforms and to
ameliorate inequalities was misguided, since it interfered with the
natural workings of the ‘survival of the fittest’. Augustus Lane Fox
Pitt-Rivers, often seen as the father of British field archaeology,
argued strongly that if evolutionary principles were properly understood
by ordinary people, they would desist from pursuing deluded notions of
reform and revolution. Pitt-Rivers, then, organized the display of
artefacts in his museum along evolutionary lines to educate the public
in these principles.

It is worth elaborating upon this point. It has been suggested that
evolutionary ideas that treat human history in terms of a ‘league table’
of progress have always been popular when the intellectual basis of a
culture is feeling self-confident. Thus, ideas of progress were popular
in Victorian Britain, but waned in the twentieth century with two world
wars and the end of the British Empire; whereas in the United States,
they were especially popular during the 1960s, but lost popularity after
the military and political disaster of Vietnam.

Cultural Evolution

It is difficult to over-estimate the impact of cultural evolutionary
ideas on the development of archaeological thought. Many different
schema of social development are ‘evolutionary’ even if they do not
necessarily spell this out explicitly.

Ideas of cultural evolution were formative in the development of
archaeology as a discipline in the later nineteenth century. Lubbock’s
great book Prehistoric Times, for example, published in 1865, was
sub-titled As Illustrated by Ancient Remains, and the Manners and
Customs of Modern Savages. In other words, Lubbock brought order and
system to prehistory by making the assumption that societies moved from
simple to complex, and therefore that ‘the manners and customs of modern
savages’ could illustrate earlier periods of British and European
prehistory.

But if one stands back from this nineteenth-century context and
considers evolutionary principles in abstract terms, there is no a
priori theoretical reason why the direction of cultural evolution should
be from simple to complex. Most schemes of cultural evolution tend to
classify societies in this way, on the grounds that this, empirically,
is the story of human development: from ‘simple’ hunter-gatherer forms
many thousands of years ago to the ‘complex’ modern states of today. For
Leslie White, this move from simple to complex was explained as a
tendency to harness ever more vast quantities of energy, as cultural
systems became more entropic or tightly integrated. Durkheim’s and
Spencer’s views of evolution also specified a definite direction from
simple to complex. In many versions of evolutionary theory, however,
there is no reason why social forms cannot move in the other direction
in certain circumstances, that is from complex to simple, just as
organic forms can do in biology. This is what is proposed with the
collapse of cultural systems and their ‘return’ to ‘simpler’ forms of
society, like the Ancient Maya after the ‘Classic Maya Collapse’ or the
ancestral pueblos of Chaco Canyon.

There is also no a priori theoretical reason why more complex forms of
society are better adapted to the natural environment than less complex
forms. If modern capitalist society is wiped out in, say, excesses of
industrial pollution, or in global warming, it may well be the case that
‘simpler’ forms of human society based on subsistence agriculture or on
gathering and hunting will be proven to be more adaptive in the long run
to this planet’s environment than ‘complex’ industrial forms.

Third, there is no a priori reason why change should not be very sudden
rather than gradual. The Victorian view of cultural evolution was
ideologically saturated with the notion of change as gradual as it was
inevitable. This equation of evolution with gradual change continues to
be very strong in popular circles (one reads of modern institutions and
companies proposing periods of ‘evolutionary change’, by which they mean
that change is to be gradual and incremental rather than sudden).
However, there is no reason why change should not be very sudden and
transformative – as it was, arguably, in cases of the formation of early
states or of systems collapse.

Finally, to state the obvious, there is no reason why we should accept
Spencer’s and Durkheim’s insistence that cultural evolution leads to a
more moral, just or civilized society. It is perfectly possible to take
the view that while in practice, human societies have moved from less
complex to more complex forms, this tells us nothing about the moral
worth of those societies most advocates of cultural evolution today
would insist on this qualification. Indeed, Romantic thinkers often
posit the reverse – a moral decline attendant upon social complexity and
specifically industrial society, the loss of a more authentic and less
alienated way of life that is in some way supposed to be ‘closer to
Nature’.

It is important to stress that different evolutionary schema can be very
different from one another, both in their classifications and in the
suggested mechanisms for social transition. Some evolutionary schemes
are unilinear; that is, they suggest that there is one broad pattern or
trend to cultural evolution. Others are multilinear, suggesting a number
of divergent evolutionary paths a particular cultural sequence can
follow. These multilinear schemes can diverge or converge (figure 9.4).

Figure 9.4 Clarke’s contrast (drawn from Kroeber 1948) between organic
and cultural evolution

[c09_image004.jpg]

We might contrast for example the two unilinear schemes of the cultural
anthropologists Elman Service and Morton Fried. Both were compiled by
assembling many examples of different human societies from ethnographic
research, and both have been particularly influential on archaeologists.
Service gives us a fourfold typology ranging along the scale of simple
to complex of band, tribe, chiefdom and state. Fried offers an
alternative scheme of egalitarian, ranked, stratified and state. Note
that while they differ in their terminology, the descriptions of Service
and Fried share a great deal of common ground. Both start and stop at
the same point (they start with ‘simple’ gatherer-hunter societies,
though their definitions of such societies differ, and end with the
modern state). They both also share a similar methodology; in other
words, the methods that have been used to draw them up are very much the
same: Service and Fried collated many different ethnographic examples of
different social systems, and then ranked or classified them according
to perceived criteria of complexity.

Note that this is another example of archaeology being influenced by
thinking developed in other disciplines. In practice, much earlier
archaeology within the tradition of cultural evolution has followed the
method of ascertaining what the archaeological correlates of each stage
might be, and then looking for them in the archaeological record. For
example, Service suggests that chiefdoms will include the following
features among others: a settlement hierarchy; redistributive trade
networks; religious complexity involving monumental construction and so
on. Much archaeological effort has been spent in refining these criteria
and seeking out relevant evidence in the archaeological record in a wide
variety of contexts, from Renfrew’s work on Neolithic and Early Bronze
Age Wessex to Tim Earle’s work on chiefdoms in Southern America and
Polynesia.

In a more recent example, Raymond Kelly studied a range of different ‘p
re-state’ societies. He was interested in the relationship between war
on the one hand, and social segmentation on the other. By comparing
different segmented and unsegmented societies, Kelly concluded that
segmentation of societies was related to the development of a group
mentality, which in turn enabled and facilitated inter-village raiding.
Kelly’s general scheme was then applied to archaeological data from
ancient Mexico by Flannery and Marcus (2003).

One of the great strengths of cultural evolutionary theory, from the
point of view of North American archaeology, is that it strongly
integrates archaeology within the discipline of anthropology as a whole.
It suggests and facilitates cultural anthropologists and
‘anthropological archaeologists’ working together in a strong
collaborative programme into what are perceived as important, concrete,
empirical questions. These questions are generalizing and comparative in
nature and are of relevance to the modern world (ranking, warfare, the
origins of the State). Within this project, archaeologists are an
important and central part of the wider thrust of a generalizing
anthropological theory.

Criticisms of Cultural Evolution

Many of the criticisms of cultural evolution echo postprocessual
critiques of archaeology as a whole. Shanks and Tilley, for example,
write: ‘The concepts of function, adaptation, and evolution have no
explanatory role in a consideration of the social and need to be either
completely abandoned or reduced to a simple descriptive vocabulary’
(1987: 210). Mark Pluciennik’s 2005 Social Evolution comes very close to
a complete rejection of any form of evolutionary thinking. Why do they
suggest this?

First, it is argued that evolutionary schema apply criteria from
‘outside’. Polynesia, Wessex, Iron Age Denmark, the ‘Anasazi’ are all
treated as belonging to the same stage of evolution, and the same
factors and mechanisms for change are examined in each context – class
conflict, environmental stress, development of a managerial élite, and
so on. Cultural evolutionary models, it is therefore argued, ‘flatten
out’ past societies. Past people’s own views of themselves are, it is
argued, seen as unimportant, and the unique qualities of particular
cultures – for example, their artistic or cultural achievements – are
not seen as important or capable of producing generalizations. In short,
critics of cultural evolution suggest that such schema find it difficult
to encompass the particularity of historical sequences.

There is a moral and political dimension to this point. Indigenous
peoples, the ‘subjects’ of comparative ethnography, often feel that the
unique and particular qualities of their ancestral traditions and modes
of life are ignored or suppressed in this flattening-out. Further, their
mode of life is presented not as vibrant and meaningful, worthy of study
in its own right. Rather, it is treated as some relic of a past and
outmoded way of living; the only way forward for them, in such a scheme,
is to move forward in the evolutionary scheme by embracing ‘modern’
Western ways of living.

Second, earlier cultural evolutionary models often seem to leave little
room for contingency or historical accident. Societies seem to be on a
smooth, high, inexorable road to state formation. Critics argue that
history could have happened otherwise, purely by chance. A favourite
variant of this claim is that all such models are implicitly
teleological. A teleological view of history is one in which there is a
strong sense of direction, of humanity moving inexorably towards a
predefined and predetermined goal (telos).

Third, in their simpler forms, cultural evolutionary models tend to
ignore diffusion and cultural contact. If each society goes through a
fundamentally similar set of stages, what account is given of contact
between societies? How might such contact alter or deflect social
change?

Fourth, it is argued that the individual is also ignored. Human beings
are presented as pawns, locked into an inexorable evolutionary process
over which they have no control. Again, in parallel with systems
thinking, evolutionary models are open to the attack of critical
theorists like Habermas and others discussed in chapter 5.

As a result of these criticisms and responses to them, simple models of
cultural evolution, particularly uninilear ones, have been all but
abandoned. Archaeologists using evolutionary theory have taken one of
two courses: they have either made the attempt to abandon evolutionary
theory entirely (such as many postprocessualists), or alternatively have
attempted to develop cultural evolutionary ideas to take account of
these criticisms. As I discuss this latter attempt below, the student
will observe that some of these developed forms, particularly different
strands of multilinear evolution, link up with the modifications to
systems thinking discussed in chapter 5.

Multilinear Evolution

All the evolutionary schemes discussed above suggest that there is one
basic scale, simple to complex, and societies move up and down that
scale. However, as indicated in figure 9.4, one can propose that there
can be more than one scale or pathway. Trajectories of social change can
miss out particular stages, particularly as the result of contact or
diffusion between societies. Or there might be a much looser typology of
different social practices.

These points were developed in the earlier part of the twentieth
century, particularly in a backlash in North America against the schema
of classical sociocultural evolution discussed above. In particular, the
anthropologist Franz Boas led criticism of unilinear evolution as
ethnocentric, dependent on flawed ethnography, and harnessed to an
unacceptable idea of Progress. As a result of Boas’ and others’
criticisms, for much of the twentieth century, cultural evolution was at
best a minority pursuit among North American anthropologists, though we
have seen how this minority, particularly Leslie White, had a profound
effect on New Archaeology.

As a result, later forms of cultural evolution were often ‘multilinear’
rather than ‘unilinear’ in character. What does this mean? First, and
most obviously, multinear evolution proposes that societies can take
different paths or trajectories. These trajectories may or may not lead
to a common end-point, for example State societies. Or they may lead in
quite different directions.

More subtly, proponents of multilinear approaches pursue alternative
ways of thinking to the grand evolutionary stages of classic
sociocultural evolution. For example, early discussion of ‘chiefdoms’
took chiefdom society as an intermediate stage in unlinear evolution,
between earlier and state societies. However, chiefdoms might be seen
equally well in the interstices of social formations – the networks of
contemporary drug barons, pirates, warlords and gang leaders, for
example, fit many of the criteria of ‘chiefdom societies’, but clearly
exist within the wider social networks of modern states.

It is also possible to attempt to decouple the question of social
complexity from the more specific features of hierarchy and
stratification. Carole Crumley has argued that social complexity need
not imply a rigid hierarchy or order. Rather, complex societies are
characterized by ‘heterarchy’: ‘structures are heterarchical when each
element is either unranked relative to other elements or possesses the
potential for being ranked in a number of different ways’ (Crumley 1987,
158). In this view, hierarchy is only one possible form of heterarchy,
and in practice, most societies exhibit a range of different ranked and
unranked forms.

As a result of the criticisms raised above, and as a result of
development in evolutionary thought as a whole, most of those working in
cultural evolution have abandoned any simple idea of stages. Much work
within evolutionary traditions has looked at diverse trends or
trajectories of development. It has also looked at evolution not as a
monolithic process or as a simple ladder of classification. It has
attempted to include accounts of agency, practice theory, factional
competition, and conflict in its models, and located the source of
generalizing inferences not in formal comparisons or rankings of
societies on a notional scale, but rather in thinking carefully about
process. It is interested in corporate entities and the role of
individual identity and factional politics. It has attempted to link up
state formation on the one hand and rhythms of daily life on the other.

Cultural Evolution and Marxism

As we have seen with the constellation of Darwin, Marx and Spencer,
there is a great deal of common ground between much of evolutionary
thought and classical Marxism. Marxism can be seen as one form of
cultural evolutionary theory, and conversely, much cultural evolutionary
theory can be seen as a form of Marxist thought, though often the
Marxist content is implicit or coded. Indeed, Leslie White was attacked
in the McCarthyite paranoia of his time for his political beliefs,
though conversely he was accused of watering down his Marxism by others
such as Maurice Bloch. Several of the autobiographical accounts of New
Archaeologists make it clear that cultural evolutionary ideas of the
1960s were discussed and advocated within a North American intellectual
and cultural environment in which Marxism played a very significant
role, even if this was not overtly acknowledged at the time.

Classical Marxism, as discussed in earlier chapters, proposes that all
societies go through the same set of stages: primitive communist,
ancient, feudal, capitalist. Marx and Engels, indeed, read and were
profoundly influenced by the thought of several nineteenth-century
evolutionary thinkers, most notably Maine and Morgan. Marx wanted to
dedicate Das Kapital to Charles Darwin, though Darwin declined the
honour.

Cultural evolution also shares many of the problems of classical
Marxism. One of these is that in its ‘classical’, unilinear form,
Marxism allows little or no room for contact between societies. If
societies evolve from one state to another, what role is there for
cultural contact and diffusion? Others have argued that to propose one
single scheme of evolution is simplistic. Societies might develop along
different paths.

One particular form of Marxism which engages with evolutionary questions
is ‘Latin American social archaeology’. Latin American social
archaeology had its origins in the 1970s and 1980s as an application of
Marxist, and implicitly evolutionary, ideas to the archaeological
record, particularly via Gordon Childe’s discussion of social evolution.
Latin American social archaeologists make an analytical division between
socio-economic formation, mode of life or modo de vida, and culture.

The first of these three categories, socio-economic formation, refers to
the general historical stage of a society; the last, ‘culture’, refers
to its particular properties. The intermediate category, modo de vida,
refers to the range of different modes of existence that can occur
within a general socio-economic formation. For example, within the
general socio-economic formation of hunter-gatherer societies, one might
have different forms of modo de vida according to different relative
stresses on hunting and gathering, and still more different particular
examples of different ‘cultures’, each with particular features. Latin
American social archaeology, by dividing social analysis in this way,
makes the claim that it can combine forms of unilinear and multilinear
evolution within a single framework of analysis.

A second form of thinking relevant in this context is political economy.
Political economy, as a general term, refers to the relations between
political and economic practices and systems. It was developed as a body
of thought by Karl Marx, who drew on earlier ‘classical economists’ such
as David Ricardo and Adam Smith. Key themes developed by
nineteenth-century political economists included: the importance and
nature of property rights, for example over land; the way value is
created within different economic systems; the division of labour, and
its relationship to issues of alienation. Marx’s particular interest was
in modern capitalist societies, but political economy has been developed
within archaeology with reference to pre-State and early State
societies.

Archaeologists taking an approach derived from political economy are
interested in different economic practices (the provision of labour
services, subsistence agriculture, household economy, gift exchange,
circulation of prestige goods). They explore how these practices
intersect with issues and processes of political power (ranking, the
rise and collapse of chiefdoms, state formation). Archaeological studies
of political economy take a broadly evolutionary approach, in that they
engage with, for example, the economic processes that structure social
ranking, and especially the processes and structures that are involved
in state formation (see below). They are also part of the broader body
of approaches that developed out of earlier systems thinking discussed
in chapter 5.

Origins of the State

An important, even central, strand of thinking in cultural evolution has
been the development of generalizing and comparative theories of the
origin of the State. It can be argued that ‘state origins’, or more
broadly the origins of social complexity, is one of the Big Questions in
archaeology, alongside the origins of homo sapiens sapiens and the
origins of agriculture. States are generally defined in terms of their
use of force and their legitimation of political inequality. In the
archaeological record, it is argued by evolutionary theorists, states
can be seen as having bureacracies, settlement hierarchies, palaces and
temples, and as seeking to build up territory and Empire. Many
archaeologists working on state origins insist that most or all of these
features can be seen cross-culturally, in contexts of ‘primary state
formation’ ranging from Mesoamerica to Mesopotamia to China.

For example, a relatively traditional study is Spencer and Redmond’s
review of the evidence for state formation in Mesoamerica. Spencer takes
as given the unilinear scale of progress between chiefdom and state, and
he is working within an established tradition that maintains that
distinct archaeological correlates can be seen for each. They review
archaeological work in different areas, organizing it ‘according to
three diagnostic criteria: a) the emergence of a four-tier regional
settlement-size hierarchy; b) the appearance of royal palaces and
specialised temples; and c) the conquest/subjugation of distant
territories’. They conclude, for example, that:

for the La Venta region, surveyors have reported a three-tier settlement
hierarchy for the Middle Preclassic period. No convincing plans of
palaces or standardized, multiroom temples have resulted from
excavations … There is no compelling evidence that the Olmecs of the
Southern Gulf Coast carried out an aggressive takeover of any distant
region. We conclude that the Formative period Olmecs are appropriately
interpreted as chiefdoms, not states. (Spencer and Redmond 2004: 175,
187).

In a classic example of how cultural evolution has attempted to move
beyond unilinear models, Baines and Yoffee have stressed how early state
societies were not all the same as one another. They shift emphasis away
from comparing specific societies in terms of ticking off a check-list
of different features such as bureaucracies and temples, and towards
developing generalizing comments about processes ‘through an
investigation of the instrumental principles of hierarchisation, of the
restriction and display of certain kinds of wealth and the devaluation
of other kinds of symbols, and of constitutive institutions of
legitimation that emphasise the dispersive ties between rulers and
ruled’ (Baines and Yoffee 2000: 13).

Again, Adam T. Smith has discussed the relationship between the
constitution of landscape and political authority in early states. He
rightly criticizes earlier evolutionary models for treating space as
unimportant – that is, comparing Mesopotamia with Mesoamerica with
China, without thinking with sufficient care about the landscape
differences between these very different locales. However, Smith does
not forsake a generalizing approach, and ends up with a general stress
on the importance of landscape and the centrality of political authority
rather than ‘environment’ as generalizing comments on what he calls
‘early complex polities’ – though it is striking that Smith ends up
being equivocal about the utility of this general term (Smith 2003:
278).

Case Study: Cahokia

Cahokia is a complex of around 120 earthen mounds and other features in
the midwestern United States, near Collinsville, Illinois in the
American Bottom floodplain, across the Mississippi River from St Louis,
Missouri; the site was occupied between ad 650 and 1400. Cahokia
dominates the surrounding landscape, being the largest site of its kind
by far; at its peak, the site was the largest settlement north of
Mexico. The central monument, Monk’s Mound, is the largest humanly
constructed earthen mound in the Americas, big enough to be termed by
some a pyramid (figure 9.5); it is one of around 120 mounds. The whole
site may have had a population of up to 20,000 people.

The interpretation of Cahokia, and the ‘Mississippian culture’ of the
surrounding region, has become a classic example of the development and
application of theoretical ideas. Early studies concentrated on
description, chronology and ‘culture history’. The development of
cultural evolutionary models led archaeologists to debate whether
Cahokia could be classified as a chiefdom or as an early state, and if
so, how complex it was, whether it could be described as a ‘city’. Thus
studies of the site tended to maximize or minimize its size and
complexity, while studies of the surrounding region either stressed how
dominant and far-reaching Cahokia’s power and influence was, or
conversely, tended to minimize this dominance and argue that the site
was the centre of no more than a ‘complex chiefdom’ (Milner 1998: 3).

Figure 9.5 Artist’s impression of the site of Cahokia at its peak, by
William R. Iseminger

[c09_image005.jpg]

Cobb comments on the study of the Mississippian culture in terms that
could be extended to the study of other areas and periods:

If there is a historical trend in studies of Mississippian complexity it
is one that first emphasized hierarchy. This was followed by a
consideration of the horizontal power links, the heterarchical
structure, between segments of society. Finally, some researchers have
moved to a practice-based approach that emphasizes agency and relations
more than system or structure. Yet these changes in perspective
represent more of a Doppler shift than a complete reorientation –
scholars may represent different areas on the spectrum, but they do not
seem to have lost sight of the importance of the spectrum itself (Cobb
2003: 79).

The most recent assessment of Cahokia exemplifies this trend: Julie
Zimmerman Holt’s characterization of a ‘theatre state’ (2009: 231). Holt
is struck by the similarity of the monuments and associated practices at
Cahokia to the description by the cultural anthropologist Clifford
Geertz of the Balinese ‘theatre state’. Holt hinges her argument on
specific crosscultural comparisons in her use of Geertz’s Balinese
material, and she draws attention to both archaeological and historic
evidence for sacrificial and other rituals, including human sacrifice,
and games such as chunkey. In so doing, Holt brings together many of the
recent developments in thinking about cultural evolution and state
origins. She asserts: a) a questioning of simplistic models and accepted
categories of cultural evolution, for example a cut-and-dried
distinction between ‘chiefdom’ and ‘state’; b) a rejection of the
distinction between power and ritual as a false choice; c) a rethinking
of stress on the importance of theatre from Geertzian anthropology; and
d) an implied stress on the importance of practice – including
strategies used by leaders and commoners to such as ‘group-building’ or
‘group-distincting’. In this way, an interpretive stress on agency and
practice has been built into a wider, generalizing and comparative
framework.

Cultural Evolution Strikes Back

My response to the debate over the utility of cultural evolutionary
models is to observe that, however much they have been overtly abandoned
by some scholars, archaeologists resort to underlying ideas of cultural
evolution far more frequently than they sometimes care to admit. Those
underlying ideas are often unacknowledged, and are often of the most
simple and basic kind, tending back, implicitly, to unilinear models.

The key tension in current thinking, then, is not between archaeologists
who affirm cultural evolutionary principles and those who disavow them,
but rather between different elements of what all archaeologists do and
what they claim that they do – a tension that is part of a broader
tension in contemporary archaeology that I will return to in the
concluding chapter.

Most obviously, the terminology used to describe and classify different
cultural stages and phases remains that coined by an earlier,
evolutionary age. Terms like archaic, formative, classic, and
post-classic still abound. An excellent reason for the survival of these
terms is simple inertia, or a dependence on a common terminology or set
of reference points. For an archaeologist who has grown up with
classifications of the material framed in this way, it is arguably a
waste of intellectual time and effort to attempt to get academic
consensus for a renaming. Whether archaeologists like it or not, the
classification and terminology of Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages will still
be with us in the decades and centuries to come; Classical civilization
will still be Classical civilization and the Dark Ages will still be the
Dark Ages; the Palaeolithic will still be divided into Lower, Middle and
Upper.

Some archaeologists would claim that these terms are no more than simple
descriptive usages. However, one very compelling point of the critiques
outlined in chapters 7 and 8 is that language is more important than
this. It is naïve to see terms as ‘unimportant’ or ‘just descriptive’,
just as it is naïve to attempt to dismiss the sexist use of language as
unimportant. However if it is accepted that the terminology persists, it
follows that the older schemes of unlinear evolution are not simply
passé; they continue to structure archaeological thought in often
unacknowledged ways.

However, I suggest that what is at stake here is much more than the
problems of terminology. Let us take as an example phenomenological
interpretations of Neolithic and Bronze Age Wessex, of the sort
discussed at the end of chapter 7. Such accounts are often laid out with
implicit reference to a strong position of overt rejection of
evolutionary theory and generalizing models of archaeological process.
However, interpretations of people moving across the landscape, what
they see and experience at different points, and what meanings and
understandings those experiences related to, have been set out against a
backdrop of an implicit, shared understanding of what Neolithic and
Bronze Age society and culture was like – what sort of social forms
operated, how society worked at that time.

For example, visual references to tombs of different kinds are
interpreted as references to the ‘ancestors’. These arguments are only
convincing if one thinks it plausible or compelling to propose that
links to the ancestors conferred territorial rights, or were pertinent
to territorial claims; or more loosely that kin ties and rights over
land were intimately related. Such a general understanding of Wessex
society is clearly derived from, at the very least, a general awareness
of comparative ethnography, of groups around the world, even if that
general awareness is not overtly referenced. But for such examples to be
relevant, and for the reasoning to convince an archaeological audience,
it must be assumed that there is some general comparability between this
prehistoric past and the ethnographic present. It is difficult to see
how this implicit assumption is justified, unless some model of cultural
evolution, however vague and unstated, is being deployed.

It can be argued, moreover, that some kind of engagement with the issues
raised by cultural evolution, however critical and qualified that
engagement is, necessarily starts the moment one asks ‘why?’ questions.
Take, for example, my account of the medieval open hall, which was
presented in chapter 7 as an example of interpretive archaeology. The
obvious next question, which is frequently asked of me by colleagues
raised in evolutionary traditions, is: why was the open hall abandoned
when it was, in the sixteenth century? To answer this question properly,
one has to refer outwards – to, for example, a change in underlying
sentiment and mentality, for example a ‘rise in privacy’. But why a rise
in privacy? Well, a greater sense of the individual, related in turn to
Renaissance ideas and the rise of market relations. Why the rise of the
market? And so one goes on: ultimately it is very difficult to avoid
being drawn into some kind of generalizing account of
feudalism-to-capitalism that is at the very least influenced by Marxist
and other evolutionary accounts of general social change.

At a more basic and general level, it is possible to identify the
assumptions of cultural evolution at an implicit level within much of
archaeological discourse, particularly when that discourse claims not to
be theoretical. Many such discussions of the ‘rise of civilization’, for
example, in treating it as a narrative rather than questioning its
causes, see the rise of civilization as a natural and inevitable
process: traditional accounts of the rise of the Roman Empire are a case
in point. Again, many ‘common-sense’ discussions of technology make the
assumption that technology simply gets better and better through
‘natural qualities’ of human ingenuity and problem-solving. Ironically,
then, ideas of cultural evolution are most tenacious, and evolutionary
ideas are expressed in their most simplistic and questionable form, in
areas of the discipline that consider themselves to be free from
‘theory’.

In my view, then, claims of the death of cultural evolutionary theory
have been over-stated. It is very difficult to specify an interpretation
of the past which is broadly social and processual which does not, at
some level, rest its foundations on assumptions about cultural
evolution. It is arguable that there has been a relative decline in the
quantity of archaeological literature that deals explicitly with
questions of cultural evolution, whether of unilinear or multilinear
strands. There is certainly a major difference in the profile of
evolutionary ideas between North America, where cultural evolution
remains an important and even dominant tradition, and much of the rest
of the world, especially Britain and the rest of Europe. However, I
would argue that cultural evolutionary ideas continue to underpin a very
large part of what archaeologists actually do, whether we like it or
not. I will come back to how this tension might be negotiated in the
concluding chapter.

10

Archaeology and Darwinian Evolution

If you think you understand [evolution], you don’t know nearly enough
about it … evolution must be the best-known yet worst-understood of all
scientific theories (LePage 2008: 24).

I traced in the last chapter how evolutionary ideas were a central
element of the intellectual origins and basis of archaeology as a
discipline. Further, I tried to show those ideas were given a decisive
cast during the decades of the mid to late nineteenth century, an
intellectual framework that created the intellectual foundations of
archaeology as a discipline. The chapter then diverged, choosing to
follow Spencer’s cultural evolution rather than self-styled ‘Darwinian
strands’ of evolutionary archaeology.

In this chapter, I will start by describing a few elements of Darwin’s
thought. Without Darwin, archaeology would not be the discipline it is
today. We noted in the last chapter how ideas of cultural evolution
continue to structure much archaeological enquiry whether overtly or
implicitly. Much the same can be said of Darwinian ideas. These are
often described as controversial in archaeology and in their application
to human culture generally, and indeed many of them are. However, it is
equally true to say that the intellectual framework encompassed by the
thought of Darwin remains absolutely foundational to much of the
discipline of archaeology, and foundational to intellectual life in
general. With apologies to Harold Macmillan, we are all Darwinians now;
Darwin’s thought established a cultural horizon without which
archaeology, and the human sciences, would not exist in the form they
take today.

The long-term impact of Darwinian ideas has been sharpened in the last
20 years. In this period, a number of explicitly ‘Darwinian’
archaeologies have flourished, in tandem with the heightened profile of
Darwinist evolutionary approaches to the human sciences as a whole.
Theoretical writing styling itself Darwinian has ranged from general
outlooks on the human sciences as an intellectual project, to
specifically archaeological theories and approaches, to particular
methods and research strategies, to particular explanations of elements
of the archaeological record or episodes in the past.

In their many forms, different Darwinian ‘archaeologies’ often look very
different from one another. Their starting assumptions and methods often
seem to be very varied to the outside observer, and their style, tone
and rhetoric often differ very markedly. It is therefore impossible to
summarize a single Darwinian or evolutionary archaeology, perhaps even
more so than the difficulties in generalizing about other schools such
as cultural evolutionary thought or postprocessual archaeology. However,
all these theories share one thing in common: a claim to be descended
from the thought of Charles Darwin and his theory of evolution.

Darwin’s Dangerous Idea

Darwin published The Origin of Species in 1859. It is difficult to
over-state the excitement and impact of this book, in both scientific
and cultural terms. The Origin of Species was a central element in the
constellation of ideas discussed in the last chapter. It was the
outspoken manifesto of a view of the world that was explicitly and
unashamedly scientific and evolutionary. Its arguments, and those of
Darwin’s later The Descent of Man, resonated not just through the
sciences, but across society as a whole, provoking responses from the
shocked to the vituperative to the satirical (figure 10.1). Spencer,
Marx and others applied evolutionary ideas to the study of human
society.

Darwin’s ideas filtered through into the arts and humanities also. The
poet Tennyson wrote of ‘Nature red in tooth and claw’ ten years before
Origin was published, but Tennyson was influenced by proto-Darwinist
ideas, and the phrase spread rapidly, like a virus or what some
Darwinists would call a meme. Many of the artist and critic John
Ruskin’s ideas about aesthetics were framed in bitter opposition to
Darwin, while Spencer’s phrase ‘survival of the fittest’ resonated
through thinking on philosophy and human culture. It is arguable who
influenced whom within this maelstrom of ideas; what is clear is that
all these ideas formed an intellectual horizon in nineteenth-century
thinking whose importance cannot be overemphasized. In all this rapid
take-up of evolutionary ideas across a range of disciplines, it is easy
to lose sight of the core elements of evolution as laid out by Darwin
himself.

Evolution has been defined as ‘descent with modification’ (Mace, Holden
and Shennan 2005: 2). Darwin proposed that plants and animals pass on
their characteristics to their offspring. Different offspring, however,
vary from one another. (Darwin was unsure of why this happened, and it
is interesting to note this gap in nineteenth-century evolutionary
thinking; it fell to later generations of scientists to discover and
explore the cause of biological variation, namely the operation of genes
and genetic mutation.)

Figure 10.1 Charles Darwin, from a cartoon in 1871

[c10_image001.jpg]

The resulting variations between different plants and animals mean that,
by chance, some are better suited to their environment than others. The
ones that are better suited to their environment stand a better chance
of growing and surviving, and a better chance, critically, of
reproducing, and thus passing on that variation to succeeding
generations. Those plants and animals that are more successful in
reproducing will, in time, expand in numbers, and come to drive out
their ‘competitors’.

Darwin’s theory was quite simple in its essentials, but exceptionally
powerful, and exceptionally dangerous in terms of its implications for
understanding the natural and human world. It provided a basis for the
scientific explanation of observed variation in the natural world; no
serious scholar now disputes its basic principles. However, I want to
focus here on the cultural impact of Darwin’s ideas, since (as
evolutionary thinkers frequently complain), while they remain as an
accepted basis for biological evolution, their implications are often
under-appreciated in the human sciences.

First, and perhaps most fundamentally, Darwin’s theory demystified the
natural world. For nineteenth-century readers of evolution, the natural
world was no longer simply or only God’s work, a mysterious source of
eternal wonder to be understood through divine revelation. Rather, the
natural world was to be understood with reference to Science. In my
view, all the current debates over the implications of Darwin’s findings
for belief in God miss the more important point. Whatever one’s
religious beliefs might be, as a scientist or scholar, the world was now
much more open and amenable to rational and empirical enquiry than it
was before Darwin’s theory. Different readers of this book will disagree
about whether or not the world is ultimately to be understood as God’s
creation, but it is a matter of scientific agreement that the natural
world has within it abundant evidence for a series of processes that
explain its tremendous variation in evolutionary terms.

When viewed with hindsight, Darwinian thought can be held to represent
the logical end-point of a process of opening up the world to scientific
enquiry that can trace its origins back to early modern science and
natural philosophy. In the sixteenth century, Copernicus demonstrated
that the earth moved round the sun and not the other way around. By
doing so, he destroyed the traditional conception of an earth-centred
universe. More broadly, the great empiricist philosophers such as Bacon,
Hobbes and Locke insisted that the world was to be understood not
through abstract thought, but through empirical observation and rational
method. In so doing, their work tended, in terms of the unfolding of
intellectual history, to decouple scientific enquiry and natural
philosophy on the one hand from religion and theology on the other. A
Darwinian view of the world, then, is fundamentally opposed to for
example a Romantic view, in which emotional affinity and revelation of
the nature or essence of things through mystical experience are often
placed at centre stage.

Second, Darwin’s theory was able to explain tremendous variety and
complexity in the natural world around him with reference to the
operation and interaction of a few simple processes. The end result –
the biological variety we see around us, the thousands of species of
plants and animals and their interactions – was infinitely complex, and
required careful and complex scientific study to elucidate. But
crucially it could be explained, in its essentials, in a relatively
simple way. He expressed this point in a famous passage, a tableau drawn
not from his more famous voyage around the world on the Beagle, but
rather from his daily walks across the green fields and hills of the
English landscape around his home at Down House in Kent, south-eastern
England (figure 10.2):

It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many
plants of various kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth,
and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different
from each other, and dependent on each other in so complex a manner,
have all been produced by laws acting around us (Darwin 1859 [Wilson ed.
2006, 760]).

Figure 10.2 An entangled bank, close to Down House, Darwin’s home

[c10_image002.jpg]

Darwin’s thought, then, was reductionist. Reductionism is a term often
used in a pejorative way, but I do not mean it in a pejorative sense
here. Darwin made the great intellectual achievement of reducing the
study of tremendous complexity and variety to the interaction of a few
key laws and variables. In this sense, ideas of cultural process as
discussed in chapter 5, in their stress on cutting through their ‘noise’
of surface variability to the underlying cultural processes, owe a great
intellectual debt to Darwin.

Reductionism of this kind is also evident in the development of
nineteenth-century geology. The early date of the Industrial Revolution
in Britain, and its consequent demand for raw materials such as coal,
meant that the British Isles was the first part of the globe to have the
details of its geology mapped out through surface observation and
through examination of the sections through the earth’s crust revealed
in mine shafts. The result was a beautiful, but apparently complex and
confusing, mass of different rocks to be found on the surface (figure
10.3). However, this complex surface pattern was the result of an
underlying stratification that is in essence very simple. The strata of
the British Isles are tilted up toward the north and west, so that
younger and softer rocks are exposed in the south and east. The
‘elaborately constructed forms’ of the geology and physical geography of
the British Isles, then, and the world beyond, had been produced by
processes which at their heart were very simple however complex the
final pattern that they produced.

Figure 10.3 William ‘Strata’ Smith’s map of the geology of the British
Isles

[c10_image003.jpg]

Reductionism, then, is often criticized as an intellectual process,
particularly by humanists who accuse some Darwinists of simplistically
reducing social and cultural variability to a biological ‘core’.
However, it can be argued that properly executed, the development of
reductive explanations is a necessary and unavoidable part of modern
science.

Third, Darwin’s thought had radical implications for the study of
humanity. It implied that homo sapiens sapiens was an animal like any
other. Humans were no more ‘unique’, in principle, than any other
species. The methods of study that were appropriate for the natural
world, then, were logically applicable to the human world also. One of
the reasons for Darwin’s impact was that he wrote in a clear and
accessible style, and as a result, no reasonably intelligent reader
could escape or evade the appalling implications of The Origin of
Species for human descent. Indeed, in his later book The Descent of Man,
Darwin went out of his way to rhetorically emphasize the point. In a
passage which shocked a European world accustomed to thinking of Man as
made in God’s image, he described human ancestors as fanged, hairy, even
Satanic with their pointed ears and tails:

The early progenitors of man were no doubt once covered with hair, both
sexes having beards: their ears were pointed and capable of movement;
and their bodies were provided with a tail … our progenitors, no doubt,
were arboreal in their habits, frequenting some warm, forest-clad land.
The males were provided with great canine teeth, which served them as
formidable weapons (Darwin 1871 [Wilson ed. 2006: 894])

Writing like this challenged claims made by scholars in other
disciplines. For example assertions in the humanities that humans were
in some way ‘special’ or ‘different’ from ‘mere animals’ were given a
severe jolt. In this way, Darwinism can often be described as a highly
positivist philosophy, in the sense of the positivist belief that the
human sciences could or should follow the principles of the natural
sciences.

Darwinism leads one, then, to a highly sceptical view of the idea of
human essence. Claims can often be found in philosophical, theological
or humanist literature about what makes us ‘distinctively human’.
Darwinists are often dismissive of these claims. For Darwinists, the key
question is not a meditative, philosophical or abstract one (‘what makes
us human, deep down?’) but a scientific question: what combination of
traits, for example large brain size, a larynx enabling complex sounds
and therefore language, opposable thumbs, or primate social
organization, made early hominids adaptively successful? Darwinist
thought is in this sense profoundly and aggressively anti-essentialist.
In earlier chapters we saw how much culture-historical or traditional
archaeology is implicated in notions of what makes us ‘essentially
human’, notions that again can trace an intellectual ancestry to
philosophies of Romanticism and/or idealism. Darwinism encourages the
view that such notions lack intellectual credibility or at best are
unscientific.

Humans are, arguably, an extremely successful species, but the reasons
for that success are not to be found by reference to divine will, or to
particular civilized or ‘cultured’ attributes, or to some kind of human
‘essence’. Rather ‘culture’ itself can be redefined radically. For
succeeding generations of Darwinists, culture was the means by which
humans adapted to their environment. Great art and architecture,
literature, music, systems of morality, and all the other professed
attributes of ‘civilized’ life might be fine and pleasurable things to
contemplate, but could be explained scientifically in terms of their
attributes as part of a functioning cultural system. Victorian notions
of morality were undercut by such a theory, emphasizing as it did that
emotional or sentimental phenomena as ‘innocent’ as a maiden’s blush
were sexual in origin.

Darwinism also leads to a highly sceptical view of any purpose, mission
or teleology to human history. Such a view might sound strange, because
in the nineteenth century Darwinism was harnessed to Herbert Spencer’s
and Karl Marx’s philosophies of a definite human progress. It also
sounds strange because the term ‘evolution’ is often associated in
popular discourse with just such a teleology. However, a powerful
implication of Darwin’s theory is that chance – random variation, the
contingent combination of different inherited characteristics – plays a
very large part in the world. In cultural evolution, and in humanistic
study generally, the world has a purpose. In Darwinian evolution, by
contrast, ‘the nature of genes is to make copies of themselves not with
any grand plan or purpose in mind but simply because that is what they
do’ (Cartwright 2000: 53).

All these points may sound quite obvious to a twenty-first-century
generation for whom Darwinist ideas are apparently very familiar.
However, I invite the student to think about them very carefully. One of
the characteristics of Darwinist principles, as Michael LePage hints, is
that people profess to accept them, but their implications are not
always thought through in practice: ‘today, more than a century after
Darwin’s death, we still have not come to terms with its mind-boggling
implications’ (Dennett 1995: 19). This perceived failure to roll-out the
implications of Darwin’s dangerous idea is especially apparent when the
student turns away from the ‘natural world’ towards the study of human
beings. Darwinists in the human sciences often complain that their
colleagues and students continue to think of the human world in
humanistic and Romantic ways long after these notions have, in their
view, been utterly discredited.

Cultural Ecology

Darwinist ideas were based around a small group of key concepts,
including variation, drift, adaptation, and natural selection. The
central argument of Darwinist applications to the human sciences is very
simple. Each of these ideas can be argued to apply not simply to the
natural world, but to human and cultural life also. In this view, human
and cultural life is part of that natural world.

Darwinist archaeology, then, is part of a wider movement in the human
sciences, a movement which makes the claim that Darwinist principles are
applicable not merely to biology, but to human culture also. If this
claim is correct, then all or part of the archaeological record can be
explained with reference to evolutionary ideas such as variation,
adaptation and natural selection.

What is the evidence for this claim? First, variation can be seen in
culture as well as in the natural world. Variation can be seen on many
different levels and in different ways, from the zigging and zagging on
pottery decoration, to variation between individuals and small groups,
to variation between whole cultural groups however defined.

In biology, variation is argued to be random: it proceeds through
genetic mutation, though as we have observed, the operation of genes was
not understood in Darwin’s time. To take a classic and over-simplified
example, why do giraffes have long necks? When giraffes reproduce and
the result is variation in neck length between offspring, there is no
intentionality behind this. Giraffes do not get longer and longer necks
because they desire or want longer necks. Nor do giraffes act in a
conscious or purposive way, for example by stretching and stretching in
an attempt to get them. Rather, the variation is random. What happens is
that natural selection acts upon the variation between offspring of
giraffes. Giraffes who happen to have inherited longer necks from their
parents find it easier to reach the leaves in higher branches of trees.
They are better nourished, and stand a better chance of reproducing and
passing on their genes to their offspring. Over time, then, giraffes
with longer necks will come to numerically predominate.

In human culture, the causes of variation are more complex. They might
be argued to be ‘random’ in some cases. For example, what has been
termed ‘stylistic drift’ has been argued to occur when decorative
features such as zigging versus zagging on pottery has no obvious or
direct adaptive benefit. (It may well have an indirect adaptive
consequence, however, for example by its function as a stylistic
expression of group cohesion). However, much human behaviour is
undeniably purposive or intentional. People in the past chose to build
houses of a certain form, chose to plant particular crops, or chose to
dress in a certain way. It is very difficult to see the patterns these
choices produced as the result of ‘random mutation’. Rather, the choices
were in part purposive – choice of what crops to plant or form of houses
to build was informed by an appreciation of what strategy was likely to
be successful (thus people do not choose to build igloos in central
Africa or to attempt to grow yams in the Arctic).

Darwinists argue, however, that evolutionary principles can act on any
variation regardless of whether it is ‘random’. Indeed, human intention
and the cultural choices that humans make can mean that many
evolutionary ‘dead ends’ are avoided. A giraffe with a short neck is the
simple recipient of sheer bad luck, and there is nothing the poor animal
can do about it. A human individual or group, however, can choose this
subsistence strategy over that one; can discover and utilize new sources
of food; can make the choice to move to a different area with a
different or more abundant set of natural resources. In practice, very
few human individuals or groups consciously choose a strategy that they
believe or know to be a poor one – though examples can be argued. For
example, one explanation for the failure of the Scandinavian settlement
of Newfoundland in the early Middle Ages is that they attempted to
persist with subsistence strategies more appropriate to their homeland,
rather than follow the more ‘rational’ choice of adopting the strategies
of their Inuit neighbours.

The study of human adaptation to the environment has been termed
cultural ecology or human behavioural ecology. Cultural ecology is the
belief that societies will be more or less adapted to their material
environment, and therefore that the characteristics of those societies
can be explained in terms of such adaptation. A powerful argument in
much of ‘cultural ecology’ is the observation derived from ethnography
that humans usually have a deep and sophisticated understanding of their
environment, and will modify their behaviour to adapt to changes in that
environment.

It may be the case that much human behaviour has unintended consequences
for survival and reproduction. The reasons why human groups change their
behaviour might be complex, and ostensibly governed by intentions
unrelated to adaptation and reproduction – building temples to please
the gods, or burying their dead with elaborate grave-goods for the
afterlife. Nevertheless, cultural ecologists argue that much behaviour
that has no obvious or immediate significance in facilitating
reproductive success nevertheless does have consequences when looked at
in detail and depth.

Much cultural ecology and cultural materialist anthropology concerns
itself with taking cultural practices that appear ‘odd’ to Western eyes,
or at least not obviously adaptive or utilitarian, and showing how such
behaviour does have adaptive consequences and/or can be explained using
an adaptive model. Many of its adherents are anthropologists working
with modern societies. Examples of ideas from cultural ecology that have
been taken up and used by archaeologists are site catchment analysis,
optimal foraging theory, risk and seasonality.

Site catchment analysis is a body of techniques based on the mapping of
resources around a site. It is assumed that people will exploit the
landscape ‘rationally’, and they will utilize resources in such a way as
to maximize returns. The technique, then, consists of drawing a line
around a site’s location and looking at the resources within two, three,
four hours’ walk of the site.

What constitutes the most adaptive strategy in the long term, however,
is not simply a question of how to exploit the most resources; it also
involves issues of risk and seasonality. Interest in ‘risk’ is based on
the observation that it is not so much the overall productivity of an
environment that is important for understanding human adaptations, but
the degree of risk within it. Neolithic farming communities, for
example, may be worried not so much about producing more food as such,
but about what might happen during the odd ‘bad year’ of disaster and
famine. It is no use a village producing enough food to support 500
people nine years out of ten if there is only food to support 100 people
in the tenth, famine year.

Many economic, social and even religious strategies, then, can be
understood as risk minimization. Extended networks of kin, trading
contacts, food storage: all these phenomena have been interpreted by
anthropologists and archaeologists as ways to mitigate the risk of
subsistence crisis. If food is short one year, one can call on one’s
distant cousins; or on trade partners who owe you obligations; or on the
tribe to whom you gave marriage partners. Thus, elaborate social
networks such as those of Australian Aborigines or Inuit Native
Americans can be explained as adaptive responses to ‘highrisk’
environments such as the Australian desert or the Arctic tundra.

‘Seasonality’ refers to an interest in how human groups survive through
the year. There may be plenty of resources in an environment for most of
the year, but this is of no use if people will starve 2 months out of
12. Peter Rowley-Conwy looked at the Ertebølle culture of Denmark and
suggested that the collection of oysters, though not important in terms
of overall caloric intake, was absolutely critical at a certain time of
year when few other resources were available. This observation in turn
helped RowleyConwy explain site location and other aspects of Ertebølle
behaviour.

Cultural ecology, then, explores the ways in which human culture is
‘adaptive’ at the level of the cultural group. There is, however, a
second set of approaches, which examine selection, variation and
adaptation at different levels – of genetic transmission between
individuals.

Genes and Memes

One application of Darwinism to human culture is to argue that much
human behaviour is not determined by ‘culture’ at all, but rather is
genetically programmed or determined. Sociobiology is a form of theory
that attempts to explain features of human behaviour as being the result
of genetic/biological rather than social, non-genetic causes. It
suggests that certain behaviours are the result of genetic propensities
that were adaptive at some point in the past. Sociobiology is an
exceptionally controversial theory of culture, since the stress on
particular propensities for behaviour (aggression, group loyalty,
altruism) being rooted in genes is often interpreted by its opponents as
being racist or sexist. For example, some sociobiologists argue that it
makes adaptive sense for males to spread their genes around widely and
reproduce as much as possible; female primates, by contrast, can only
have a limited number of children, and need a stable partner for
protection against predators and other environmental dangers. Therefore,
it is argued, women in modern Western society are genetically
predisposed to stable relationships, whereas men are genetically
predisposed to sleep with as many sexual partners as possible. Opponents
of sociobiology see this as a thinly-disguised attempt at an ideological
justification for male infidelity – ‘I couldn’t help it, dear, it’s in
my genes’. Sociobiology is seen by many, including many Darwinists, as
excessively simplistic in its approach; it is very difficult to point to
convincing or sustained case studies that apply sociobiology to the
archaeological record.

A more subtle way to think about the genetic basis of human behaviour is
proposed by evolutionary psychology. Evolutionary psychologists develop
explanations of human cognitive traits as the products of past processes
of adaptation and natural selection. We saw in chapter 6 that
evolutionary psychology was an important part of cognitive archaeology,
in that is proposes evolutionary explanations for the development of
language, of symbolic thought, and so on. Much of this work was
prefigured by Darwin himself, who in his later years looked at the
expression of emotion in humans, relating it to patterns of behaviour
that he hypothesized had been adaptive in the past. Evolutionary
psychology tends to have a more complex view of the relationship between
genetic make-up and human culture, a view taken up by co-evolutionary
theory (see below).

A subtle way to avoid some of the conceptual issues raised by
sociobiology and evolutionary psychology is to think more carefully
about the unit of selection. In biology, the unit of selection can
either be the gene, or the individual organism; there is a complex and
ongoing debate in biology over which of these is the appropriate unit of
analysis. Richard Dawkins’ famous book ‘The Selfish Gene’ was arguably
mistitled; genes are not selfish, they are just genes; they do what they
do, that is, replicate themselves. However, his point was that it is
genes which replicate and which are or are not successful in doing so,
not individual organisms.

Darwinists studying human culture have explored the implications of
Dawkins’ observation. Dawkins proposed that while biological
transmission occurs genetically, human culture consists of memes. A meme
can be defined as any cultural unit that is passed from one person to
another by non-genetic means. A meme can be an idea, a particular
behaviour, or a cultural value; and it can be passed from one individual
to another by imitation, teaching or other forms of cultural
transmission. Memes are in this view like genes, in that they carry
code. However, the mode of transmission of behaviour here is memetic,
rather than genetic. Memetic transmission can be analogous to genes, or
it can be very different: thus, while genetic variability is the result
of ‘copying errors’, cultural behaviour may change not just through
‘drift’ but also through intentional behaviour, for example innovation
or adoption of different cultural practices. As a result, many of the
problems of sociobiology, both conceptual and ethical, are avoided.

The idea of memes is attractive to Darwinian archaeologists because it
gets around a key problem. Sociobiology asserts the primacy of genetic
transmission of behaviour; but clearly, in human history, there have
been cultural practices that have been very successful and have
flourished, though they have not necessarily facilitated the
reproduction of particular individuals.

Co-Evolutionary Theory

A particular form of Darwinist thought that has proven popular among
archaeologists is ‘co-evolutionary’ or ‘dual inheritance’ theory.
Co-evolutionary theory does not claim to reduce ‘culture’ to biology or
vice versa. For Richerson and Boyd, culture is part of biology, but not
reducible to it:

Much evidence suggests that we have an evolved psychology that shapes
what we learn and how we think, and that this in turn influences the
kind of beliefs and attitudes that spread and persist. Theories that
ignore these connections cannot adequately account for much of human
behavior. At the same time, culture and cultural change cannot be
understood solely in terms of innate psychology. Culture affects the
success and survival of individuals and groups; as a result, some
cultural variants spread and others diminish, leading to evolutionary
processes that are every bit as real and important as those that shape
genetic variation. These culturally evolved environments then affect
which genes are favored by natural selection. Over the evolutionary long
haul, culture has shaped our innate psychology as much as the other way
around (Richerson and Boyd 2005: 4)

One of the strengths of this argument is that it moves beyond rather
sterile ‘nature’ versus ‘nurture’ arguments, which Richerson and Boyd
regard as misguided. On the one hand, humanists and others have often
taken a ‘superorganic’ view of culture, insisting that the mind is a
‘blank slate’ upon which different cultural systems are more or less
free to write what they like. On the other, some Darwinists have tended
towards a naïve sociobiological position in which everything that we
think and do is genetically determined. Richerson and Boyd reject this
opposition; culture for them, is obviously implicated in biology, but
genes act as a recipe, not a determining code.

One of the powerful implications of this argument is that Richerson and
Boyd do not divorce or oppose culture to biology, but they do affirm
that culture changes evolutionary processes qualitatively: ‘Culture is
interesting and important because its evolutionary behavior is
distinctly different from that of genes.’ Part of culture can be seen as
memetic, that is operating in a manner analogous to genes, but memetic
processes are not the only cultural processes at work.

Richerson and Boyd’s views are controversial, but they do open up an
intellectual space which moves beyond sterile nature/nurture debates,
and enables one to explore the interaction of culture and biology
without having to sign up to a reductionist position. It is striking
that recent Darwinist archaeologies of a more eclectic and theoretically
flexible brand such as those emanating from the UCL Centre for the
Evolution of Cultural Diversity have drawn heavily on Richerson and
Boyd’s work.

Selectionist Archaeology

A stronger and more fundamental position of is that of the ‘selectionist
archaeology’ of Robert Dunnell and his students. Selectionist
archaeology starts from a very strong assertion of archaeology as a
science, and a dogmatic rejection of other forms of archaeological
enquiry as basically misconceived. For example, the entire project of
cultural evolution is dismissed as ‘unscientific’ and having nothing to
do with biological models. Dunnell separates two very different strands
of nineteenth-century thought: Spencer’s stress on social totalities
leading to cultural evolution; and the adaptationist arguments of
Darwin. Only the latter, he claims, is ‘scientific’. Cultural evolution
is unscientific because it substitutes cause/intention for a scientific
framework: ‘it employs different notions of cause, lacks theory in the
usual sense of the word, and employs an entirely different research
strategy’ (Dunnell 1989: 38). Dunnell also rejects sociobiology, on the
grounds that most transmission of traits is cultural rather than
genetic.

Instead of positing the individual as the unit of selection,
selectionist archaeology focuses on the ‘phenotype’. Phenotypes are
defined as the physical and behavioural elements of organisms;
‘artefacts are the hard parts of the behavioural segment of phenotypes’,
like shells or nests for other species. Selectionist archaeology, then,
focuses on the success or failure of phenotypes in replicating. Much of
selectionist archaeology has focused on a very sharp distinction between
style and function. It is proposed that functionally advantageous traits
will be selected for. However, stylistic traits will be subject to
‘drift’.

Selectionist archaeology makes two interesting intellectual alliances.
First, in its stress on understanding the archaeological record rather
than on the human actions and processes, and also in its rejection of
cultural evolutionary models, it ends up in a similar position to much
traditional culture history. Second, as Dunnell has pointed out, it
reverts to a version of evolutionary theory earlier than that of Darwin.
Recall the example of the giraffe’s long neck discussed above. An
earlier generation of biologists, particularly the eighteenth-century
thinker Lamarck, had posited that giraffes get their longer necks
through some kind of conscious or unconscious striving on their part.
Selectionist archaeology claims to revert to this Lamarckian rather than
Darwinian model, in that artefacts or phenotypes are the ‘hard’ or
‘fossil’ part of human culture. The programme of selectionist
archaeology has been especially popular in North America. Conversely, in
other parts of the world, scholars have tended to see it as resting on a
misunderstanding of Darwinist principles; it is striking, for example,
that Shennan’s work makes very little reference to it.

Selectionist archaeology has few case studies worked through in detail
to back it up, in part, I think, because its challenge to established
modes of archaeological enquiry is so fundamental and far-reaching. If
Dunnell is correct, then we must abandon much of traditional
archaeology, including what he terms ‘model descriptions’ of phases,
cultures and periods, as well as ‘behavioural reconstruction’. Bettinger
and Eerkens note ‘an unfortunate parallel between evolutionary
archaeology and the weather: everyone talks about it but no one does
anything about it’ (1997: 177). Nevertheless, models such as these have
attracted a committed following in the last few decades, particularly in
North American archaeology.

Case Study: Art, Handaxes, Population and Innovation in the Palaeolithic

A range of examples of how Darwinist ideas have affected archaeological
interpretations can be taken from human origins research. The first is
Steven Mithen’s explanation of the archaeological record of the
Palaeolithic, including cave art and handaxes. Mithen suggests that the
creativity of cave art is an adaptive response to an environment full of
risk and fluctuation, in which there was often plenty of game around but
in which sharp fluctuations could occur. He draws attention to the
content of the art – images of animals that he interprets as encoding
valuable information for hunters – and its distribution – in an area
rich in game and possibly dense in population at this period.

Mithen suggests that the art relates to critical moments in changing
hunting strategies when changes in the environment forced hunters to
adapt by turning from group activities to solitary hunting. The art,
then, helped prepare hunters for such changes. Mithen suggests that
hunters were aware that troughs in reindeer/red deer populations would
occur, but were unsure when.

What is striking about Mithen’s approach is its use of different ideas.
He uses ideas of adaptation to a changing environment to explain a
phenomenon – art – not normally regarded as amenable to an adaptive
approach. Mithen insists that ‘creativity’ and ‘adaptation’ are not
mutually exclusive; indeed, he comments:

I am left wondering about a possible connection between the creative act
of producing images and the creative thoughts about hunting behaviour
that such images helped create. I feel that these must have fed off each
other in a spiral of creativity leaving us today with the splendours of
Palaeolithic art and enabling the Palaeolithic hunters to adapt to their
uncertain world. (Mithen 1990: 13)

Mithen’s explanation here is loosely inspired by cultural ecology, but
his more recent interpretations of handaxes as ‘products of sexual
selection’ (Kohn and Mithen 1999, 518), in collaboration with Kohn, is
more directly and fundamentally derived from Darwinian ideas. Handaxes
are one of the most common, and classic, artefacts of the Acheulian
(figure 10.4); one of their most striking features is that their form
remains extremely stable over a million years. Kohn and Mithen observe
that many of these handaxes are very carefully produced, in a way that
goes beyond what is needed for utilitarian purposes. In particular,
forms of handaxe are carefully designed to be as symmetrical as
possible. Kohn and Mithen draw on Darwinian models of sexual selection
theory, which stress how reproduction is the outcome in part of female
sexual selection, and which explores why females choose certain traits
in the male over others. Sexual selection theorists have pointed out
that symmetry, in biology, is an indicator of good genes, and is one
criterion of ‘mate selection’. They are arguing for a bias on the part
of females towards symmetry, and that symmetrical handaxes would be read
at some level as an indicator of good genes, or more broadly in terms of
the male’s success at acquiring resources, health, and social and
cognitive awareness. Males, then, learnt to produce particularly
impressive and symmetrical handaxes for the purpose of attracting mates.

Figure 10.4 Handaxes from Cuxton, southern England. Photographs courtesy
of Francis Wenban-smith

[c10_image004.jpg]

This theory is a classic example of Darwinist ideas in archaeology, even
down to the way like so many Darwinian arguments it has been popularized
(and viewed with humour, by both proponents and detractors) as ‘sexy
handaxe theory’). It can be criticized from both within and without a
Darwinian perspective, for example on evidential grounds: right or
wrong, there are quite a number of very wide and bold inferential leaps
between observed patterns in the archaeological record (symmetry in
handaxes) and explanatory theories (female sexual selection). For
example, there is no hard evidence that males rather than females were
producing handaxes, or that there was competition between males for
females as mates; both these features may be suggested by comparative
studies of primates, but remain unproven.

A third example is Stephen Shennan’s study of cultural innovation and
the emergence of modern human culture after 60,000 bp. Shennan is
interested in the relationship between population size on the one hand
and cultural innovation on the other. He takes a co-evolutionary
approach to understanding cultural transmission and innovation, and
discusses the means of transmission and change in craft traditions, most
obviously stone tool production. Shennan develops a complex mathematical
simulation which demonstrates that the larger the population size, the
more successful innovation is likely to be:

When cultural innovation processes take place and the results are passed
on by a combination of vertical and oblique transmission, larger
populations have a very major advantage over smaller ones. Quite simply,
members of larger populations are on average both biologically fitter
and more attractive as models for imitation, by virtue of the fact that
the deleterious sampling effects present in small populations decline as
population sizes increase. When populations are small, innovations which
are less beneficial reproductively and less attractive to imitate are
more likely to be maintained within them. (Shennan 2001: 12).

Shennan concludes, therefore, that a key to understanding the increased
rate of change in human culture after 60,000 bp is the relatively rapid
increase in population size after this date, compared with very low
population levels before that date: ‘demographic fluctuations may be the
single most important factor in explaining how and why the emergence of
modern human culture occurred when it did’ (Shennan 2001: 15) – and
conversely, Shennan adds, low population levels may explain why earlier
handaxes changed so very little over time.

Darwinian Archaeologies: Criticisms

Criticisms of Darwinist archaeologies and their inspirations in
Darwinian applications to the human sciences are difficult to list in a
straightforward fashion. As we have seen, the school of thought itself
is a varied and complex beast. Criticisms directed, for example, at
cultural ecology are quite misdirected at certain forms of biological
evolution or other programmes such as optimal foraging theory. As
Darwinian models of evolution vary in what they consider to be the
appropriate unit of analysis (individual, culture, phenotype), and as
proponents are quite insistent that these variations are fundamental
scientific differences rather than changes in nuance or relative
emphasis, critique of one model is not necessarily applicable to others.

Shanks and Tilley come closest to a complete rejection of such models.
They reject any kind of evolutionary or ecological theory on grounds
that are basically similar to their rejection of systems thinking.
Concepts such as time budgeting, risk and cost-benefit analysis are,
Shanks and Tilley argue, ideas that are derived from modern economics:
that is, the study of modern capitalist societies. If, as Shanks and
Tilley suggest, people in the past had systems of cultural values that
were other than those of modern capitalists, it follows that such
concepts are inapplicable to them. In fact, we can go further: if
cultural ecologists claim that such analyses hold any truth, then they
are in fact claiming that capitalist values are true in all times and
all places. Cultural ecology is therefore, for Shanks and Tilley,
ideological – as we discussed in chapter 6, an ideology is a system of
beliefs that makes certain values appear universal, normal and natural.

Cultural ecologists counter that, as we look at other cultures, their
beliefs are indeed more or less ‘rational’. Modern ethnographic studies,
they claim, show that all or most cultures do in fact have a ‘rational’
view of their environment, and that therefore we can apply modern
‘rational’ concepts such as time-budgeting and risk.

This is an unresolved argument, but it is worth pointing out its roots
in economic anthropology. In the 1960s and 1970s, many anthropologists
working on the economics of modern non-Western societies claimed that
all such societies made ‘rational’ economic choices that could be
understood using the ideas and vocabulary of Western economists –
marginal cost, energy flows, risk, etc. This was called the formalist
school of economic anthropology. Formalists were opposed by
substantivists, who argued that Western ideas were inappropriate for the
study of the economic choices of other cultures. The ‘formalist versus
substantivist debate’ has lost its heat more recently, but it continues
to surface from time to time in debates over the claims of cultural
ecology.

A related attack on evolution and ecology has come via social
constructivism, the social critique of science that we discussed in
chapter 3. If a culture is indeed adapted to an external environment, it
is argued, what was that environment? The resources and risks in that
environment are delineated by the techniques of Western Science. But if
those techniques are themselves socially constructed, they cannot claim
to be a ‘neutral’ or ‘objective’ mapping of the resources in that
environment. A different way of making the same objection is via an
attack on essentialism: that is, if one deconstructs the idea that the
body has certain ‘natural’ or ‘biologically endowed’ needs and desires,
then the landscape cannot be interpreted as a set of resources that may
fulfil those needs and desires.

Constructivists tend to make very strong critiques on the basis that
Darwinism is an unacceptably reductionist view of human behaviour, a
crude take-over attempt by biologists of the human sciences. Darwinists
respond that constructivism is an anti-science agenda, a crude take-over
attempt by the human sciences of biology and the natural sciences. Who
is right? Read the literature, and then make up your own mind.

Conclusion

The application of ideas of Darwinian evolution to archaeology today
continues to be one of the most controversial topics in archaeological
theory. No serious scholar doubts the theory of natural selection, any
more than they doubt the theory of gravity. However, there remains a
major underlying tension in the way archaeologists think about human
culture, and specifically the question of whether and how far Darwinist
models of descent with modification and natural selection are useful or
productive ways of understanding human behaviour generally, or the
archaeological record in particular.

Like many theories, there is a great deal of bad Darwinism around, most
frequently to be found in the popular press. Studies such as the
following are of dubious origin and methodology, and are frequently
quoted by opponents as exemplars of bad science:

Shoppers are using instincts they learnt from their Neanderthal
ancestors, researchers have found.

Dr David Holmes, of Manchester Metropolitan University, said skills that
were learnt as cavemen and women were now being used in shops. He said:
‘Gatherers sifted the useful from things that offered them no
sustenance, warmth or comfort with a skill that would eventually lead to
comfortable shopping malls and credit cards. In our evolutionary past,
we gathered in caves with fires at the entrance. We repeat this in warm
shopping centres where we can flit from store to store without braving
the icy winds.’

The study was commissioned by Manchester Arndale shopping centre … (Ben
Leach, Daily Telegraph, 25.02.2009)

In my view, there is a major underlying tension in the way that
archaeologists approach the study of the past. As with cultural
evolution, supporters, and critics, of such ideas, do not always do what
they say they do. Darwinian archaeology is often (though not always)
associated with a strong belief in Science, and a resistance to what are
perceived as social or political agendas to deconstruct or to devalue
Science. However, as we saw with the sexy handaxe theory, there are
arguably as many evidential gaps in Darwinist explanations of the
archaeological record as there are in parallel and competing
interpretive theories. This is not to say that Darwinist applications
are necessarily wrong, but it is to make a plea that it give up the
strong rhetorical statements it makes to be a superior, or indeed the
only, way of constructing scholarly knowledge of the past.

Darwinism is often presented as a single way of knowing, a theory that
is very simple in its essentials and provides a powerful key to
explaining human behaviour. Its proponents characteristically make the
claim that theirs is not just another way of thinking about the past,
but a better, even the only, scientific way of understanding the
archaeological record. Darwinism promises to deliver a methodologically
complex and difficult, but theoretically simple and unitary, way of
thinking about the archaeological record. Its language and rhetoric is
often uncompromising, even fundamentalist. For more dogmatic Darwinists,
their way is the only way, both much more difficult and at the same time
much more valuable than the fluffy humanism of lesser colleagues: ‘to
gain an appreciation of just how different Darwinism is from other
theories about the natural world, one cannot simply read a few books or
articles and come away with the requisite understanding. Rather one
needs to wade through myriad epistemological issues’ (O’Brien and Lyman
2000: 72).

However, what Darwinian applications to the human sciences actually
deliver, when their results are examined critically and in detail, is a
series of themes that are just as slippery and multifaceted as the most
‘nuanced’ set of interpretive archaeologies. What is different is the
rhetorical style taken, of confrontation rather than accommodation; the
interpretive ‘difference in emphasis’ or ‘chosen interpretive turn’ is
the Darwinist’s ‘fundamental misunderstanding’ or just being ‘wrong’.

The student seeking to understand Darwinian thought, and to apply it to
the archaeological record, is rapidly disillusioned by the promise of a
definite method or theory. He or she is presented with difficult choices
after his or her first introductory readings. Darwinist archaeology is
not, in practice, a single way of knowing, but rather a series of
divergent routes, the choice of which will lead to ritual denunciation
from the spurned parties. What is the unit of selection – the
social/cultural group, the population, the individual, the gene or the
meme? How is the ‘environment’ defined? Is a strictly Darwinian model
appropriate, or a Lamarckian model, à la Dunnell? Within this forest of
arguments and choice, a path can be traced that is not necessarily
incommensurate or incompatible with interpretive models. Darwin, after
all, ‘is sometimes said to have biologized human culture, but he is more
accurately accused of culturizing biology’ (Richerson and Boyd 2005:
16).

An important and exciting body of work that I have alluded to briefly in
this chapter is that of placing Darwin in his nineteenth-century
context, and his cultural impact and role as an intellectual in his
time. The supreme irony is that the man whose work initiated a
scientific dismantling of much of the essentialism of the study of
‘human culture’, and has led to such unabashed claims of the superiority
of ‘science’ over other forms of knowledge, has become a cultural icon,
in ways that (in my view) are very difficult to explain using a
Darwinist framework. Darwin is now a megastar. He is one of the very few
scientists (along with Albert Einstein) whose face is instantly
recognizable (figure 10.1); he appears on the British ten pound note, on
arte-facts such as mugs and bumper stickers, and was voted the Fourth
Greatest Briton in a BBC TV poll (behind Winston Churchill, Isambard
Kingdom Brunel and Lady Diana, but beating William Shakespeare into an
ignominious fifth place).

What is needed, then, is a renunciation of loud position statements
proclaiming the inherent superiority of the Darwinist project, or
conversely blanket condemnations of its moral or political iniquity.
Rather, future decades should see a very difficult project demanding
hard theoretical work on both sides, namely an understanding of the
evolution of human culture and society that does not seek to reduce
culture to biology, but which does seek to grasp the very subtle and
complex relationship of different elements of human behaviour. In my
view, it is striking that the most impressive and convincing
applications of Darwinist ideas have done exactly this. For example, in
Origins and Revolutions (2007), Clive Gamble has used ideas derived from
the history of brain evolution alongside interpretive ideas of
landscape, personhood and materiality.

This is a massive and very difficult undertaking, spanning as it does
the concerns of the humanities and human sciences as much as it is a
project internal to archaeology. Indeed, its difficulty is such that
simple name-calling of other schools as ‘unscientific’, or conversely as
‘reductionist’, is often preferred to engaging in such a project. But
however difficult it is, I would argue that such a project is not ‘good’
or ‘bad’ – it is simply necessary.

11

Archaeology and History

For many in North America, archaeology is seen as a subfield of
anthropology, or at the very least the two disciplines are seen as
closely linked. In Europe, a straw poll of the views of most
archaeologists would suggest that the sister discipline of archaeology
is history.

In part, this difference reflects the different subject matter in North
America and Europe. The archaeology of North America is largely
prehistoric until the first colonies of the fifteenth, sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries ad. There is a flourishing and vibrant ‘historical
archaeology’ of the period of the American colonies and of eighteenth-
and nineteenth- century North America, but numerically it is very much a
minority pursuit within Americanist archaeology. The archaeologists
based in North American Classics departments are sometimes at the
forefront of theoretical debates, but not always. In contrast, the
‘historical horizon’ is much earlier in Europe. Europeanists have
historical texts that bear on the pre-Roman Iron Age; archaeologists
specializing in this or later periods form over half the teaching staff
in most British universities, and at a rough estimate over half the
excavations in Europe take place on Classical or post-Roman sites. All
these archaeologists deal with historical texts, and therefore with
university colleagues in Classics or History departments, in some form.
The full story of this divergence between Britain and North America in
terms of disciplinary allies, however, goes a little deeper than this.
As we saw in chapter 2, this different disciplinary configuration led to
the differential impact of the New Archaeology in Britain and America,
and between prehistoric and Classical archaeology. It also led to the
continuing flourishing and variety of ‘traditional’, culture-historical
approaches in Britain and especially continental Europe.

In this chapter, I want to look at some of the different theoretical
views taken on the relationship between archaeology and history. Before
I can do this, however, we must look at different views of historical
theory and practice. The theoretical positions of historians are as
varied as those of archaeologists. To an extent, debates within
historical theory run in parallel to those within archaeology.

Traditional History

Historians often like to trace their roots as a discipline back to the
nineteenth century with figures such as the German historian Ranke.
Ranke espoused what today would be seen as a narrow empiricism: his aim
was to tell history wie es eigentlich gewesen , ‘as it really was’. He
criticized grand theoretical schemes of human history and attempts to
draw moral and political judgments from historical material. The task of
the late nineteenth-century historian was simply to amass piles of
facts, which, it was held, would speak for themselves.

Coupled with an empiricist and inductivist approach to the material went
a stress on history as a narrative of political events. Traditional
historians told a story. Traditional history books often have a
beginning, a middle and an end to their plots. Indeed, it can be argued
that while traditional historians protested (and protest) that they have
no theory, in fact they follow literary rules of narrative and
emplotment that have been ably characterized by the historical theorist
Hayden White.

Traditional political history of this kind continues to be written to
the present day. However, there has been a widening of historical
thinking in several directions too wide-ranging to even detail here. One
example of this widening of approach is the Annales school of French
historians (named after their journal, Annales: Economies, Societies,
Civilisations ) such as Marc Bloch, Fernand Braudel, Emmanuel Le Roy
Ladurie and Jacques Le Goff. The Annales school has been much cited by
archaeologists as a useful inspiration for archaeological thought, so it
is worth reviewing its theories briefly.

The Annales School

First, Annales historians broadened their interests to include all
aspects of past societies. They looked not just at the political
machinations of the élite, but also at economy, society and cognition.
In this sense the Annales school helped history become more
anthropological and processual – that is, to understand total cultural
systems rather than just tell stories about its political events.

Second, the Annales school broadened historical interest in the nature
of time. Traditional historians tended to see time as no more than just
a series of events such as battles, political treaties, births,
coronations and deaths of monarchs. The task of the historian in this
view was simply to describe these events as they happened one after
another. The Annales school wanted to look at longer-term processes that
underlay particular events. Underneath the ‘surface froth’ of battles
and treaties, they saw economic, environmental and demographic trends
and cycles. As discussed by Fernand Braudel, history moved at three
scales or rhythms:

1 that of events, l’histoire evenementielle;

2 medium-term cycles such as economic boom and bust; and

3 the very long term, ‘enduring structures’ or longue dureé (climatic
changes, physical geography).

Note the similarity between the Annales notion of the long term and the
archaeological concept of process as a trend underlying specific
variability (discussed in chapter 2). Note also two areas of debate
prompted by Annales thinking that have parallels within archaeological
theory:

1 Which (if any) of the three levels or scales of time is dominant? Each
timescale might have its own logic; they might intersect at specific
conjunctures. At times Braudel implied that the longue dureé dominated
the other two levels; other Annales historians implied that the three
levels interacted and that no one level was dominant.

2 Are people’s thoughts important, or does the environment dominate?
Some writers suggested that what they called ‘mentalité’ or mentalities
could be just as much part of the longue dureé as climate or physical
geography. For example, Jacques Le Goff talked of ‘the medieval mind’ as
a mentality spanning five centuries that structured medieval people’s
attitudes towards economic life and the natural world. So while Braudel
tended to equate environment with the long term and to treat environment
as a base-line, no such equation is logically necessary.

For example, in his book The Peasants of Languedoc Emmanuel Le Roy
Ladurie looked at the lives of peasants in southern France. He used
quantitative evidence, for example on the nutrition of peasants and of
daily wage-rates; he used a loosely systemic model to understand why
populations grew, stabilized and contracted at certain points; he
emphasized the importance of ‘environmental’ variables such as climate.
At the same time, his book Montaillou is one of the most famous
reconstructions of peasant mentalities in historical literature. Le Roy
Ladurie’s work, and Annales thinking in general, therefore incorporates
many of the tensions between environment and society, short and long
term, seen in archaeology and the human sciences in general.

The Linguistic Turn

In the decades after 1980, however, there has been a move taking
historians still further away from traditional forms of historical
discourse: this has been called the ‘linguistic turn’.

A good way to explain this shift is to look at the story of English
‘social history’. In the 1960s, very much in parallel with New
Archaeology and New Geography, and influenced also by the Annales
school, historians working within the Cambridge Group for the Study of
Population and Social Structure turned to new areas outside traditional
history. Some writers even termed this the ‘New Social History’. The New
Social History sought answers to the dynamics of past societies through
the use of statistics and looked at processes such as demographic cycles
and fertility rates, using systemic jargon to understand the links
between these. Cross-cultural analogies were used, for example between
Europe before and during the Industrial Revolution and modern
‘developing’ societies.

But the New Social History rapidly found that key elements of the
answers to the questions it was asking lay in ‘sentiment’ and
‘mentality’ – that is, in the realm of thoughts and ideologies. A good
example is the New Social History’s attempt to understand changing
patterns of marriage. Historians could not understand statistics of
changing age of marriage, for example, without looking at changing
attitudes and sentiments (for example, changing attitudes towards
illegitimacy, attitudes towards patriarchy, or the rise of the modern
notion of romantic love).

As a result, historians turned to other forms of evidence to explore
people’s attitudes. These included such ‘non-statistical’ sources as
conduct books prescribing manners and behaviour, court accounts of
popular sentiments expressed at church, even literary and poetic
descriptions of feeling and behaviour.

At the same time, historians became responsive to the argument that
there was no one objective historical truth or ‘social reality’. If the
sentiments underlying ‘marriage’ had to be explored, these sentiments
obviously varied. There was no one correct answer to the question ‘What
was marriage really like in seventeenth-century England?’; there were
many different experiences of marriage, many possible interpretations of
what people ‘really thought’ about marriage – different views of women,
of men, of the élite, of the working classes. And these interpretations
were unavoidably subjective – any historical account of marriage was
written and was read within a contemporary society in which the idea of
marriage seemed to be under grave threat or at the very least to be
changing.

As a result, social historians saw the dissolution of objective facts to
the extent that some historical theorists proclaimed the ‘end of social
history’. Many argued that we could not have ‘social reality’ because
‘what was really going on’ in any given historical situation was open to
multiple interpretations; people’s social lives were constructed within
cultural understandings and beliefs. These beliefs, of course, were
variable and could be ‘read’ in different ways, just as in chapter 7 we
discussed different ‘readings’ of archaeological material. Instead of an
objective society with a concrete existence, we had a more amorphous set
of cultural beliefs. Behind ‘social reality’ lay cultural perception. So
out of the New Social History was born … the New Cultural History. This
move was paralleled within the Annales School itself; where an earlier
generation had studied ‘mentalit é’ as a fixed and invariant deep
structure, a later generation headed by Roger Chartier preferred to
write more nuanced histories of particular cultural practices.

This excursion into historical theory is brief, potted and incomplete in
the extreme. I want to make two points with it, however:

1 The history of archaeological thinking runs in parallel with that in
history in particular and the human sciences as a whole , though the
jargon used is often different. I could have given similar potted
histories of thought in sociology, economics, politics, etc.

2 There are many different forms of historical thinking, many different
theories of historical method. It is not sufficient, therefore, to say
‘we should reject history’ or indeed conversely ‘we should adopt tried
and tested historical methods’ without specifying what those methods are
and examining those methods within their own disciplinary context. While
the theories of other disciplines can be a source of useful new ideas,
there is therefore no salvation for archaeological thought in turning to
the methods of another discipline, since the unity of methods professed
by that discipline is invariably illusory whether we are discussing the
methods of the natural sciences or those of history or of literary
criticism.

Unsurprisingly, we find that different schools of archaeological theory
have turned to different elements of current historical practice as
allies.

Jacquetta Hawkes famously wrote of archaeology: ‘however scientific the
methods employed, the final aims of the discipline remain historical:
the description of individual events in time’ (Hawkes 1968: 258). Even
when she wrote, this was a description of only one form of historical
practice, and a narrowly traditional form at that. It was a form that
Gordon Childe modelled his early culture-historical work on also. Childe
in his later life came to question the theoretical assumptions of his
earlier work and wrote critically of it in his ‘Retrospect’ (1958).

Recently, some archaeologists have turned to the ideas and methods of
the Annales school for inspiration. In particular, they have stressed
Annales interest in different timescales and its interplay of the
material and the world of ‘mentalities’ in which no one feature is
dominant. Finally, many postprocessualists derived inspiration from the
methods and theories of historians involved in the New Cultural History.

Historical Archaeology

In the first part of this chapter, I looked at the relationship between
history and archaeology in the abstract. I now want to look at how the
two disciplines interact in practice, in different approaches to the
archaeology of historic periods. My definition of ‘historical
archaeology’ differs from that of many North American archaeologists,
for whom this refers exclusively to the post-1500 period; I shall be
discussing examples from Classical and medieval archaeology also.

Much traditional archaeology has found itself in alliance with
traditional forms of history mentioned above. An earlier generation of
archaeologists working in Classical periods or early medieval Europe
deal with areas of historical discourse that, with exceptions, are still
largely traditional in scope. In many cases, the archaeologists
concerned took their first degree in Classics, History or a related
discipline, and came to archaeology through a desire to attack questions
defined in advance through (traditional) historical methods: Who was the
king buried at Sutton Hoo? What was the appearance of the Forum in Rome?
When was this medieval village deserted?

Subservience to historical accounts has meant subservience to
traditional models of culture history and a normative view of culture.
The classic example is the story of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of
England. The eighth-century historian Bede tells us that three groups of
settlers came to Britain in the fifth century ad: the Angles, the Saxons
and the Jutes. Bede tells us where they settled and which kingdoms they
founded. A generation of traditional archaeologists looked at the
grave-goods from cemeteries in these areas and interpreted them by
looking to north Germany and southern Denmark for parallels. Thus,
because Bede tells us the county of Kent was settled by Jutes, material
from Kent were labelled ‘Jutish’ and stylistic parallels sought – and
found – with material from Jutland in Denmark of similar or slightly
earlier date.

Though this is culture history based on theories of migration rather
than diffusion, the parallels with prehistoric culture history are
obvious. More recent work has criticized this model, either seeking to
minimize the impact and numbers involved in fifth-century migrations, to
be more critical about the historical record, or to stress social change
at the level of small-scale structures rather than large-scale
migrations.

Historical Archaeology and the Text

In North America in the 1960s and 1970s, a group of historical
archaeologists worked to adapt the tenets of New Archaeology to the
archaeological study of historic periods, following Binford’s insistence
that ‘specialists in this field should provide the most informative
tests or evaluations of ideas set forth by archaeologists in general’
(1977: 169). We saw one example of such an approach in Hodges’s systemic
analysis of Dark Age trade in chapter 5.

This work attempted to generalize and be anthropological in the sense of
getting away from traditional historical descriptions of colonial and
later history. It attempts to look for pattern – to define diagnostic
patterns of artefacts; and tries to generalize about the societies under
examination. For example, the work of Kathleen Deagan and others in St
Augustine, Florida, a town populated in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries by a number of different ethnic groups, has tried to look for
different archaeological patterns associated with these groups. The aim
here was in part to elaborate a more rigorous approach to the definition
of ethnicity based on the definition of quantitative measures.

One way in which historical archaeology has taken up such concerns is to
try to treat documents as a form of middle-range documentation. Remember
that Binford argued that we could look to independent sources of
information to build ‘robust’ arguments (chapter 4). In the
Palaeolithic, he looked to animal and plant behaviour. Many have argued
that in historic periods, documents can play a similar role. Account
books at ports, for example, can tell us exactly what was being imported
and exported and at what price, a pattern we can then match or fail to
match against those goods or their containers when we find them in
rubbish pits.

Conversely, many have turned to elements of postprocessual and
interpretative thought for an alternative model of the integration of
archaeology and history. Remember the importance of context in
postprocessual thought. Documents read from this view can provide a
special form of contextual information, for example on the individual or
on different views of gender. We have already seen one example of this
work: my discussion of the late medieval hall in England in chapter 7.

As a result, many explorations of recent theoretical trends have come in
historical archaeology, particularly in colonial contexts – South Africa
and North America especially. Two themes can be picked out in
particular: first, the historical archaeology of capitalism; and second,
identity in historical archaeology.

A historical archaeology of capitalism focuses on the interpretation of
the period after 1500, and the way in which archaeology can address the
most fundamental transition between medieval and modern worlds. This can
be termed the ‘origins of capitalism’, the ‘feudal/capitalist
transition’, ‘industrialization’ or the ‘origins of modernity’; each of
these terms having different theoretical affiliations, and rather
different nuances. A leading figure in the field is Mark Leone, who over
the last 30 years has developed an account of the archaeology of
capitalism in eighteenth- and nineteenth- century Annapolis and the
Chesapeake, on the east coast of the United States. Leone and his
students developed the idea of the ‘Georgian Order’, a material pattern
first delineated by Henry Glassie and James Deetz. They saw principles
of order, symmetry and segregation running through different classes of
material culture – eighteenth-century architecture, gardens, pottery,
landscape. The Georgian Order was interpreted by Leone and his students
as linked to the emergence of merchant capitalism in the Chesapeake and
beyond. Order, symmetry and segregation related to an ideology of the
individual and of liberty, however much that ideology was contradicted
by the realities of a class-divided and slave-owning eighteenth-century
society.

Archaeologies of identity, discussed in chapter 8, have some of their
most powerful case studies in historical archaeology, where different
identities can be seen to emerge and be re-negotiated in both the
archaeological and documentary records. Barbara Voss, for example, has
shown how a distinctive ‘Californio’ identity of nineteenth-century
Californians of Hispanic origin emerged as part of a whole complex of
rapid cultural changes following the annexation of the area by the
United States. ‘Archaeologies of resistance’ have looked for material
evidence of identity formation, for example in institutional contexts
such as prisons.

Historical archaeology as a whole, however, refuses to fit into the neat
theoretical boxes that have very often been defined by prehistoric
archaeologists. A good example of how historical archaeology simply does
not ‘follow the rules’ is provided from the archaeology of castles.

Case Study: Bodiam Castle

There is a long-standing debate about castles in medieval England.
Castles are high-status buildings, and combine accommodation for a great
lord and his household with ‘defensive’ features – towers, ramparts,
battlements, gatehouses, moats and ditches.

Interpretation of castles has traditionally been dominated by scholars
with a military background. Developments in castle architecture have
been interpreted in terms of changing techniques of attack and defence.
This narrative often claims to be factual and atheoretical, but can
easily be shown to be an evolutionary and progressive one: attack and
defence become more technologically sophisticated over time. Both the
evidence of archaeology (the changing form of walls, towers, gatehouses)
and documents (narratives of sieges) have been used to tell a story
about castles, quite literally: most traditional books on castles
consist of a narrative history of the ‘rise and fall’ of the castle,
with individual castles being cited as illustrative anecdotes.

In this story the documents take centre stage. By the very use of the
word ‘castle’, rather than the more neutral and anthropological
‘high-status dwelling’, scholars use a word that is derived from the
documents, and whose meanings are to some extent defined before
archaeological analysis starts. Similar categories defined by the
documents can be found across most of Classical and historical
archaeology – ‘Roman villas’ (a ‘villa’ being defined with reference to
Classical texts), ‘temples’, ‘churches’, the study of ‘enclosure’. Most
narratives start with definitions of ‘castles’ based on the (usually
Latin) texts within which words like ‘castrum’ and ‘castellum’ are
defined. Next come the obviously military features. Residential features
within the walls receive less attention, and the landscape context of
castles – the villages and towns outside their walls – even less
attention.

To over-simplify, these élite sites have generally been approached by
archaeologists in ‘culture-historical’ ways, stressing influence,
contact, diffusion of new architectural ideas. This document-based
narrative is rarely questioned, let alone tested. Nothing like a
‘processual’ approach to castle studies has ever been proposed let alone
pursued.

In recent years, some historians and archaeologists have asked other
questions: what of the social dimensions of these buildings? Are not
their lordly functions (judicial centres, lordly residences) at least as
important as their supposed military/strategic role? Some have gone
further still: what of the symbolic dimensions of these structures? Are
the battlements and towers not in fact to do with military requirements,
but rather the self-image of a masculine military élite basing its
ideology on images of knighthood?

Bodiam Castle, near the Kent/Sussex border in south-east England
(figures 11.1 and 11.2), was built in the 1380s by Sir Edward
Dalyngrygge, an old soldier from the Hundred Year’s War in France. The
interpretation of this castle has centred on the question: is this a
seriously defensively strong castle, as the military theorists would
have it? Or are its features better interpreted in a more complex
symbolic and cultural way, as more recent scholars have argued?

Military theorists have drawn attention to the proliferation of military
features: gunloops commanding the approach ways, twin towers flanking
the gate and other towers dominating the tops of the walls. Most
particularly, Bodiam is situated within a small rectangular lake that
has been artificially created. The lake is a complex piece of hydraulic
engineering, and is held back on two sides by an earthern dam. It
apparently forms a formidable obstacle to any would-be attacker. The
main entrance to Bodiam runs at an angle across this lake, exposing
attackers to fire from the battlements.

Not only is Bodiam clearly militarily very strong on this analysis: the
final ‘proof’ of the military thesis comes from a historical document, a
‘licence to crenellate [fortify]’. Translated from the Latin, it states
apparently quite unequivocally that Sir Edward Dalyngrygge sought and
duly obtained licence in October 1385 ‘to fortify with a wall of stone
and lime the dwelling-place of the manor of Bodiam next to the sea … and
to construct and make thereof a castle for the defence of the adjacent
countryside and for the resisting of [the king’s] enemies’. Here is a
clear, irrefutable documentary statement of the military purpose of the
castle. Or is it?

Figure 11.1 Bodiam Castle: photograph of the north front and gatehouse
across the lake

[c11_image001.jpg]

Disbelief in the exclusively military view of the castle has been
relatively recent, and comes from three sources:

1 A reassessment of the architecture of the castle. Charles Coulson has
shown convincingly that many of the apparently ‘military’ features of
the castle do not appear to ‘work’. Gunports are not placed effectively;
guns placed in them do not command an effective field of fire. Other
openings are almost impossible to use by longbow or crossbowmen; the
fighting parapet is not easily accessible; the list could go on.

2 A detailed survey, carried out independently, of the landscape context
of the castle (figure 11.2). First, the earthwork dam is utterly
undefended; in several estimations it could be cut through by a dozen
workers in one night. The lake itself is not as deep as it could be; it
is more a sheet of water like those of eighteenth-century ornamental
gardens than a serious obstacle. Outside the lake are the earthworks of
a large formal landscape, around which the movement of people and their
views of the castle were carefully structured.

3 A reassessment of the meaning of the licence to crenellate. Bodiam is
not ‘next to the sea’; it is 14 kilometres north of the coast, at the
end of a winding tidal estuary. Documents of this kind cannot be taken
at face value as prehistorians might suppose. Coulson suggests that the
production of such documents was largely part of a system of chivalric
honour, and the references to defensive intent should not be read as an
historical record, but rather as part of a knightly code of chivalrous
values. He writes suggestively:

Reasoning from illusive defensive effects mechanistically back to
imagined military causes has, in the case of Bodiam, led to the famous
licence of October 1385 being taken at its face value. … Because no
study has been done of licences to crenellate as a whole … many
misjudgments have arisen partly from lack of contextual awareness .
(Coulson 1992; emphasis mine)

Figure 11.2 Bodiam Castle: plan of landscape context

[c11_image002.jpg]

Coulson’s detailed knowledge and experience of late medieval documents,
inductively acquired as part of his practice as a documentary historian,
leads him to have a better ‘feel’ for the quality of the evidence than
other writers on the subject.

But this reinterpretation is not simply a statement that ‘symbolic is
more important than military’. Coulson writes:

The wisest course is to resist the temptation to write off any feature
as ‘sham’, or to take any element as purely ‘functional’ (by which
‘defensive’ is intended normally). It is an artful combination which
expresses … all the complex seignorial associations of the medieval
castle-image, which included the deterring (and, if necessary, the
defeating) of attack at whatever level was appropriate … the bravado of
double portal chambers, ‘murder holes’ and three portcullises is mere
rodomontade when the lateral doors are so weak. There is no ‘military’
logic in trebling the main closures while leaving a short and direct
approach to a weak back door (Postern) which entirely lacks elaboration.
But there is a powerful psychological sense nonetheless: it is closer to
Jean Froissart (and perhaps also to Franz Kafka) than it is to Vegetius
or to the Sieur de Vauban. The fairy-tale element is here, allusive and
romantic. … ‘Fortification’ was surely metaphysical as well as material;
a matter of imagery and symbolism, not just of technology. (Coulson
1992: 66, 83)

What theoretical lessons can be drawn from the Bodiam story? First, the
arguments are over formal rather than quantitative analysis. In other
words, scholars argue not over the numbers of things, as they did over
the relative proportions of different tool types in a given Mousterian
assemblage as discussed in chapter 3, but over their form, whether that
is of the form of the lake or of the gunloops. Such a way of debating
derives in part from an existing archaeological tradition hitherto
little discussed in this book. The so-called ‘English landscape
tradition’ is a school of thought looking to the local historian W. G.
Hoskins as its founder. The landscape tradition stresses close empirical
analysis of pieces of landscape, a view of landscapes as both very old
and as complex documents on which many phases of settlement are
‘written’, of the integration of history, archaeology and geography
using an inductive model, and of hostility to ‘grand theory’. Such an
approach has both strengths and weaknesses: it stresses
interdisciplinarity and close attention to detail, but is essentially
anecdotal in its approach. That is, it uses closely worked-through case
studies but gives little consideration to how typical the case study or
‘anecdote’ is of the wider context. More seriously, it is almost never
consciously theorized.

This debate, and the wider landscape tradition of which it is a part,
does not follow the established rules of archaeological theory. While
some approaches are more or less ‘culture-historical’ in nature, there
is no established ‘processual’ view of Bodiam. No one has tried formally
to characterize Bodiam in terms of a settlement hierarchy. No approach
to the landscape around Bodiam that might approximate to a processual
analysis has been taken. Archaeologists have not explicitly discussed
English medieval society in terms of factional competition, religious
legimitation, or access to resources, though the material for such an
analysis is readily available and would make a compelling account.
Conversely, Coulson’s discussion does not fit easily into theoretical
categories: his discussion is peppered with aesthetic value judgements
appropriate to the discourse of traditional architectural history but
reading quite oddly to someone trained as a prehistoric archaeologist
(Bodiam is ‘charmingly proportioned’, ‘elegant’, ‘nicely moulded’).
Indeed, in my view Coulson’s arguments could be strengthened by
reference to such theory, considering for example which social groups
and/or genders would have ‘read aright’ the symbolism of Bodiam, and
considering in more depth the peasant-landlord antagonism of the period.

Conclusion

Archaeological theory has tended to be played out over certain classic
‘case studies’ (I almost flippantly wrote ‘playgrounds’) such as
megaliths, cave art, the Mousterian question. These have tended to be
prehistoric, for several reasons. First, prehistory is perceived as
‘pure’ archaeology. Second, most histories of archaeology have seen
historic periods as secondary to the main story of the development of
prehistoric chronology. In passing, it is worth noting that such
histories themselves need rewriting; for example, nineteenth-century
European medievalists were well aware of stratigraphy in buildings
archaeology, and documented such stratigraphy carefully, independently
of more well-known prehistoric studies of excavated stratigraphy. Third,
the stress on very long-term processes within New Archaeology tended to
make the shorter-term perspectives of historical archaeologists marginal
to the discipline.

The story of historic archaeology shows that we do not need to stick to
the notion of prehistory as ‘pure’ archaeology, and that the archaeology
of historic periods throws up equally relevant and complex problems of
interpretation. In addition, the cross-cutting influence of different
disciplines (archaeology, history, literature, etc.) throws up a series
of unexpected theoretical debates that enrich archaeological discourse
as a whole. If you want to find the most informed and up-to-date studies
of gender and other aspects of identity, to examine the cultural and
political engagement of archaeology, or to explore themes like agency
and materiality, then it is increasingly the case that the most exciting
and compelling studies come from historical archaeology. In the last 20
years, historical archaeology has moved from the margins of the
discipline to centre stage.

12

Archaeology, Politics and Culture

I’m puzzled. We’ve almost reached the end of the book, but the most
popular buzzword in theory has hardly been raised yet – ‘postmodernism’.
I’ve heard lots about postmodernism recently, most of it negative,
though no one ever tells me what this means, let alone why it might be
relevant to archaeology.

Well, the question of postmodernism is in many ways a red herring. But I
guess I’d better try to deal with it as briefly as possible, though it
may take a whole chapter to do justice to it and all its implications.
Again, I’ll go through the theory before discussing its application to
archaeology.

The ‘postmodern condition’ has been defined by the French philosopher
François Lyotard as incredulity toward metanarratives. Lyotard suggests
that the postmodern condition is the condition of knowledge in Western
capitalist societies.

A metanarrative is a big story, or a grand claim of absolute truth.
Examples of metanarratives are:

1 A belief in scientific progress, that our ideas of the world are
getting better and better through the use of rational method. In this
sense postmodernists see belief in Science as a metanarrative.

2 Any total scheme of cultural evolution in which societies move from
one stage to another. For example, a belief in a scientific Marxism –
that through an objective science of society we can see grand,
successive stages in human history leading inexorably towards communism.
Or again, a classification of societies into band, tribe, chiefdom and
state.

3 A belief in any absolute system of morality true in all times and in
all places, whether that morality is derived from religious, nationalist
or ethnic claims.

4 Any scheme of ‘progress’ in human history. Such progress may be
aesthetic or artistic: for example, much traditional art history assumes
that artists get better and better at representing Nature. It may be
technological: that humans have more and more ‘complex’ or ‘efficient’
technology through time. Postmodernists argue that assumptions of
‘progress’ implicitly underline many apparently atheoretical typologies
(for example, pre-Classical to Classical or Gothic to Renaissance in the
history of art and architecture, or most ‘progressive’ archaeological
accounts of ancient technology in which advance succeeds technical
advance).

For postmodernists, such beliefs can be traced back to the basic
assumptions of the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century.
Enlightenment philosophers claimed that with the use of Reason, we could
study human affairs in a rational and objective manner. Enlightenment
philosophy therefore implied:

(1) Belief in some kind of Utopia. If Reason can be applied to the study
of human affairs, it follows that it can be applied to its organization.
Therefore, we can reach some kind of perfectly organized state, or we
can at least aim for that goal even if it is unattainable within our
lifetime. It can even be a goal that we know we shall never attain but
nevertheless wish to aim for as an ideal, such as perfect ‘scientific’
knowledge of the natural world. Examples are for Marx, communism; for
Fukuyama, bourgeois capitalism; for some physical scientists, a final,
unifying post-Einsteinian theory of the physical universe.

(2) A notion of teleology in human affairs. A teleology is an assumption
of an underlying grand process with a definite start point and end
point; for example, within Marxism, the drive towards ever greater
inequality and alienation, culminating in its ultimate overthrow and
dissolution under communism. Cultural evolution tends to be more or less
teleological, though we saw in chapter 9 how recent work in this area
has tended to minimize or deny this teleological element. For the
Enlightenment, a teleological account could be the steady unfolding of
Reason as human history progressed, or variants thereof.

(3) A belief in essential properties of a ‘real world’ out there,
separate from language, that we can study independent of the text,
independent of what we write about it. If there is such a real world,
then meanings can be fixed. But for critics of modernity, there is no
such fixity. For Jacques Derrida, ‘il n’y a pas de hors-texte’. The
translation of this phrase can be debated but is generally rendered as
‘there is nothing outside the text’; there are, instead, a proliferation
of other texts.

In other words, the text apparently refers to a ‘real world’, but when
we look at that real world, we find that it too consists of a set of
signifiers that refer to something else. The word ‘pot’ refers to a
definite thing made of clay with handles, but the thing made of clay
with handles itself refers to other things. Any self-evident factual
statement can be pulled apart by its own internal logic, since it cannot
refer to a stable external world beyond the text – the signifiers just
go on and on. Derrida demonstrates this through the technique of
deconstruction, in which he shows that however self-evident and factual
a text appears to be, its meanings can be turned against itself.

As a result, it is argued that the postmodern condition is of a world
with fluid, unstable meanings with no final reference point. Instead of
looking for deep, underlying, ‘core’ or ‘essential’ features of a
phenomenon, there is simply endless fluidity and play across surface
meanings.

(4) A questioning of disciplinarity. In the eighteenth century, the
study of the ‘real world’ was divided into different disciplines dealing
with different kinds of phenomena. Thus, physics and chemistry deal with
physical processes, whereas biology deals with organisms. But if all
texts refer outwards, if the chain of signifiers just goes on and on
rather than stopping, there is no certainty, no final reference point,
in language – everything just refers to everything else; there is no
final meaning or interpretation. So there can be no distinct
‘disciplines’ dealing with distinct fields of study. Divides between
disciplines are in this view arbitrary, depending on historical accident
or contingency – how the history of systems of thought happened to
unfold during the Enlightenment.

Some postmodern thinkers, for example, have deconstructed the barrier
between history and literature. Since all historical documents are also
literary texts and all historians write narratives, and all literature
exists within a certain historical context, it is argued that there can
be no a priori distinction between history and fiction. Reliance on
factual content, postmodernists argue, is problematic at best: it is
rare to read a novel in which Paris is not the capital of France, or
human beings do not have two arms and two legs. In practice, it is
argued, ‘disciplines’ such as history or literature are constituted and
their boundaries maintained not through ‘real differences’ in their
subject matter, as traditional scholars would claim. Such claimed
differences would owe their reality to an outside world that does not
have any fixed or stable boundaries at all (the ‘logocentric fallacy’).

At the end of the twentieth century, the postmodern argument continues,
Western thought entered ‘the postmodern condition’. Historically, all
these grand narratives, certain distinctions and disciplinary boundaries
have fallen away; we don’t have any large stories or certainties left
that we can rely on. The most obvious example given is that of Marxism.
In 1900 Marxists could be confident that world history was on the high
road to revolution and communism. They had a system for explaining the
world which seemed to work and which gave definitive pointers to the way
they should think and act in the present. Now, after the fall of the
Berlin Wall in 1989, things are not so certain, to say the least.

Postmodernists spread the attack more widely, however: they also point
to the erosion of confidence in a single ‘scientific method’ discussed
in chapter 3 and also in the decline of Victorian ideas of evolutionary
progress (chapter 9).

Postmodernism is a way of thinking that has affected much of Western
thought within and beyond the human sciences. Within architecture, for
example, modernists believed that creation of functional buildings along
‘rational’ principles (for example, the use of tower blocks) could
contribute to the solution of social problems such as inner-city
crowding and deprivation. The failure of these beliefs, postmodernists
allege, reflects the intellectual failure of underlying modernist
philosophies.

To an extent, then, we should talk not so much of postmodernism but of
the postmodern condition: it is alleged that the decline of confidence
in the Enlightenment, in human perfectibility, or to a final and
intrinsic Truth, is not really a proposition to be debated back and
forth. Rather, it is a general state, the way the world is in the
twenty-first century.

Postmodern thought often refers to two ‘heroes’. The nineteenth-century
thinker Nietzsche stood against the Enlightenment, arguing against the
sway of Reason. For the twentieth century, they cite the philosopher
Ludwig Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein started his intellectual career as a
logical-positivist philosopher (see chapter 3). He attempted to create a
philosophical language that was perfectly neutral, a language that
described the outside world in completely objective terms. When this
attempt collapsed, Wittgenstein ‘saw the light’ and spent the rest of
his career arguing that communication was simply an endless ‘language
game’ in which the rules were arbitrary but by which we nevertheless
agree to play.

I want to pick out one contemporary thinker in particular as important
in the development of postmodern thought, as he is cited more frequently
than anyone else by contemporary archaeologists: Michel Foucault.

Foucault looked at many of the concrete institutions of the
Enlightenment, places where Enlightenment values of Reason held sway.
These included the reform of prisons, the replacement of ‘barbaric’
methods of punishment with ‘rational’, ‘enlightened’ penal systems; the
development of modern scientific medicine and clinical practice; the
treatment of madness and the development of the ‘enlightened’ idea that
madness was an illness that could be treated medically. He tried to show
that far from representing ‘progress’ or the rise of more rational or
humane ways of treating human beings, all these institutions were bound
up with new forms of oppression in what he called ‘the disciplinary
society’.

Foucault’s second theme was an attack on essentialism. Human beings in
the Enlightenment were assumed to have a set of ‘natural’ or ‘normal’
faculties: the possession of Reason, a certain form of sexuality, desire
for privacy and for individual freedom. In each case Foucault showed how
each historical epoch had its own ideas about what was ‘normal’ and
‘natural’ for the body to desire or feel. There cannot, therefore, be
reference to a biological base-line for scientists such as ‘the sex
drive’ because there can be no crosscultural definition of such a
base-line.

Postmodernism, perhaps more than any other buzz-word or idea in
contemporary theory, acts as a locus of very strong emotional or
visceral responses, both for and against. Most frequently,
‘postmodernism’ is used as a term of abuse. Many thinkers identify
postmodernism with a denial or deconstruction of any kind of rational
method or empirical enquiry into the past. It is claimed that
postmodernism lays the way open to a disabling relativism, in which if
there is no final truth in the world, all views of the world, or of past
history, are equally valid.

It is further alleged that postmodernism leads to a kind of nihilism. If
there is ‘nothing beyond the text’, then the implication, according to
opponents, is that postmodernists view the whole world as ‘just a text’.
Note the inserted ‘just’ or ‘merely’ here, carrying the implication that
words are not important. You will remember that empiricism is, in part,
based on a radical division between ‘words’ and the real world, and the
prioritization of the latter. For many scientists and other empiricists,
postmodernism threatens to become a denial of what they see as the real
world, and of the possibility of rational enquiry.

This allegation of nihilism can take a moral turn. If there is ‘nothing
beyond the text’, then there can be no one overarching system of
morality that is true in all times and all places. Postmodernism, then,
is equated with a moral as well as intellectual relativism.

For Marxists, some feminists, and other committed to ideas of social
justice, postmodernism is interpreted as holding an additional danger.
It appears to reduce very real issues of equality, deprivation, and even
violence against powerless individuals and groups to the status of a
‘language game’. Much criticism of postmodernism, then, comes from the
political Left, many of whom see its stress on surface play and irony as
the ideological froth of late capitalism, the last, wildest, most
decadent party before the inevitable collapse back into grim reality. As
I write these words, and the ‘credit crunch’ unfolds and widens into
what is generally agreed to be a profound crisis of global capitalism,
such an analysis seems to gain in strength day by day.

Great. What has any of this got to do with archaeology?

First, much postprocessual thought clearly shares ground with postmodern
thinking: the loss of confidence in Science, the attack on essentialism,
the stress on a diversity of readings and a lack of fixity of meaning.

I would argue against an easy equation with postmodernism, however. The
postprocessual turn in archaeology parallels the postmodern turn in the
human sciences rather than being derived from it. In other words, the
changes that archaeological thought went through in the 1980s and 1990s
were one small example of a wider set of changes across the human
sciences as a whole. This is why I suggested at the start of this
chapter that postmodernism is in some ways a ‘red herring’.

Second, the postmodern questioning of disciplinarity has led to interest
in breaking down disciplinary boundaries. At the same time, it also
implies a fragmentation of method. If there is no one Truth ‘out there’
waiting to be discovered any more, it is difficult to see how there can
be one ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way of doing archaeology.

The implication for archaeology is therefore (a) can we really talk
about a single ‘archaeological method’ distinctive from that of other
disciplines? and (b) is there such a thing as a unified method in
archaeology anyway?

Third, postmodernism does suggest that archaeologists need to engage
with other forms of knowledge outside the traditionally conceived
purview of ‘archaeology’ or of ‘science’. At the very least, scholars
have to think carefully and seriously about the world outside the
academic and professional practice of archaeology, rather than simply
dismissing other views of the past as a ‘lunatic fringe’. Postmodernism
suggests that if there can be no one neutral method, then other views of
the past can have validity, and not simply be ruled out of court because
they do not conform to established procedures of archaeological method.

For example, archaeologists may not agree with the ley line hunters,
Native Americans, other Indigenous peoples, or others who have come to
their version of what the past was like by rules that are not strictly
those of archaeology as an academic discipline – but archaeologists do
have to take them seriously. We cannot simply continue to write about
the past ‘as [we think] it really was’ independently of the present. In
short, we have to look at the social, political and cultural context of
archaeology.

Archaeology is Not in a Vacuum

Whatever their theoretical differences, most would agree that
archaeological interpretation does not exist in a vacuum, isolated from
the outside world. Before the practising archaeologist goes to work, he
or she reads the morning papers, worries about all the wars in the world
and imminent economic recession. At work, relations of status between
teacher and student are constantly invoked; out on site, decisions about
what to dig and how to dig it are orders from the site director, arrived
at after debate between (usually senior) members of the team or crew. In
short, decisions are taken and archaeology practised within a definite
set of social and political relations whether we like it or not.

How, if at all, does this political environment affect archaeological
interpretation? If it does, it does not necessarily do so consciously.
Take, for example, the study of the rise of the Roman Empire. Most
traditional historians of the Roman Empire would angrily, and sincerely,
protest that their accounts of ‘Romanization’ were simply descriptions
of ‘what really happened’, free of any conscious bias. More recent
writers point out that these writers are certainly not consciously
biased, but never see the need to ask the question: why did natives so
rapidly and readily assimilate themselves into an imperial system? This
is at least partly due to the fact that for the previous generation the
benefits of Empire were obvious and self-evident; conversely, for our
generation they need explaining at the very least.

So for some, even as archaeology proclaims its neutrality it is deeply
committed:

At heart, archaeology is a colonialist endeavour. It is based on, and
generally perpetrates, the values of Western cultures. Privileging the
material over the spiritual and the scientific over the religious,
archaeological practice is solidly grounded in Western ways of knowing
the world. (Smith and Wobst 2005a: 5)

Archaeology, as cultural practice, is always a politics, always a
morality. (Shanks and Tilley 1987: 212)

Politics as seen by these thinkers is more than ‘party politics’. It is
about power in the broadest sense, from the policies and practices of
the State down to the smallest human interaction. In this view,
everything that we say and do is political in some sense. When a site
director gives instructions to his or her team, when we write that an
argument is ‘strong’ or ‘weak’, when we choose which site projects to
fund and which to ignore, when a self-confident student cuts across a
more diffident and nervous student in debate – these are all political
decisions and actions.

This point is an emotive and controversial one. Many students have told
me that they dislike politics, and specifically chose the study of
archaeology to get away from it. The Classical author Livy wrote his
History with this aim in mind also. But we have seen many times in this
book how we always return to the present in the end, whatever
philosophical viewpoint we take. In chapter 2 we noted that the data are
mute, that the past does not exist; rather, statements about it are made
in the here and now. In chapter 6 we discussed the concept of ideology,
and earlier in chapter 5 we saw early versions of systems theory
condemned by critical theorists as just such an ideology. Chapter 8 saw
feminists criticizing archaeology and academic discourse in general for
its phallocentrism.

The common point of all these critiques is very simple: when an
archaeologist claims that their position is neutral and apolitical, what
are they trying to hide?

Case Study: African Burial Ground

During the eighteenth century, between 10,000 and 20,000 people of
African descent were buried in an area of New York City that came to be
known as the African Burial Ground. In one estimate, ‘at least half of
the present African-descent population in the United States probably has
at least one ancestor buried in this area’. The area fell out of use
after 1795, and the land was filled in and overbuilt. The role of slaves
of African descent in eighteenth- century New York was gradually
forgotten. According to Michael Blakey:

The very existence of an African Burial Ground in colonial New York
raised the issue of false historical representation. The vast majority
of educated Americans had learned that there was little if any African
presence in New York during the colonial period, and that the northern
American colonies had not engaged in the practice of slavery. The Burial
Ground helped show that these notions comprised a kind of national myth.
(Blakey 1995: 546)

In 1991 the burial ground was ‘rediscovered’ and partly excavated by
archaeologists in advance of redevelopment. Over 400 burials were
excavated before public concern led to legislation to suspend excavation
and to protect and display the site.

This concern had come from members of the African-American community in
New York. The nature of this concern and the way it affected
archaeological practice is revealing. In the first place, formal
lawsuits arguing that the site should be preserved found little comfort
in existing legislation, which had been framed around a narrow view of
‘archaeological significance’ rather than the cultural associations a
site might have for specific ethnic groups. Such lawsuits were however
backed up by the support of black activist groups, Mayor Dinkins and the
Congressional Black Caucus. At one point, a one-day blockade of the site
halted redevelopment work.

Figure 12.1 A coffin from the African Burial Ground, New York. The heart
shape is made of tacks; it has been interpreted as a west African symbol

[c12_image001.jpg]

Second, the archaeological research was transformed. Initial work on the
bones was done by the Metropolitan Forensic Anthropology Team (MFAT),
but public pressure ensured that in late 1993 the bones were transferred
to the Cobb Biological Anthropology Laboratory at Howard University.

The analysis of the bones was not simply done by a different team: it
had a different research design that linked together political concerns
(who controls these remains?) with new intellectual ideas about
ethnicity, of the sort discussed in chapter 8, and new techniques of
archaeological practice.

Not only was the research design changed; the Howard University team
publicized the research design and offered it up to criticism and
modification from the descendant black community. Even the name of the
place and the project became a contested topic. The site had been
referred to as ‘The Negro’s Burial Ground’ before objections coupled
with academic arguments led to it being renamed the ‘African Burial
Ground’. In 1993 the burial ground was designated a National Historic
Landmark and plans for redevelopment were scrapped. In 2006, the site
was designated a National Monument, and a memorial and grounds have been
laid out on the site (figure 12.1).

The results of archaeological analysis paint a compelling portrait of
the exploitation and violence suffered by enslaved Africans, and equally
to the active resistance of people of African descent to this
exploitation and violence. Most of the dead were buried in coffins and
shrouds, and oriented east-west, like white New Yorkers; but the
presence of beads and shells point towards continuing African
traditions.

The major implication for the practice of archaeology is that while what
we do is unavoidably political, changing the way we do it is far from
straightforward. In this case, it was not simply a matter of rewriting a
research design, but of opening up that design to scrutiny from
non-archaeologists – people who themselves occupy a problematic position
within their own communities. There was no one ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way to
handle the African Burial Ground controversy, though there were better
and worse ways. To a great extent, sympathetic and sensitive handling of
the archaeological interpretation depends on the acknowledgement that
there is a multiplicity of different views.

Indigenous Archaeologies

Many archaeologists have come to recognize that archaeology is based on,
and generally reflects, the values of Western cultures. In privileging
the material, scientific, observable world over the spiritual,
experiential, and unquantifiable aspects of archaeological sites,
ancient peoples, and artifacts, archaeological practice demonstrates
that it is solidly grounded in Western ways of categorising, knowing,
and interpreting the world (Atalay 2006: 280).

One of the key developments in the development of archaeology in the
last 20 years has been the growing engagement with archaeology by
Indigenous peoples. ‘Indigenous’ is a difficult term to define, and is
often spelt with a capital I to denote its complexity, but generally
refers to ‘native’ peoples who have been dispossessed in colonial
contexts, such as Native Americans or the Indigenous peoples of
Australia.

A specific locus of disagreement has been the collections and storing of
cultural artefacts and human remains. Huge quantities of archaeological
and ethnographic material were collected in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries by Western scholars from around the world, as any wander round
the store-rooms of many museums will indicate. The motivation for this
collection varied, but was often done within a framework of unilineal
cultural evolution, that saw the collection and classification of this
cultural material as a cornerstone of evolutionary and scientific study.
For many ‘native’ peoples, however, these actions are more accurately
seen as acts of plunder, the cultural counterpart to the processes of
colonialism and in many contexts cultural and physical genocide that
accompanied the colonial process.

For many Indigenous peoples, cultural tradition unites present and past,
and the Western dichotomy between present and past (as visualized for
example in figure 2.1) is rejected. Within such a world-view, cultural
objects are more than simply ‘artefacts’ belonging to some distant past,
and are certainly not commodities that can be alienated. Objects are
sacred and have spiritual power. The attribution of a profound cultural
value is especially true of human remains.

Archaeology has engaged with these issues in different ways. First, the
importance of genuinely collaborative research and engagement with ‘user
communities’ has been stressed. In the past, archaeology was often
justified exclusively in terms of ‘science’ or ‘pure research’ –
knowledge about the past for its own sake. Increasingly such a
justification is seen as not good enough, on the grounds argued above,
namely that knowledge is never pure and disinterested in nature, and
when such a claim is made (‘I’m not interested in politics, I just want
to collect and study old artefacts in peace’) it usually masks the real
power relations at work. As with the African Burial Ground, it is argued
that archaeologists need to take seriously the views of Indigenous and
other local communities, and to collaborate in the framing of research,
rather than merely treating those outside the archaeological community
as an ‘audience’.

Second, an increasing (though still small) number of Indigenous people
are now trained and work as archaeologists. Many of these scholars are
working actively to construct new kinds of archaeology – ‘Indigenous
archaeologies’ – that move beyond what are seen as colonial practices.
Indigenous archaeologies are by their very nature a varied and
developing set of practices. They draw, in part, on postprocessual
critiques, on many of the issues of identity and interpretation
discussed in chapter 8, and on postcolonial thinking in the human
sciences. Indigenous scholars acknowledge the irony in this situation:
‘we must sometimes use the master’s tools … to create a
counter-discourse to Western approaches that have consistently worked to
destroy or silence our Indigenous ways of knowing’ (Atalay 2006: 296).

Third, political legislation has changed the relationship between
archaeologists and Indigenous peoples in different countries. As the
rights of Indigenous peoples have been increasingly asserted, their
claims over cultural material and human remains have been legislated for
in different ways. The most notable example is NAGPRA (North American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act), passed in 1990. NAGPRA
specified that most federally-funded institutions such as museums and
universities draw up inventories of their collections and send summaries
of all Native American human remains, sacred and ceremonial objects, and
other objects deemed to be of ‘cultural patrimony’ to tribes likely to
be associated with such material. What NAGPRA meant, then, was that much
of North American archaeological practice changed radically after this
date, with issues of ‘Indigenous knowledge’ and relations with
Indigenous groups gaining a much higher profile than before, and the
notion of the archaeologist as detached scientist being seriously
eroded.

A classic example of the conflict between ‘Western’ and Indigenous
cultural values is the dispute over ‘Kennewick Man’. In 1996, human
skeletal remains were found on the bank of the Columbia River at
Kennewick, in Washington State in the northwestern USA. These remains
were carbon-14 dated to over 8000 years old. According to some
academics, the remains showed ‘Caucasoid’ traits, and Kennewick Man
became a controversial pawn in the context of a debate over the single
or multiple nature of prehistoric migration to the Americas.

For local Umatilla and other Native American groups seeking ownership of
the remains, the scientifically determined date of the skeleton was
irrelevant, since their religious beliefs told them that their people
had been present since the dawn of time. They requested custody of the
remains, with the intention of reburying them. The Native American claim
was rejected in a 2004 court judgment, as the court determined that
‘kinship’ between the modern Umatilla and Kennewick Man could not be
‘proven’. The remains have been extensively studied by scientists, and
are now at the Burke Museum in Washington.

The conclusion of the Kennewick Man case points up a key issue in the
future development of Indigenous archaeologies: the definition of the
‘descendant community’. It is easy to assert Indigenous rights, but in
practice, the question of who are the descendants of the Indigenous
community is not always an easy one. In the past, archaeologists often
tended to ignore or write out of their interpretations any reference to
descendant groups. For example, the use of the term ‘Anasazi’ (meaning
‘the vanished ones’) to refer to the builders and inhabitants of Chaco
Canyon and the adjacent region in the American Southwest tended to
downplay links between these sites and descendant Hopi groups.
Conversely, the replacement of the term Anasazi with Ancestral Pueblo
acknowledges and affirms these links.

However, different cultural groups often have competing claims to
territory and to cultural resources. If archaeology is not a neutral
science, then it follows that the role of archaeology in adjudicating
these claims cannot be a simple or straightforward one. The classic case
of such competing claims is the site of Ayodha, in northern India, held
by Hindus to be the birthplace of the god Rama. Until 1992 the alleged
site of Rama’s birth was occupied by a Muslim mosque, itself five
centuries old. This mosque was destroyed by Hindu nationalists in 1992;
over 2000 people were killed in associated riots. After the destruction,
archaeological excavations claimed to ‘prove’ that, stratified below the
mosque, were the remains of an earlier Hindu temple. Many, if not most,
archaeologists would wish to distance themselves from one-sided claims
of exclusive ownership of the Ayodha site, and to be very wary of being
drawn into uncritical support for a single set of claims; in this case,
then, a simple assertion of the rights of a single cultural group, or
indeed an assertion that archaeologists should simply describe and
record objectively what was found, is simply not enough on its own.

Multiculturalism, Diversity and Inclusion

Three theoretical buzz-words have come to dominate much of the cultural
and political context of archaeological work: multiculturalism,
diversity, and inclusion. All are strongly related to the theoretical
agendas laid out in Chapter 8, and all are theoretical concepts whose
impact on archaeology has occurred in part through their application
through legislation – they are probably familiar to the student from
contemporary cultural discourse. I will define each in turn and explain
something of their relevance to archaeology.

Multiculturalism stresses the importance of different cultures, races
and ethnicities within a single population or nation-state. It tends to
celebrate different cultural practices, to see this difference as
enriching rather than threatening within a society, and to resist the
idea that nations or populations can or should attempt to ‘assimilate’
different groups to a single culture. Diversity refers not simply to
cultural difference, but to other dimensions of difference also – to
gender, class, family circumstance, and disability. Archaeological and
other organizations are required to acknowledge and respect diversity,
for example in the workforce. Inclusion is about making diversity work
in practice – of taking the necessary steps to ensure that people of
different backgrounds are given the same opportunities, and that
employers and institutions do not simply assume that all their staff or
participants are of a particular cultural background (for example,
ensuring that working hours can respect a variety of religious
practices, or proactively ensuring and extending access for people with
disabilities).

Archaeologists have engaged with all these themes in a variety of ways –
as with NAGPRA, legislation has compelled institutions to comply whether
their senior staff were personally in sympathy with such agendas or not.
We have already seen how it was not good enough for archaeologists to
sit back and ‘objectively’ study the remains from the African Burial
Ground – it was crucial to explore ways of actively engaging with
descendant and other communities. Government legislation to promote
agendas of diversity, multiculturalism and inclusion have been rolled
out, particularly in Britain and the European Community. Consequently,
the key priorities of heritage bodies and museums have been transformed.

Most crucially, in many contexts it is now necessary for archaeologists
to engage actively with these issues rather than simply sit back and
take an intellectual pose. In Britain, for example, there has been a
welcome shift in the last decade away from what I have termed a national
‘culture of complacency’:

No longer could universities shrug their shoulders and claim that they
would admit more students from underprivileged backgrounds if they made
the effort to apply; it was now incumbent upon them to show that they
had an active policy of encouraging recruitment and were monitoring its
effectiveness. No longer could established heritage bodies like museums,
English Heritage, and the National Trust shrug their shoulders and say
that they would welcome more ethnic minority visitors if they only came
through the doors; relevant policies to attract such visitors and make
monuments and displays relevant to them had to be shown to exist.
(Johnson 2006: 166)

Ironically, then, the values of an engaged and committed archaeology
have been promoted in many countries not simply through the activities
of some archaeologists, but also through the necessities of complying
with Government legislation. They have also, in many cases, been thought
out and promoted through museums and ‘heritage’ agencies more widely,
deeply and effectively than they have through Universities.
Consequently, much of the most current, original and radical thinking on
the engagement of archaeology with social justice issues has come not
from academics, but from those working in ‘heritage management’,
‘community’ or ‘public’ archaeology however defined.

The Relativism Question

Well, it seems to me we’ve reached an impasse. There is no future in
ideas of academic objectivity. We’ve seen that all versions of the past
are political in some sense. So it seems we just make up whatever
stories suit us, are convenient in the political present.

No, that will not do. There are better and worse interpretations of the
past. I do not know of a single archaeologist of whatever theoretical
stripe who would disagree. Even Jacques Derrida writes that ‘[the
relativist] definition of deconstruction is false (that’s right: false,
not true) and feeble; it supposes a bad (that’s right: bad, not good)
and feeble reading of numerous texts, first of all mine’ (1988: 136–7).

The criticisms of an unrestrained relativism are many, various and
irrefutable. It is demonstrably wrong: archaeology has ‘progressed’, we
no longer believe in the Creation of 4004 BC. Relativism involves a
logical fallacy: ‘all views are of equal value – including this one’.
Relativism undercuts the value of archaeology as a form of knowledge
about the past, and if pursued to its logical implication would do
archaeologists out of a job. For many, the most fundamental and damning
criticism of relativism is that it destroys our ability to speak out
against politically undesirable and even obnoxious views of the past,
the classic example being Holocaust denial groups. Archaeologists might
wish to engage with Indigenous groups at a variety of levels, and
acknowledge the validity of different views at the African Burial Ground
– but who would suggest that this means we have to acknowledge racist
views as of equal value?

Modern theorists take several roads out of this impasse. Many continue
to insist that most archaeological facts and interpretations are
mundane, beyond politics. Politics does play a part in this view, but at
a level of theory that happens ‘after’ primary interpretation – we can
collect our pottery sherds, and worry about the politics when it comes
to interpreting them. This is a position implicitly taken by many
traditional or culture-historical archaeologists.

Alternatively, one can stress a positivist view of scientific method as
a way to avoid the relativist trap. Remember that positivists stress the
importance of separating the context of discovering or suggesting an
idea from the context of its testing and evaluation. A processualist
might well write: ‘Of course we are influenced by contemporary ideas. It
couldn’t be any other way – our hypotheses about the past processes, by
definition, are framed in the present. But the essence of science is to
use rigorous procedures of testing to move beyond this, through
observation of the archaeological record. This is why the development of
middle-range theory is so important. Only by developing robust ways of
testing our ideas against archaeological material can we move beyond
simply telling stories about the past.

‘For a scientist, you can get an idea about how atoms might work, or
about physical processes, from the newspaper, from a conversation, or
from a drugcrazed hallucination. It doesn’t matter where the idea comes
from. What does matter is that you then test that idea. That is, you set
up that idea as a rigorous hypothesis and then test it against material
that you observe. That is the way science works, and it is the way it
has been proven to work.’

Thus, for example, Jerry Sabloff is quite happy to note Wilk’s work
relating different explanations of the Classic Maya collapse to
contemporary political events, but takes care to suggest how this can
help us do better science:

While Wilk’s correlations are interesting, they do not prove that
current intellectual trends determine which views of the collapse became
popular, nor is there anything necessarily ‘wrong’ about archaeologists
letting political trends influence their thinking. However, if his
correlations are valid, they indicate how careful scholars must be to
ensure that current biases are not blinding them to alternative
hypotheses or limiting the kinds of data they collect. (Sabloff 1990:
166–7)

In other words, such a view will grant that everything we say is in some
sense political, but by using science we can and should move away from
just telling stories.

There has been a series of discussions attempting to steer a middle
course between positivism and relativism. Bruce Trigger has suggested
that the course of archaeology is driven both by political context and
by a progressively better understanding of the data. He advocates a
modified version of middlerange theory to grasp the interplay of
different kinds of influence. Alison Wylie suggests that the way we
relate theory to data will vary according to the context or locality we
are working in:

The question of what epistemic stance is appropriate … should be settled
locally, in the light of what we have come to know about specific
subject matters and about the resources we have for their investigation.
We should resist the pressure to adopt a general epistemic stance
appropriate to all knowledge claims. (Wylie 1992b: 35)

In my view, the definitive discussion of this problem is Elizabeth
Brumfiel’s analysis of the quality of textiles in Aztec Mexico. In this
period, women under Aztec rule had to produce tribute cloth; Brumfiel’s
feminist perspective made her sceptical that the women were
ideologically ‘duped’ and led her to expect that through time ‘the
quality of tribute cloth was deteriorating … because Indian women were
engaged in resistance. Indian women were deliberately turning out
undersized, loosely woven cloth with thick, loosely spun thread as a
form of opposition to tribute extraction’.

However, the archaeological evidence suggested that quality did not
decline. ‘Rejecting the hypothesis’, however, ‘did not lead [Brumfiel]
to reject the entire framework of theoretical propositions from which it
was derived’; rather she created an ad hoc modification of her theory:
‘resistance to exploitation does not occur when activities … are
vulnerable to supervision and control by the dominant class. This
enabled me to continue to affirm that proponents of ideological
domination have underestimated the frequency of resistance and the
importance of coercion in maintaining dominance’ (Brumfiel 1996: 454,
458).

Brumfiel concludes that:

Long before the choice between coercion and ideological domination is
decided by appeals to data, the need to choose will be eliminated by a
theoretical insight that clarifies the complementary relationship
between the two phenomena. Even so, data will have an important role to
play. … For example, these observations on the quality of tribute cloth
production … have opened a new line of enquiry for me concerning how the
vulnerability of men and women to state coercion may differ because of
differences in the location of their work or in the kind of goods that
they produce for the state. The knowledge I have gained from this
enquiry will affect the way I regard ideological domination and
resistance in future studies. (Brumfiel 1996: 459)

My own view is largely in agreement with Brumfiel; indeed, I know of no
archaeologist who would, either openly or implicitly, declare themselves
to be an unqualified relativist. In fact, peace has broken out in the
realm of epistemology. With the notable exceptions of hard-line
positivists and behavioural archaeologists, few would disagree that
archaeologists are unavoidably influenced by our social and political
circumstances, and that ‘raw data’ do not exist in any unproblematic or
unbiased way. Conversely, few would disagree that the data are
important, and that at the very least they form a network of resistance
to the interpretations we wish to put on them. Most of us would say this
network of resistance is very strong, and that our methods should try to
strengthen it.

Discussions over the perils of relativism are, I suspect, far more to do
with the perceptions, fears and uncertainties of the contemporary world,
in particular the uncertain place of academic and intellectual practice
in its wider context. Rather than replies to or refutations of a
postmodernist philosophy, they are symptomatic of the difficulties of
working within a very challenging set of cultural circumstances within
which archaeology is unavoidably engaged. All the contributors to this
debate have seen through the naïve certainties of positivist rhetoric
with its definite and simplistic divide between data and theory to the
realities of a world that is uncertain and difficult to live and work
in.

13

Conclusion: The Future of Theory

Now just hold on a minute. There’s one huge omission from the entirety
of the preceding text that can’t be permitted to go on any longer. What
exactly is theory? You can’t get away with not defining theory for the
entire book.

Well, we saw in chapter 1 that there were different definitions of what
theory is. I provisionally defined theory as ‘the order we put facts
in’, and also made reference to why we do archaeology, and to ‘issues of
interpretation’. As we have seen in the course of this book, however,
there are different theoretical views of what facts are and how they
relate to theory, different rationales or ideologies behind
archaeological practice, and very different views of what constitutes
‘interpretation’.

Remember figure 4.1. For many positivists, theory is a definable set of
propositions that can be set up and tested against data. For advocates
of middle-range theory, archaeologists have been developing a set of
methods over the last 30 years that enable us to test theory against
data.

In this view, theory is defined quite narrowly and precisely. It is
simply a set of general propositions. These can be either
generalizations about the archaeological record (‘the rise of early
states correlates with the emergence of redistributive trade networks’)
or about how we should do archaeology (‘we must make testability the
central criterion of our epistemology’). The data that archaeologists
manipulate cannot be changed in this view: data just exist independently
of the theory we are using. Many of the things we do as archaeologists
(site catchment analysis, random sampling, retrieval of surface scatters
of pottery) are in this view simply techniques. The questions the
techniques are designed to answer may be theoretical, but the techniques
and the data are outside the purview of theory.

At the other extreme, all archaeology is theoretical; theory is defined
very broadly. As we have seen, postprocessualists have argued that both
techniques and data are ‘theory-laden’, and that we must theorize
‘interpretation at the trowel’s edge’. Many would go further and,
following critical theory, argue that site catchment analysis and other
techniques masquerade as neutral but are actually deeply theoretical.
Remember that for poststructuralists even a banal factual statement like
‘there are 23 pig molars from Layer 346’ is a statement within a text
that can be deconstructed. Or they might take a different angle: ‘Of
course the number of pig molars is a factual statement but why does it
appear where it does in this text? Why did the site director decide to
put so much emphasis on economic reconstruction at this site to the
exclusion of all others? In short, the question may be ‘factual’, but we
want to question the question.’

So, just as feminists argue that inequality penetrates deeply into
everyday life, and just as many would draw a broad and deep view of the
political engagement of archaeology, so in the interpretive view all or
almost all of archaeological practice is drawn within the remit of
theory. Indeed, one of the key developments in the last decade has been
the theoretical questioning and exploration of field practice (see
below).

How one defines theory, then, depends on one’s own theoretical
viewpoint. It would be wrong for a book written as an introduction to
different theoretical views, that claims to be sympathetic or at least
fair to a diversity of views, to nevertheless insist on one definition
of theory to the exclusion of others. My preferred definition is ‘the
order you put facts in’, in part because this is a short and accessible
definition, in part because this seems to me to be vague in the right
places – it allows different theoretical viewpoints to coexist within
such a definition (though not all, admittedly). More importantly and
fundamentally, it draws attention to the way that data and theory are
dialectically related. In other words, ‘data’ and ‘theory’ have to be
understood as part of a larger whole in which the nature of one cannot
be understood without the other.

Where We Are Now

In 2009, what is the current state of archaeological theory? Such a
superficially simple question is very difficult to answer. One of the
striking things about the responses to the first, 1999 edition of this
book was that they differed very sharply, not just in their evaluation
of which strands or movements in archaeology were or were not
productive, but more fundamentally – in their descriptive assessment of
what was or was not ‘central’ or ‘marginal’, ‘serious’ or ‘frivolous’ in
archaeological theory. ‘I don’t know why you waste time in your book
discussing position X; no serious scholar believes that now’, was a
frequent comment from a fervent believer in position Y; one week later,
at another institution, the comment would be ‘I don’t know why you waste
time discussing position Y; everyone settled on position X a long time
ago’. The mental alarm bells of any scholar should ring loudly every
time a different view is not engaged with, but rather summarily
dismissed on an a priori basis, rejected as a ‘basic misunderstanding’,
or ruled ‘out of court’ in this way.

One critical difference in the perception of where we are now remains
the different institutional position of academic archaeology in
different countries. I have commented in earlier chapters on the
position of much North American academic archaeology within Anthropology
departments, versus the European tradition either of separate
departments or of closer alliances with Classics and History. In the
last decade, this contrast has had two important consequences.

The first is a difference in the impact of postmodernism and what has
been held to be its implications. In North America from the 1990s
onwards, postmodernism had a huge impact on cultural anthropology in
particular. At the same time, there was a wider cultural context of a
‘war on science’ in which, culturally and politically, it seemed that
science was both being politicized and its integrity attacked by
Creationists and others. It seemed, then, to many North American
archaeologists that the themes they held dear as essential to a
responsible and rigorous archaeology were being seriously eroded. In
retrospect, it seems to me that many of the more extreme and negative
reactions to the early polemics of British postprocessual archaeology
were in part displaced reactions to what was going on closer to home,
across the corridor in Anthropology departments, and across the road in
City Halls and in the White House.

The second consequence is a differently constructed relationship with
Indigenous peoples. In North America, and also in other contexts around
the world such as Australia, there has been in the past a very sharp
dividing line between how ‘archaeologists’ construct the past, and
beliefs in the past held by Indigenous peoples. For many, there is a
binary opposition between these two world-views, which often appear at
first sight to be quite incommensurate. Kennewick Man, discussed in the
last chapter, is a case in point.

For Europeans, the relationship between archaeology and Indigenous
peoples is constructed in a different way. First, with arguable
exceptions such as the Saami, there are few clearly Indigenous goups,
and no obvious or straightforward definition of what an Indigenous
people is. For example, British people of Anglo-Saxon descent can be
accused by the Welsh of having driven out the ‘native British’ from much
of England in the centuries after ad 400. Second, cultural claims of
descent and ownership of territory do not always reflect the aspects of
a struggle of the dispossessed, but rather take on a nationalist and
politically unpleasant tinge, for example in arguments over who has
rights to what land in the former Yugoslavia.

Making a judgment on what is important in theory today is rendered
especially difficult by the great diversity of contexts in which
‘theory’ operates. I have argued that all archaeology is theoretical,
but overt discussions of theory are constructed or inflected in
different ways between and within communities of archaeologists – for
example, between different regional or national traditions, between
different area/period specialisms, or between archaeologists working in
different contexts (academic versus ‘professional’).

The Fall and Rise of Empiricism

One way to look at the question of where we are now is to put it the
question in very crude terms – to ask: what, in practice, is the
theoretical attitude adopted by most archaeologists, ‘professional’ as
well as academic, around the whole world? I suspect that the answer
would have to be that it remains a crude and unreflective empiricism, in
the sense that the data are held to speak for themselves, without the
need for intervening theory. Empiricism in this sense can to some extent
be seen as lurking behind a number of varied positions and statements
about theory that often sound quite obvious and inoffensive in
themselves until their implications are teased out, for example:

-   that only academics have the time for theory, and ‘professional’
    archaeologists, or those working in museums or cultural resource
    management, have ‘no time’ to do it;
-   that as an archaeologist one can choose between taking or not taking
    a theoretical approach; and/or that some approaches are ‘very
    theoretical’ while others are ‘very empirical’;
-   that the moment for ‘doing theory’ occurs after ‘a basic grasp of
    the data’ (a moment that never seems to be ‘now’);
-   a rhetoric which implies that ‘theory’ is somehow less empirically
    grounded than archaeology without explicit theory; this rhetoric
    usually comes with an implicit reliance on ‘common sense’;
-   an implication that ‘plain speaking’ is superior to a theoretical
    ‘rhetoric’ (an assertion which, paradoxically, is itself a classic
    piece of rhetoric);
-   the notion that ‘more empirical’ studies will be of more ‘enduring
    value’, whereas theories are merely ‘passing fads’;
-   the definition, on criteria that are taken as commonsensical and not
    in need of explication, of questions which are more knowable or
    legitimate than others; for example, that ‘subsistence’ or
    ‘lordship’ is a legitimate explanation for patterns in the landscape
    whereas exploration of memory or gender is ‘wild’ or ‘fanciful’; and
-   at the most basic level, the notion that the accumulation of more
    data, in and of itself, will automatically lead to a better
    knowledge of the past.

All these positions make a false assumption. They imply that while
theory may or may not be a ‘legitimate’ part of what archaeologists do,
somehow there is a position from outside theory from which arguments can
be evaluated and more broadly archaeology can be practiced. I have
insisted over and over again in this book that all archaeologists are
theorists, whether we like it or not. There are many different possible
positions to take – but they are all theoretical ones.

More profoundly, all these positions imply an assertion of community.
What I mean by this is that they assert theoretical criteria that ‘we
all know’. We all know what we read in a site report; we all know a
‘plausible’ explanation when we see one. But who are ‘we’ in this
analysis? When the great seventeenth-century empiricists Bacon, Hobbes
and Locke used simple, direct, ‘plain English’ phrases like ‘we can see
that …’ they were actually writing for and to a very narrow circle of
their friends and contemporaries male members of the English gentry
classes. The most important lesson of multiculturalism, of diversity
issues, and of engagement with Indigenous perspectives, has been that
who ‘we’ are cannot be taken for granted. Indeed, ‘we’ can be argued to
be the most theory-laden word in the English language. It is certainly
one of the most ambiguous.

If a naïve empiricism is so obviously flawed, why does it endure? I
suggest that its endurance is partly due to the fact that deep down, at
a discursive and even emotional level, we are all empiricists. Two of
the distinctive features of archaeology are its nature as a field-based
discipline, and its engagement with material objects. Put very crudely,
‘we’, archaeologists, love the physical activity of digging, love
handling old objects, love the feel, touch and smell of the past.
However much archaeologists tell themselves that objects in themselves
tell us nothing about the past (as discussed in chapter 2), they still
love working with things, and ‘deep down’, at a visceral level,
archaeologists can hear the artefacts speaking to them, without the need
for intervening theory.

Part of the enduring strength, then, of the empiricist tradition is that
however easy it is to condemn intellectually, empiricism remains present
in a large part of the archaeological practice of everybody.

Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies

A second way of approaching the question of where we are now is to ask
what has changed since the turn of the century. It is possible to assert
that the so-called ‘processual/postprocessual wars’ that characterized
much of theoretical debate in the English-speaking world have ended (see
figures 13.1 and 13.2). In the opinion of many, including myself, the
term ‘postprocessual archaeology’ ceased to have much meaning after
about 2000. The term still crops up, usually in critical comments by
self-proclaimed opponents of ‘postprocessualism’ that are to my mind
rather out-of-date.

Figure 13.1 Archaeological theory in 1988

[c13_image001.jpg]

Figure 13.2 Archaeological theory in 1998

[c13_image002.jpg]

There has been a growing articulation of a shared terrain or a shared
set of concerns in much of archaeological theory. In the late 1990s I
was suspicious of this move, for two reasons. First, I was not convinced
by some of the case studies that claimed to back up this asserted middle
ground. It seemed to me to be a wishful assertion, a piece of rhetoric
even, rather than a seriously argued and substantive position. Second, I
was unduly influenced by the depressing experience of reading countless
student essays, and quite a few academic papers, that substituted
phrases like ‘there is something to be said for both sides’ for any kind
of intelligent and informed evaluation of the arguments. Ten years
later, I have modified my views in this respect.

We saw in chapter 5 how thinking in terms of cultural process had
shifted, away from ecosystem models, and towards a much more nuanced
understanding, taking on concerns about agency, conflict, and gender. At
the same time, much of the early programmatic polemic of
postprocessualism had faded away by 2000. Angry claims and
counter-claims about relativism and its dangers had largely subsided.

One version of this articulation has been termed ‘processual plus’ by
Michelle Hegmon in relation to North American archaeological theory.
Hegmon argued that much of North American archaeology had taken on the
themes and issues of gender, agency, symbolism, and materiality, and had
engaged with the political and cultural context of archaeology. She drew
attention to the way processual themes and language had shifted: away
from the evolution of culture to diverse trajectories of change, from
social organization to social strategies, from humans in the environment
to humans as part of the environment. (I would add to her list a shift
from a language of ‘testing’ to a language of ‘evaluation’.)

Hegmon’s views drew a quick response from others. While Hegmon insisted
that ‘I am not suggesting that there is a theoretical rapprochement …
nor do I think that this kind of homogeneity would be a good thing’
(Hegmon 2003: 233), others felt that it left important and dissonant
elements out, in particular those elements of theory that engage with
social justice issues, including Indigenous, Marxist, feminist and
postcolonial archaeologies; it could be added that Hegmon was also open
about leaving behavioural and Darwinian archaeologies out of her
synthesis.

I think that Hegmon’s assessment is important in two respects. First,
she is looking for a way to move theoretical debate forward
constructively. Conflicts are not necessarily bad; in many respects, a
discipline can be defined not through its common ground but through its
disagreements – for example the Obeyesekere/Sahlins debate in cultural
anthropology, or the origins of the English Revolution or the
feudal/capitalist transition in history. However, an inclusive and
diverse discipline, and above all a mature discipline, should be able to
move its theoretical debates beyond a clash of schools or what she calls
‘egos’ in which the winner takes all and the loser is crushed. Second,
she is correct in her assertion that a series of common themes can be
seen to emerge across theoretical battle-lines in the early twenty-first
century. I will discuss three as examples: agency, materiality, and
field practice.

Agency

The first common theme that can be said to have emerged is an interest
in human agency and the individual human subject. This interest spans
theoretical divides. Darwinists are interested in the individual
organism, and in the role of chance and contingency in evolution.
Co-evolutionary explanations examine the interactions of individual
variation and cultural innovation, and the population as a whole.
Faction, gender and other agencies have come to the fore in processual
thought about the origin of social complexity and states. Giddens’
structuration theory has been deployed in different theoretical
traditions, while phenomenology rests at some level on an exploration of
human subjectivity.

Agency is a classic example of theory being counterintuitive, of
pointing out insights that run counter to orthodoxy, but which appear
simple when thought about in a different way. One of the most frequent
clichés heard is that we cannot ‘see’ the individual in the
archaeological record. However, pots are made by people: in a very large
part, the archaeological record contains very direct evidence of
individual actions and human intentions the digging of a rubbish pit,
the construction of house foundations, the manufacture of objects, the
deposition of grave goods.

Stated in this way, an interest in agency sounds quite obvious and
undeniable. However, over and over again in this book, we have seen
different theoretical attitudes leading us away from agency. Basic
archaeological classification into phases, assemblages and cultures
leads us away from seeing the very simple human actions that lay behind
the production, use and loss of, for example, Mazaokeyiwin’s awl handle,
and towards their aggregation and assimilation into broader categories
and processes.

Materiality

The second common theme is an engagement with materiality. Put very
broadly and simplistically, a concern with materiality is a stress on
the material world as important and in some sense active. Interest in
materiality comes from a wide range of theoretical sources. Political
economists are interested in property and expressions of value; Marxism
is a materialist philosophy; phenomenological approaches stress the
physical experience of the world and the intransigence of artefacts;
behavioural archaeology examines the relationships between people and
things in all times and places. All these approaches share common
ground. They insist that the relationship between people and things is
important, that it is complex, and that things (objects, buildings,
monuments, landscapes) are not simply passive reflections of other
aspects of culture.

Archaeology has struggled in the past to free itself from a series of
approaches that saw the material world and material objects as somehow
secondary or less important. In chapter 6 we saw how the idealist
philosophy of Croce, in which ideas were more important than things,
implied that archaeologists should content themselves with description
and classification. In culture history, we saw how for the normative
approach artefacts are (imperfect) reflections of ‘cultural norms’ which
exists inside people’s heads. In many processual views, artefacts are
the fossil record of past ‘processes’ which do not necessarily have a
direct physical existence, and which again are defined either in
‘adaptive’ or in ‘social’ terms. Within an interpretive framework,
artefacts are often held to ‘represent’, ‘reflect’ or ‘express’ social
values or meanings, values or meanings which are implicitly held to have
a prior existence.

All these views share common ground, in that they tend to view the
archaeological record as somehow a by-product of what archaeologists are
really interested in (human history, cultural process). Arguably, then,
they all implicitly treat the subject-matter of archaeology, old things,
as less important or somehow inferior or secondary to other disciplines.
In a more popular sense, traditional archaeologists of Classical and
historical periods often look in the material record for evidence of a
process that is pre-defined through the documents – thus an ‘archaeology
of lordship’ concerns itself with castles and village layout, an
‘archaeology of the Roman Empire’ with forts, villas and cities. These
approaches appear to be an advance on traditional models, in that they
are ‘social’ or ‘anthropological’ in nature, referring to social
structures and processes rather than simply historical narratives. But
they still treat the world as epiphenomenal, or in other words a
secondary by-product of what is really important.

A concern with materiality proposes, first, that the material world is
important, and second that it cannot be comprehended using previous
models such as ‘text’ or ‘norms’. In this view, objects mediate social
relationships, or ‘materialize’ them. It flows, in part, out of the
concerns with phenomenology and subjective experience, and the role that
material objects and landscape play in constituting and mediating that
experience, discussed in chapter 7. A key preoccupation is with
ontology, that is, the study of the being or essence of things, or of
being in the abstract. Objects are seen as active, and as having agency.
Objects are also seen as changing the human subject – a man with a gun
is a very different being from an unarmed man.

One particularly strong tendency within the concern with materiality has
been the recent emergence of a school of ‘symmetrical archaeology’.
Symmetrical archaeology ‘begins with the proposition: humans and
nonhumans should not be regarded as ontologically distinct, as detached
and separated entities … neither our analyses nor our explanations nor
our interpretations should ever begin with such asymmetric dualisms.
Thought and action, ideas and materials, past and present are thoroughly
mixed ontologically. … Any radical separation, opposition and
contradiction between people and the material world within which they
live is regarded as the outcome of a specifically modern way of
distributing entities and segmenting the world’ (Whitmore 2006: 546).
The ‘actor-network theory’ of Bruno Latour has been influential on this
point. Latour proposes that social scientists have been too ready to
ascribe the causes of surface phenomena to an underlying ‘reality’ they
call ‘the social’. However, he points out that ‘the social’ doesn’t
exist in these terms: you and I have never touched, felt or smelt ‘the
social’. Chris Witmore lists six characteristics of a symmetrical
archaeology: that archaeology begins with mixtures, not bifurcations;
there is always a variety of human and non-human agencies; there is more
to understanding than ‘meaning’; change arises from fluctuating
relations between entities; the past is not exclusively past; humanity
begins with things (Witmore 2006: 549).

Symmetrical archaeology represents, for better or worse, a fundamental
challenge to the way most archaeologists operate and to the theoretical
underpinnings of much of the discipline, just as one of its key
inspirations, ‘actor-network theory’, challenges the underpinnings of
the human sciences. For example, this book has insisted, over and over
again, that archaeology is fundamentally about human beings (it is
nothing if not anthropological), and about ‘why?’ questions (we can do
more than just describe and classify); it posited a radical separation
between present and past (figure 2.1). All these assumptions are
questioned by this perspective. I am profoundly sceptical of the claim
that symmetrical archaeology can achieve a fundamental reordering of the
discipline, but it does represent a hardening and unifying of different
strands of theory into a coherent manifesto.

Theorizing The Field

The third common thread that can be said to have emerged is a widening
and deepening of the purview of theory to include reflexive approaches
to the everyday activities of fieldwork and artefact analysis. Two
distinctive features of archaeology are its nature as a field-based
activity, and its materiality, as discussed above. Archaeology derives
much of its emotional appeal from these features. One of the most
exciting and encouraging developments in theory, then, has been the
opening-up of field practice.

The classic example of reflexive fieldwork is Ian Hodder’s work at the
Neolithic site at Çatalhöyük in Turkey. Hodder has attempted to develop
a ‘reflexive excavation methodology’, in several senses. First, the way
of working is claimed to be ‘always momentary, fluid and flexible’
(Hodder 1997: 691); day-to-day working methods include the keeping of
site diaries, discussion and questioning of appropriate strategies.
Second, there is an attempt to be open and inclusive to different
interests at the site, from Californian Goddess-worshippers to the
different local groups and authorities. Third, the site archive has been
developed through relational databases and webbased material in such a
way as to make it open and accessible, and to make clear the subjective
elements behind the objective record or data-set. Çatalhöyük is a
‘flagship’ site and a well-funded project of the highest profile; but
theorizing ‘the field’ has taken place in a wide range of other
contexts. Gavin Lucas, for example, has considered the development of
the theory of stratigraphy, while my own work has looked at the methods
of English landscape archaeology as a form of field practice inspired by
Romanticism.

More broadly, there has been much theoretical reflection on concepts
such as ‘heritage’, ‘landscape’, ‘diversity’ and related issues in
recent years. This reflection has emerged as much from professional
institutions such as English Heritage or the US National Parks Service
as it has from the universities. It has been prompted in part by
changing legislation. In Britain, for example, there is now a statutory
requirement on public bodies such as heritage organizations, museums and
universities to explicitly reflect on issues of diversity and inclusion
and to develop specific policies and programmes of action to promote
these values. We saw in the last chapter how in the USA, the NAGPRA
legislation has compelled archaeological practice to engage with these
issues.

Where Theory Is Going

I have not selected the three strands of agency, materiality and field
practice at random. It can be argued that they represent three different
elements of moving-on rather than synthesis: ‘what is needed is not a
merging or a fusion of processual or post-processual archaeology, but a
moving on from a debate caught in a tired opposition between subject and
object’ (Hodder 2006: 23).

My response to Hodder is very simple: he is right, but moving on from
tired oppositions is a bit like trying to change the weather: easy to
state as a goal, but a lot more difficult to do in practice. If I am
correct and empiricism is enduring because, deep down, there is part of
us all that remains empiricist (figure 13.3), then it makes such a
moving-on all the more difficult. How might we undertake this highly
desirable, but very difficult and laborious, theoretical task in the
future?

Figure 13.3 Archaeological theory in 2008: the struggle between
different elements of thought and activity, in the mind of every
archaeologist

[c13_image003.jpg]

In the contemporary world, theorists have not had a good track record of
influencing the future. Twentieth-century theorists had a very mixed
record at making prescient observations about historical developments
such as the rise of fascism and its attendant horrors, the continuing
resilience of capitalism, the development of new technologies. I am,
therefore, very reluctant to make predictions of my own as to where
theory is going. All too often, such predictions sounds like
wish-fulfilment – one reads over and over again of the imminent death of
evolutionary approaches, of cultural materialism, of postmodernism, or
even of theory itself. These predictions invariably come from opponents
of the theoretical movement in question who clearly desperately wish
that their baleful diagnosis is going to be an accurate one. But a few
years later, the patient in question seems to be wandering around the
landscape looking perkier than ever.

I would like to predict the continued implosion of avowedly
‘atheoretical’ approaches in archaeology. I would like to see a world in
which no serious scholar can get away with simply dismissing ‘theory’ as
irrelevant, or bypassing or trivializing the need to make his or her
theoretical views explicit. Unfortunately, I don’t see such a happy
situation emerging any time soon. In many areas, theory has been
‘accepted’ and there is a lively theoretical scene, but in others,
theory remains an either/or alternative or an optional extra. Far too
frequently, one reads comments like ‘X’s approach is very theoretical;
an alternative is the more empirical approach of Y’. If theory is the
order we put facts in, theory is not an either/or option. I am tempted
to make the rather harsh comment that as a discipline, archaeologists
cannot and should not tolerate colleagues who do not choose to engage
with theory in some sense, any more or less than they could tolerate
colleagues who denied the theory of stratigraphy or of evolution.

There is a simple step that advocates of theory could take to advance
this situation: instead of sitting with gritted teeth through yet
another exposition of Hallstatt typologies, we could ask two simple,
courteous questions in every seminar we go to, without exception: What
is your preferred theoretical framework, and what are your criteria for
selecting it over possible alternatives? Why do you choose to put the
facts in that particular order?

I am not being entirely serious here. There are good reasons why most
academic papers do not begin with a general theoretical excursus, among
them that they work within an accepted discourse or paradigm. This
discourse or paradigm is accepted by the audience they are addressing
and the networks they are familiar with. There is also an important
argument to be made that theoretical traditions in some areas of the
world are vibrant and important, but do not identify themselves as
distinct, explicitly defined bodies of specifically archaeological
knowledge or practice with a corpus of literature of their own. It can
be argued that much of central and Eastern European archaeology, for
example, does work within a sophisticated theoretical framework, but
that explicit reflection upon that framework in such a manner as to
enable the identification of a specific body of literature on
‘archaeological theory’ is problematic.

Progress and Impact

Does archaeological theory progress? ‘Progress’ is a loaded word, as the
chapter on cultural evolution discussed, and perhaps carries too much
cultural baggage and is best avoided. I do think that, as a discipline,
archaeology has a record of developing better, more accurate, more
robust, deeper, understandings of the past. And I think that
archaeological theory has played a critical role in this process.

It may help to turn the question upside down. Can we claim that theory
does not progress? I don’t think we can. Archaeological theory does not
just ramble around in an endless and inconclusive ‘debate’ in which all
views are possible and equal. Looked at historically, theory has moved
in particular directions at particular times. This movement has been
complex, and the moves made were very difficult to predict beforehand,
but particular patterns, trends or processes can be discerned. These
patterns or trends have been responses to major cultural and political
questions of the time, but they are also in part responses to what
archaeologists perceive as major empirical issues of the time, and they
are also both constrained and enabled by the data.

One demonstrated way that theory has ‘progressed’ is in a broadening and
deepening of its concerns. I am particularly interested in the
vernacular practice of archaeological theory, as opposed to complex
ontological questions of the essence of things. What I mean by this is
that archaeology could do with more reflection on the everyday
judgements and assumptions that are made by practicing archaeologists,
and the way these reflect underlying theoretical categories.

Many of the conceptual categories that archaeologists use remain quite
ill-defined. Indeed, the more basic and foundational they are, the more
implicit and ill-defined they seem to be. This observation will not
surprise cultural anthropologists, who are used to the idea that the
more basic a cultural idea is, the less explicitly it is articulated;
and archaeologists are nothing if not a rather peculiar culture or
tribe. A classic example is the definition of ‘process’, first
introduced in chapter 2, and returned to in chapter 5, which involves a
cluster of related meanings. It is difficult to think of a more
important term, at least in North American archaeology, and yet it is
very rare to find an explicit and tight definition of it. Similar
comments could be made about words like ‘type’, ‘phase’, ‘structure’,
‘change’. Ironically, the less overtly contentious an idea is, the less
sharply it is defined.

Does archaeological theory have an impact on the ‘real world’, however
defined? Of course, but the way in which it has an impact needs careful
reflection. Part of the problem with assessing the impact of theory is
its very complex relationship to practice on the one hand, and to the
context of what we do on the other.

For example, one can ask: what active role did ‘theory’ play in the
changes in North American archaeology seen in the last decade as a
result of NAGPRA, changes discussed in the last chapter? One could argue
that NAGPRA played a far more important role than the postprocessual
critique in opening North American archaeology up to Indigenous and
alternative knowledges. On the other hand, one could argue that ‘the
postmodern condition’ was one part of the cultural and political climate
that led to the passing of NAGPRA under a Republican President, George
H.W. Bush.

One could deploy the deeper and more subtle argument that ‘theory’ is
not necessarily a guide or a recipe-book, but rather an attempt at
description rather than prescription. In other words, theory is an
attempt to classify and comprehend the difficulties and contradictions
of working within a particular context. In the case of NAGPRA, the
legislation concentrated archaeologists’ minds – it made the
intellectual necessity of engaging with Indigenous knowledge a priority.
NAGPRA, the cultural and political context, ‘theory’ and archaeological
practice moved together. Further, it did so in such a way that makes it
difficult to specify cause and effect, but also in such a way as to
demonstrate their close relationship – and to demonstrate the relevance
and impact of theory, archaeological practice, and cultural and
political context upon each other.

Diversity and Pluralism

In the first edition of this book, I stressed the importance of a
diversity and multiplicity of viewpoints, and the importance of students
thinking for themselves rather than accepting the approaches or
positions that professors and other senior figures would like to hand
down to them. I still believe in these points just as strongly. There is
a necessary complement to be made. Theoretical views have to be argued
through with reference to the literature, just as rigorously and with
just as much careful thought as with any other academic endeavour.
Theory should be democratic, but I do not believe it should be anarchic.
It is not a place where one is free to pick whatever version one cares
to choose – there is always a price to be paid, in terms of the time and
effort required to gain deep knowledge and understanding.

Empiricism, the reader will recall, is (among other things) a division
between the world of data and of words or concepts, and a rhetoric of
prioritizing the former. In some ways, one of the most pernicious,
pervasive and hidden aspects of empiricism in archaeology is the
underlying proposition that while archaeologists have to work hard with
the data – read the site reports, tramp across the landscape, handle the
pottery and artefactual material, ‘master’ the stuff – we do not have to
make a corresponding effort with our theory. We need to know our
typologies and our chronologies, but archaeologists are allowed to get
away with position statements and theoretical judgements that are not
informed by the literature.

In the first edition I wrote that ‘Papers that end with the depressingly
banal conclusion that ‘there is something to be said for both sides’ or
that ‘we should look for a middle ground’ should be banned – not because
a middle ground is in itself a bad thing, but because the search for
such a middle ground all too often becomes an easy replacement for the
hard work of serious yet sympathetic critique of one’s own and others’
theoretical positions’. This passage was selectively quoted by at least
one author to imply that I was advocating a rejection of any kind of
consensus or middle ground; I was not. What I should have added, as a
necessary and equal complement, is that the other phrase that should be
banned from papers is ‘I just think that …’.

If one believes that theory is a part of archaeology that is as
difficult and subtle as any other, archaeologists need to do the work,
be familiar with the literature, and argue from a well-read and informed
perspective. Archaeologists slip too easily from statements like ‘at the
end of the day, it’s the facts that count’ to the position that
archaeologists can make a judgment about theory that is not informed by
the literature. In short, as Conkey and Gero stated for feminist
research:

If we want to explore a configuring of contemporary archaeology, it is
simply ‘poor research’ to ignore a large and diverse body of
theoretical, analytical and conceptual possibilities that pertain to and
substantively inform the questions at hand … ‘Do I have to do the
readings?’ We would say the answer is, ‘yes’. (Conkey and Gero 1997:
426)

Archaeologists, then, can assert any theoretical position they like – as
long as they are prepared for an immediate and rigorous interrogation
into the basis of that position and the degree to which it has been
informed by a detailed knowledge of the material. Theory is hard work,
and it should also, if it is done properly, be uncomfortable work. Good
theory should cause archaeologists to reflect on what they do, both as
scholars and human beings. This reflection should not leave basic
assumptions unarticulated or undisturbed: a response a theorist should
aim for is: ‘You know, that’s really helpful, I never thought about it
like that …’ In this sense, good theory should cause people to feel
challenged about their everyday working practices as archaeologists, but
also enabled and to think and act in new ways.

Archaeology is a broad church. A diversity of viewpoints is to be
encouraged. On the other hand, there comes a point at which ‘diversity’
becomes ‘fragmentation’. An excessive pluralism can appear to be
tolerant, but in fact act as a cloak for suppression of debates – why
should two views bother to engage critically with the other if both are
‘valid’? The most obvious example of a position that is simply
unsustainable is the rejection of theory itself – I have repeatedly
stressed how there is no choice to be made between ‘theoretical’ and
‘atheoretical’ archaeology.

There is also a balance to be struck between an insistence on doing the
reading and a theoretical Calvinism. The sixteenth-century theologian
Calvin argued for a form of Protestant belief in which only a very few
people, the ‘elect’, could be saved. Theoretical Calvinists are as
tiresome a breed as theoretical know-nothings. All archaeologists have
to make choices about what and how much they read, just as they have to
make choices about what to sample from the archaeological record. There
is a regrettable attitude among a few theorists that if you have not
read Lévi-Strauss in the original French, you have no right to comment
on the broad thrust of theory. The literary critic Jonathan Culler
writes that:

One of the most dismaying features of theory today is that it is endless
… It is an unbounded corpus of writings which is always being augmented
… Theory is thus a source of intimidation, a resource for constant
upstagings: ‘What? You haven’t read Lacan! How can you talk about the
lyric without addressing the specular constitution of the speaking
subject?’… the completion of one task will bring not respite but further
difficult assignments. (‘Spivak? Yes, but have you read Benita Parry’s
critique of Spivak and her response?’). (Culler 1997: 15)

Given the necessary open-endedness and indeterminacy of theory, and the
need that Culler identifies for the theorist to be constantly placing
him or herself in a vulnerable position, aggressive denunciations which
treat differing views not with respect but as ‘basic misunderstandings’
are unhelpful. They can only be seen as a barely coded attempt at what
Culler calls constant upstaging, leading to intellectual exclusion and a
negation and closing-down of diversity.

It is important that these tensions between plurality and dogmatism, and
over what and how one should read theory, be understood in pragmatic and
pedagogical terms. In other words, the question is not just ‘what do we,
as archaeologists, want to do?’ or ‘what is the essence of
archaeological theory?’ but also ‘how should academic archaeology
encourage students to be questioning – what practical strategies can we
adopt to open up the discipline to dialogue?’

Conclusion

I came to archaeology as Roger Beefy, the bluff ‘dirt archaeologist’
character who has been questioning things in this volume. Most of the
practising archaeologists I had worked with before university were
openly contemptuous of theory; in late 1970s Britain, ‘rescue
archaeology’ was at its peak, and there seemed to be too much digging to
do to worry about linear movement zones and mutual causal deviation
amplifying processes. Of course, those familiar with the subsequent
history of British rescue archaeology will be well aware of how mistaken
this anti-theory view proved to be: how much of the material excavated
and recorded was never adequately published and failed to contribute to
better accounts of the past, in part because the lack of a broader
theoretical framework within which to set research priorities and guide
the writing-up and interpretation.

The first year of my undergraduate course, which was strongly oriented
towards a narrow view of cultural evolution and the New Archaeology,
tended to confirm suspicions that theory was just a waste of time. Grand
evolutionary schema seemed boring and irrelevant to the particularities
of archaeological practice. I’d read around history and historical
sociology, and as Bruce Trigger also noted in his Time and Traditions,
which I read around that time, the rejection of history seemed
especially naïve. In retrospect, this was a biased and partial reading
of the literature; but it was the one I made at the time.

This view was reinforced through experiences of theory outside
mainstream archaeology. My work on the ‘English school’ of landscape
history, which I first engaged with before university, and experience of
historical theory drew me to an appreciation of how different
disciplines really did have very different theoretical criteria and
methodologies. In this sense, the insight that arguments are never
evaluated in conditions of pure objectivity, but are always formulated
and considered within a certain social milieu, was not a theoretical
lesson that I learnt but a practical one derived from talking and
working with archaeologists, historians, architectural historians and
geographers. Again, practical experience rather than theoretical
demonstration has led me to see a fragmentation of method within the
discipline as a whole; I see very little in common between the method
and theory of, say, the archaeology of the American Southwest and that
of the medieval European church. Both would consider the methods of the
other as utterly unproductive; if a ‘theorist’ has any role in
archaeology, it must surely be to translate – to show how both schools
have their own validity, their own intellectual credentials, and why
both should respect the other’s traditions and take the time to talk to
the other.

In the last decade, I have not changed my outlook on archaeology
fundamentally, but I have shifted emphasis in my views in three areas.
During this time, I published two books, one on the archaeology of
castles, and one on the study of landscape. The critical reaction to
these two books impressed two lessons upon me. The first was about
epistemology: that rhetorical statements about the importance of the
data, or conversely one-sided deconstructions of understandings of the
past that exposed their political basis, were not enough. Getting one’s
boots muddy and one’s trowel worn down told you nothing in and of itself
about the past. The critical point was to develop better, more accurate
understandings of the past. The way to do this (as any New Archaeologist
would rightly have insisted 40 years ago) was not to follow one’s
instincts, that is to simply excavate another village or survey another
field and wait for the data thus gathered to speak for itself. It was to
think clearly and critically about rigorously addressing how this body
of data led to that explanation, and how the links between data and
explanation might be strengthened.

The second was that the basis for any understanding of the past had to
be, in part, through an informed, anthropological understanding of
structure and process. The archaeology of castles and of the English
landscape remain areas dominated by culture-historical approaches, and
by methods that implicitly assume the primacy of documents as discussed
in chapter 11. In attempting to articulate an intellectually coherent
way forward for these fields of study, I found myself arguing in terms
that stressed system, structure and process as a necessary backdrop to
explorations of identity and practice.

The third lesson I have learnt is that the real theoretical struggle is
not between different -isms, but rather, between a gut attachment to a
naïve empiricism, and a cerebral insistence that we are all theorists.
This struggle is all the sharper and more profound because it exists not
simply between different advocates or schools, but rather within all of
us – within the heads of all archaeologists (figure 13.3). There is no
clear ‘enemy’ – there is, however, a constant and unceasing struggle
between the comfort of what archaeologists take for granted and the
ceaseless questioning of any responsible and mature discipline.

My main aim in writing this book was to persuade the reader of the
excitement, importance and relevance of theory, and to encourage him or
her to adopt a consciously critical attitude to the things she or he is
taught by senior figures – ‘experts’ – about the theory and practice of
the discipline. The rather naïve hope behind this was that a diversity
of approaches to the archaeological record is a good thing, as the
interaction of different approaches tends to produce interesting and
fruitful results, a more truthful and more stimulating account of the
past; and more broadly, that the intrinsic value of liberal academic
study lies in its development of a positive critical attitude to the
self and to society and culture as a whole. I don’t much care which
‘ism’ future generations of archaeologists find most appealing, except
in so far as it enhances and fosters such critical attitudes. The moment
an archaeological theory begins to sound like a recipe-book to be
followed blindly is probably the moment at which it has outlived its
usefulness.

What I do care about is debunking the enduring notion that somehow
theory is an optional extra, or that it is an addition to or easily
separable from the ‘core’ activities of archaeology. Theory is not the
only important element of modern archaeology, but it is one of the
essential ones. Or to put it another way, theory is a little like a
visit to the dentist – to argue about whether it is enjoyable or not is
to miss the point.

Though unlike a visit to the dentist, it can also be enjoyable.

Selective Glossary

Sir, I have found you an argument; but I am not obliged to find you an
understanding. (Dr Johnson, to a tedious interrogator; Boswell, June
1784)

Many of the terms discussed below have led to confusion since they mean
different things to different people. Terms like ‘class’, ‘culture’,
‘evolution’, ‘process’, ‘type’ and ‘power’ can appear quite simple but
very often tend to mystify since they are used by the author in one
sense and read in quite another. A good example is the term ‘theory’
itself (see below). Part of the problem with such terms is that they
vary their meaning according to context or disciplinary background. For
example, ‘cultural materialism’ has entirely different, almost
diametrically opposed meanings in the respective fields of cultural
anthropology and literary theory.

I have only listed terms here that appear in the text but that deserve
further amplification. I started out with the aim of compiling a full
glossary of all the specialized terms I have seen used in archaeological
theory, but it became rapidly apparent that such an exercise would
require a further book. A number of terms (for example, materiality,
perfomativity and reflexivity) are, I feel, better understood through
reading the relevant chapter than through a glossary entry. Renfrew and
Bahn’s Archaeology: The Key Concepts (2005) is extremely useful. Hodder.
Shanks, Alexandri et al. (1995) has a good glossary. Further help with
the human sciences generally may be sought in Johnson (1995), while Humm
(1992) has a glossary on feminist thought. Lechte (1994) has brief
discussions of contemporary thinkers. Raymond Williams’s Keywords (2nd
edn, 1988) should be part of the reference library of every scholar –
read his entries on ‘culture’, ‘nature’, ‘experience’ and your view of
the world will never be the same again. The appendix in Culler (1997)
offers concise views of the main schools in literary theory.

If many terms are not here, those that are have considerably
over-simplified definitions. The best way to appreciate the full meaning
and context of many of the words examined here is to read the relevant
chapter(s) – terms can only be understood within the context of the
intellectual movement(s) of which they form a part. Terms also change
their meaning. Between my writing of these words and your reading of
them, many of these terms will have subtly changed.

Agency The issue of how we think about intentional action and the
resources needed to act, as in ‘structuralism lacks a theory of agency’
(in other words, structuralism can’t explain why individuals act in a
diversity of ways rather than blindly executing a preconceived pattern).
Often paired with structure.

Annales school A French school of historical thought, part of which
stresses the interrelationship of different timescales (the longue dureé
or long-term, the medium-term, and short-term events of l’histoire
evenementielle). Annales historians also focus on the study of
mentalities. See chapter 10.

Antiquarianism In this book, mere collection of ancient artefacts
without relating these to past processes. The antiquarianism of
sixteenth- to eighteenth-century Europe and America was more
sophisticated than this and demands more complex treatment, however.

Behaviourism The proposition that we should focus exclusively on
observable behaviours and refrain from referring to people’s thoughts in
our explanations of that behaviour.

Cognitive archaeology ‘The study of past ways of thought as inferred
from the suriviving material remains’ (Renfrew 2005: 41). Cognitive
archaeology claims to be more modest than the postprocessual search for
‘meaning’. It focuses on two areas: the evolutionary development of
cognition in early hominds, and the subsequent cultural development of
cognitive capacities, for example the development of writing.

Contradiction A term with Marxist connotations: see dialectic.

Critical theory See chapter 6. A school of thought derived in part from
Marxism, associated with Adorno, Habermas and Marcuse, and often
referred to as the ‘Frankfurt School’. Critical theorists aim to unmask
the inner workings of a society which they suggest lie concealed from
view by the mystifications of ideology.

Culture An archaeological culture is a repeatedly recurring assemblage
of traits – pottery and house forms, burial practices – seen over a
discrete time and space. It may or may not relate to a human culture. In
the broader sense, a culture can be many things, including:

1 a body of shared ideas and beliefs (the normative view);

2 an ‘extra-somatic’ (outside the body) system adapted to the external
environment (systemic view);

3 a structure or code analogous to language; and

4 an attribute of civilized behaviour, as in ‘every cultured person
should have some knowledge of archaeology’.

Culture history A term usually used in North America to refer to a
traditional approach to the mapping of cultures and cultural influence.

Cybernetics The science of energy flow, often associated with systems
theory.

Decentring Humanists see individuals as autonomous, coherent and authors
of their own meaning: the poststructuralist ‘decentring of the subject’
deconstructs all these ideas.

Deconstruction A weapon from the armoury of poststructuralism. By
showing that any word or sentence has many meanings and that those
meanings themselves refer to a multiplicity of other meanings within
language, any text, however apparently obvious or banal, can be
‘deconstructed’ or shown to have many meanings other than its apparent
one. Decon struction can be used in politically radical ways (to show
for example how the word ‘masculine’ is both unstable and privileged)
though it has also been held to lead to a disabling and politically
neutral relativism.

Diachronic Through time (as opposed to synchronic).

Dialectic A complex term from Hegelian and Marxist thought. It refers to
the contradiction or conflict of ideas or of groups within a wider
framework. That framework collapses from within, resulting in the rise
of new social or intellectual forms that in turn develop new
contradictions. Thus, for example, Marx’s account of feudalism is
dialectical since it suggests that there were contradictions within the
feudal system that brought the whole system crashing down, to be
replaced by nascent capitalism and its own contradictions. A dialectical
view of social change or of intellectual development can be contrasted
with an evolutionary or progressive view.

Diffusion The spread of ideas between cultural groups.

Direct historical approach A North American term, referring to the
project of delineating culture groups in prehistory by working from
‘known’ groups in ethnography and ethnohistory back into the
protohistoric and prehistoric past.

Discourse A set of rules of how to write and think that is specific to
particular disciplines or institutions: thus ‘all the apparatus of
empiricist discourse are mobilized in this article?…’. A buzzword among
archaeologists influenced by Foucault.

Diversity Taken to refer to the acceptance and respect of differences
between people, for example of gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation or
religion. Often paired with inclusion, with reference to changing the
cultures of institutions.

Empiricism Popularly, the belief that the data will ‘speak for
themselves’ without the need for intervening theories. Often used
loosely as a term of abuse to indicate theoretical naiveté in general:
‘Oh well, you’ll call me an old empiricist I know, but I think we should
just dig and not bother about theory’. In its more sophisticated form,
as developed in seventeenth-century philosophy, empiricism rests on a
conceptual division between ‘things’ or ‘the real world’ on the one
hand, ‘words’ or ‘concepts’ on the other, and the prioritization of the
former. Also used loosely, interchangeably and confusingly with
positivism.

Epistemology How we know what we know, or the validity of knowledge
claims. For example, the question ‘can we ever really know what people
were thinking in the Formative Period?’ is an epistemological question.

Essentialism The belief that there are certain attitudes or emotions
that are ‘natural’ or biologically endowed, either to humans in general
or to a specific sex; much debated by feminists and others. Thus the
statement ‘in prehistory, men must have been more warlike as they lacked
the mothering instinct’ is an essentialist statement. Essentialist
claims are often supported with reference to biological arguments (for
example, that men’s and women’s brains are structured differently);
essentialist statements therefore often have a basis in sociobiology,
evolutionary psychology or related schools of thought. Alternatively,
they are derived from humanism.

Ethnocentrism Two meanings: the belief that one’s own values and
attitudes have held true in all times and places; and/or the belief that
one’s own culture is morally superior to others, not simply different.

Evolution ‘Descent with modification’ (Mace, Holden and Shennan 2005:
2). A term historically derived from Darwin and Spencer. When used in
archaeological writing, its meaning varies. It can involve some or all
of:

1 the application of Darwinian principles to humans in the past; and

2 the idea that human societies can be ranked on a scale of complexity,
and that through time there has been a move from simple to complex. This
can be linked with ideas of progress in human life.

Falsificationism The belief that while we can never ‘prove’ anything,
science advances by coming up with hypotheses that it is possible to
disprove or falsify.

Feminist archaeology The belief that gender roles are partially or
completely socially constructed rather than endowed by biology, and that
women in particular have suffered from oppression in Western society.
This has the implication that: (a) archaeologists need to examine gender
roles and inequalities within the profession; (b) archaeologists need to
be more critical about biases and assumptions made about ancient
societies; and (c) archaeologists need to question the way academic
knowledge has been constructed in, it is argued, a ‘phallocentric’ or
male-dominated manner. Not all archaeologists interested in ‘an
archaeology of gender’ call themselves feminists, and not all feminists
would necessarily fully agree with point (c) above.

Formalism A school of economic theory that suggests we can extend
Western ideas of economic rationality to non-Western societies.

Frankfurt School See critical theory.

Functionalism The belief that the different institutions and practices
of a human group are interrelated in a manner analogous to that of a
body, so that the form of one can be explained by its functional
relationship to other elements.

Hermeneutics The study of how we give meanings to cultural products, or
how we interpret human actions and their products (for example, written
texts, social actions, works of art, or artefacts).

Heuristic To find out, to learn or to throw up fresh ideas, as in ‘we
didn’t gain any grand theory from this simulation, we just did it for
heuristic purposes – it threw up some new ideas and possible
interpretations that we need to test out in the next research stage’.

Historicism Various meanings. Often used as a code-word for Marxism;
alternatively, New Historicist literary theory is ‘a critical movement
insisting on the prime importance of historical context to the
interpretation of texts of all kinds’ (Hamilton 1996: 2).

Historiography Various meanings, including historical theory and the
history of historical thought.

Humanism Broadly, the study of human culture; often associated with the
belief that there is an essential ‘human condition’ regardless of
historical circumstance.

Hypothesis A prediction about the relationship between variables, as in
‘My hypothesis is that marginal environments and risk are positively
correlated.’

Idealism Theoretical usage differs from commonplace usage. An idealist
believes that thoughts are prior to actions, in other words that the
mental world is more important than the material. In Collingwood’s
historical idealism, the central method of historical and archaeological
interpretation is to rethink the thoughts of past peoples
empathetically.

Ideology See chapter 6. A set of overt or implicit beliefs or views of
the world. According to Marxists, ideology serves to legitimate or mask
the ‘real’ state of social relations.

Indigenous Of a people inhabiting a region with which they have the
earliest known historical connection, often with a history of
dispossession by later immigrants; a term whose definition is much
debated, and therefore often used with a capital I.

Inductivism The belief that archaeological research starts with
observations from the data, building general statements from them (in
contrast with the HDN model, in which data collection is
hypothesis-driven).

Legitimation See ideology.

Logicism A school of archaeological theory associated with the Ecole
Pratiques des Hautes Etudes in Paris. Logicists focus attention on the
structure of publications and interpretations rather than the
archaeological remains themselves (see Gardin 1980).

Logocentrism For poststructuralists, logocentrism is the illusion
fostered by positivist science that there is a concrete world beyond
‘the text’, to which the text refers, and that meanings can therefore be
fixed in some final ‘reality’. Poststructuralists argue that meanings
are never fixed in this way and deny what they call ‘the logocentric
fallacy’.

Materialism Various meanings. Literally, a materialist believes that the
material, physical world should be given more significance than the
ideal or mental world. Some Marxists use the terms ‘Marxism’ and
‘materialism’ interchangeably. It is also used as a code-word by some
North American archaeologists to indicate Marxism without its political
connotations. For literary theorists, cultural materialism is the idea
that culture and history are linked dialectically; it is sometimes seen
as ‘the British version of New Historicism’, though it tends to be more
openly committed to left-wing politics. Finally, materialism is used to
describe an acquisitive mind-set that many archaeologists feel is bound
up with the origins of capitalism, as in ‘the increased comfort of homes
in the sixteenth century reflects a new spirit of materialism’.

Materialschlacht a term referring to detailed presentation of material,
on the (empiricist) principle of letting the facts speak for themselves;
increasingly used in German archaeology in pejorative reference to
largely descriptive dissertation theses which catalogue copious
archaeological material with very little interpretation.

Methodological individualism The belief that societies are nothing more
than collections of individuals, and that therefore we can only explain
‘social’ phenomomena through individual psychology.

Methodology The techniques and methods used to collect and interpret
archaeological data. Some feel methodology is part of theory; others
insist that it be kept separate.

Modernism Used loosely to refer to belief in Science, Truth and
Progress.

Multiculturalism The celebration of diverse ethnic backgrounds.

Multilinear Of a model that suggests more than one possible course, for
example of social evolution.

Nomothetic (also nomological) Generalizing, as in ‘The New Archaeology
had nomothetic aims’.

Normative The assumption that artefacts are expressions of cultural
ideas or norms.

Ontology The study of the being or essence of things, or of being in the
abstract.

Paradigm A set of beliefs or assumptions that underpin the whole way of
doing ‘normal science’. The term was invented by Kuhn, who suggested
that science was characterized by long periods of stability punctuated
by revolutionary ‘paradigm shifts’, for example between Newtonian and
Einsteinian physics. There is much debate about whether Kuhn’s
assessment is accurate, and if so whether the New Archaeology (or for
that matter postprocessual archaeology) marked a true ‘paradigm shift’.

Particularize To explain or understand something in terms of its
peculiar qualities.

Phenomenology The study of human experience and consciousness in
everyday life.

Polythetic With many features or criteria.

Postcolonial Postcolonial theory deals with the effects of colonization
on cultures and societies, from a critical standpoint, and the issues
these raise for academic and cultural enquiry.

Postmodernism According to Lyotard, ‘incredulity towards
metanarratives’.

Practice A term closely linked to agency, associated with Bourdieu
rather than Giddens, referring to everyday actions and their
relationship to structure.

Pragmatism A philosophy originally developed by Charles Peirce and
others proposing that the meaning of an idea or a proposition lies in
its observable practical consequences.

Processual A school of archaeological thought that stresses the idea of
process, tends to generalize and adopts a broadly positivist approach.
Processualism can be seen as a developed, more mature form of the New
Archaeology.

Realism A philosophical position which accords to known or perceived
things an existence or nature which is independent of whether anyone is
thinking about or perceiving them. In archaeology, realism tends to be
adopted as a position between the extremes of positivism and social
constructivism.

Reductionism The belief that complex phenomena can be explained by
reducing them to a set of often very simple variables: often linked to
Darwinist, essentialist or sociobiological arguments. Often used as a
term of abuse by its opponents. Thus, ‘To suggest that we can explain
the presence of weapons in these graves simply by reference to Man’s
aggressive instinct is both reductionist and essentialist’.

Reification Taking an idea or cluster of ideas and treating it as a
definite thing. Thus, ‘the Neolithic’, ‘the Formative Period’ and
‘postprocessual archaeology’ are all reifications. Usually used
pejoratively.

Relativism The belief that all possible accounts of the past are equally
valid in their own terms, there being no neutral or objective way to
judge between them. Also used in anthropology as the view that other
cultures are simply different from our own, not ‘better’ or ‘worse’.

Semiotics The study of signs.

Social constructivism Also known as social constructionism. The
proposition that scientific knowledge is not a neutral body of data
independent of cultural practices and values, but is actually created
within society. In this view scientific data and practices are wholly
social constructs (strong constructivism) or partly (weak
constructivism). In practice, social constructivists are interested in
laboratory practices and publication of information as processes to be
studied sociologically rather than as purely ‘scientific’ debates in the
narrow sense of the term.

Sociobiology The idea that cultural practices are biologically rather
than socially constructed, based on the drive to reproduce genes.

Structuralism The belief that culture is governed by rules analogous to
those of language.

Structuration theory A term associated with Giddens to describe how
social agents or individuals relate to social structures. Giddens
suggests that actors are constrained by their social environments, but
pursue active strategies; the clash of agency then produces, often as an
unintended consequence, change in social structures.

Structure Enduring cultural or social relations. Sometimes used
interchangeably with ‘system’ by functionalists, though for Marxists and
structuralists the structure underlies the social system.

Substantivism A school of economic theory that holds that our ideas of
economic ‘rationality’ are not applicable to other cultures.

Synchronic At one particular moment in time (as opposed to diachronic).

Systems Can be used in a variety of senses from the very general (‘the
social system that was the Roman Empire came under stress in the third
century ad’) to very particular. In its particular forms, systems theory
is close to functionalist beliefs that cultures can be seen as bodies –
themselves systems – composed of various subsystems. Change in one
subsystem will thus react against other subsystems and either be
‘dampened down’ (negative feedback leading to homeostasis) or produce
wider change (positive feedback leading to transformation such as
systems collapse).

Teleology A narrative with a definite development towards a point; for
example, a traditional Marxist account of history is teleological in
that it suggests an inexorable progress towards communism.

Theorifeindlichkeit Used pejoratively in German archaeology to denote
distance from or hostility to theory

Theory General definition at the start of chapter 12. It has also been
used specifically to refer to a particular kind of structural-Marxism
formulated by Althusser and others; thus, E.P. Thompson’s essay ‘The
poverty of theory’ was actually an attack on Althusserian Marxism rather
than on theory as such

Totalizing A scheme of thought is totalizing if it attempts to place a
set of diverse experiences within one large scheme applicable to all
times and places. For example, social evolutionary models can be argued
to be totalizing in so far as they place all human societies within one
stage or another of a grand evolutionary scheme. Usually used
pejoratively by opponents of such thinking.

Unilinear Following one course, as in cultural evolution.

Zeitgeist A very complex term from German Romantic philosophy. It refers
to an essential or defining spirit, whether of an historical period, a
‘people’, or other cultural group or formation.

Further Reading

How To Read This Book

As stated in the Preface, this book is an introduction to archaeological
theory. In this sense, the most important element within its pages is
the Further Reading section below.

The main changes a reader will find in this second edition are as
follows:

-   A slight change in style and tone. Theory is invariably a very
    personal thing, and as Culler (1997) points out in relation to
    literary theory, it involves placing oneself deliberately in a
    vulnerable position. There is a very fine line between critique and
    personalized criticism, and I have tried to take care in this second
    edition to err on the side of caution in this regard. I have also
    steered away from the emotive and ambiguous term ‘we’, preferring
    the more neutral ‘archaeologists’ whenever possible.
-   Emendation and updating of the first four chapters. To understand
    where ‘theory’ is today, I remain convinced that one still has to go
    back to New Archaeology; ideas of empirical enquiry and cultural
    process that emerged from this remain, I think rightly, foundational
    to much of archaeology. I’ve tried however to make the account of
    the development of these ideas more tied to the present – hence for
    example the renaming of ‘Culture as a System’ as ‘Culture and
    Process’. Because much of the account in the first edition was
    written in the past tense, it was easy for the reader to assume that
    the ideas contained therein were somehow passé or superseded by
    later (postprocessual) trends. This was never my intention – ideas
    of science, variability, pattern, process, remain central to much of
    archaeology now and in my view have to be understood as a foundation
    to other areas. Conversely, postprocessualism has, ten years on, to
    be seen more historically, as a movement of the 1980s and 1990s,
    rather than as a term that is particularly meaningful today.
-   More extended discussion of ‘traditional’ or culture-historical
    archaeology. Although often describing itself in terms that often
    makes little or no explicit reference to a specific body of
    archaeological ‘theory’, culture history remains an important
    approach, particularly in Roman and later archaeology and in much of
    continental Europe.
-   Division of the ‘evolution’ chapter into two, one on cultural
    evolution, one on approaches variously labeled as Darwinist or
    selectionist. This reflects a growth in applications of different
    forms of Darwinian theory to archaeology since the mid-late 1990s.
-   More coverage of theory outside the English-speaking world. The
    first edition was a victim of its own success. My intention had been
    to write a book that chose to deal principally with traditions in
    Britain and North America, and to be open and explicit about this
    (see the repeated references to this on ps. xiii, 116, and 210). If
    I had known how successful and influential the book was going to be,
    and how it has taken on (despite my best intentions) the status of a
    key text, I would not have made this decision. This second edition
    includes much more reference to work from around the world,
    particularly in the Further Reading section. I have chosen to retain
    an overall structure that, some will find, continues to reflect an
    Anglophone bias; this seemed a lesser evil than attempting to write
    a separate chapter(s) on ‘non-Anglo theory’. Inevitably the book,
    like any book, still bears the marks of the author’s biases,
    preoccupations and language limitations.

I encourage readers to take a critical approach to this book as much as
any other. See thoughtful and critical reviews of the first edition by
Trigger (2000) and Holtorf (2000), and responses to my views by a
variety of scholars in Archaeological Dialogues: Johnson (2007) and
responses.

General Points

When reading any scholarly book in archaeology, theory included, it’s a
good idea to take a look at its reviews in major journals. These often
tell you more about the prejudices of the reviewers than they do about
the book, but are a good way of isolating areas of contentious debate.
Articles in Current Anthropology and Archaeological Dialogues are
especially instructive in this regard, since the article is followed by
responses and responses-to-responses. Norwegian Archaeological Review
also includes useful responses in succeeding issues.

American Antiquity, Antiquity, European Journal of Archaeology, Journal
of Anthropological Archaeology, Current Anthropology, and American
Anthropologist all have good theory articles. The Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory, Journal of Social Archaeology,
Norwegian Archaeological Review, and Journal of Material Culture are of
consistent quality. With the spread of theory in the last 20 years,
other, more ‘empirical’ journals have ever higher numbers of articles
that are explicitly informed by theory. Reviews of the literature on a
given theoretical topic in the Annual Review of Anthropology are often a
good place to start.

You can complement reading with attendance at conferences. The main
British theory ‘talking-shop’ is the Theoretical Archaeology Group
conference (TAG), which is held every December at a different university
each year (the ‘archive’ is at (www.antiquity.ac.uk/tag/index.xhtml).
Many go to TAG simply to see old friends and drink some warm beer, but
it is also a ‘barometer’ of what’s the latest trend in theory today, at
least in Britain. The majority of papers are given by research students
or younger staff and organization is supposed to be ‘bottom-up’. The fee
is currently £50 or less, there is usually free floor-space for students
and the unwaged, and everybody regardless of status pays their own way
to come. Andrew Fleming and I explored the history of TAG and some of
the tensions between its egalitarian ethic and the reality in Fleming
and Johnson (1990).

There is also a Theoretical Roman Archaeology Conference held every
second year in Britain, and a ‘Nordic TAG’ (Tusa and Kirkinen 1992;
Anderson et al. 1997). The German ‘Theorie-Arbeitgemeinschaft’ (‘T-AG’:
www.theorie-ag.de) has a newsletter, regular seminars and also organizes
sessions in many of the larger German conferences (see Härke and Wolfram
1993). RATS (Radical Archaeologists Talk Shop) is ‘an informal group of
left-leaning archaeologists’ (James Delle, personal communication)
rather than a theory group as such. It brings together archaeologists
from the northeastern USA and beyond and meets on an irregular basis
somewhere in New England or New York.

Otherwise you have to pick and choose between sessions and papers at
major conferences. In North America, the Society for American
Archaeology and the American Anthropological Association (SAA and AAA)
hold symposia with theoretical content; the European Association of
Archaeology does also.

There is a proliferation of blogs, wikis, and email lists dealing with
archaeological and social theory, though these change and develop so
rapidly that it is difficult to be authoritative about them. Sites that
are likely to be enduring include:
http://traumwerk.stanford.edu/archaeolog/;
http://proteus.brown.edu/joukowskyinstitute/home; and the arch-theory
email list. Fora of the World Archaeological Congress
http://www.worldarchaeologicalcongress.org/site/home.php are an
important arena. www.area-archives.org links to discussions of the
history of archaeology, with theoretical content. The Archaeology part
of the UK History, Classics and Archaeology subject centre has useful
materials for both learning and teaching in archaeological theory:
http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/hca/home. www.theory.org.uk hosts some useful
– and hilarious – material on social theory and cultural studies;
http://plato.stanford.edu/contents.xhtml hosts a collection of articles
on philosophical issues.

The reading list that follows is partial, and will be out of date
between the time I write these words and you read them. It is largely
confined to English-language publications, and there is a bias towards
publications that will be readily accessible in a range of locations. I
have first listed some introductory readings, and then given suggestions
for further reading on a chapter-by-chapter basis. The aim of these
references is not to provide a complete bibliography on a particular
theme; rather, they indicate the background to the arguments laid out in
the text, and contain suggestions for further reading which all students
should take up.

Introductory Texts

Praetzellis (2000) is tremendous fun. I wish I had written it. The best
place to start for a historical perspective is Trigger (2006). I do not
agree with Trigger’s assessment of where we are now (see Hodder 2006 and
Wylie 2006, and others in Williamson and Bisson 2006, for friendly but
critical comments), but his writings are consistently thoughtful and
serious, and he has a good sense of the balance between academic and
wider influences in the development of archaeology.

Renfrew and Bahn (fifth edition 2008) and Thomas and Kelly (2006) are
excellent general introductions to archaeology with the merit of
recognizing that theoretical concerns are integral to what we do. See
also Renfrew and Bahn (2005). Gamble (2008) is accessible and gives a
good sense of archaeology as an intellectually demanding discipline.

Binford, L. R. (2002) In Pursuit of The Past. This is well written, easy
to read and gives a powerful, convincing account of his view of
archaeology. Note that it was actually written by John Cherry and Robin
Torrence from transcripts from Binford’s lecture series in Britain and
the Netherlands – Binford is a brilliant, charismatic lecturer.

Preucel, R. and Hodder, I. (eds) (1996) Contemporary Archaeology in
Theory: A Reader. A collection of 26 articles on most key aspects of
archaeological theory. Very good for browsing. Second edition edited by
Preucel and Mrozowski forthcoming. See also Hodder (ed.) (2001),
Archaeological Theory Today.

For the overall thrust of Americanist archaeological theory at present,
with its tensions and debates delineated as much as common ground, read
Hegmon (2003), the articles by Watkins (2003) and Moss (2005), and
Hegmon’s response in turn. It’s worth comparing this exchange with
Kristiansen’s view of theory in Europe and the responses (Kristiansen
2008).

Meskell, L. and Preucel, R. (eds) (2004) A Companion to Social
Archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell.

Preface: The Contradictions of Theory

Popular suspicion of ‘intellectuals’ is of course a precise inversion of
intellectual fear and suspicion of the masses: see Carey (1992).
Easthope (1999) is a witty exploration of the anti-theory bias in
Anglo-Saxon cultural life. Sommer (2000) makes the important point that
the definition of ‘theory’ as a distinct domain is itself a product of a
particular cultural tradition.

Chapter 1 Common Sense is Not Enough

One of the most succinct and devastating demolitions of ‘common sense’
can be found in Kluckholn (1939). The discussion of ley lines is drawn
from Williamson and Bellamy (1983). See also Stout (2008).

Because most feel such debates are irrelevant, few ‘atheoretical’
writers have been moved to put defences of their position in print.
Fieldwork as a masculine discourse: Joyce et al. 2002: 18–26), and Moser
(2007). Conversely, Conkey (2007) has explored the way the practice of
theory itself is gendered.

An account of the difficulties of theory in another discipline, with
which I find myself in general agreement, is Culler (1997) chapter 1.
See also Eagleton (2003), with the slightly misleading title After
Theory – really a critique of the move from Marxist to postmodern forms
of literary theory. Bentley (2006) is a provocative comment on jargon in
archaeology (see comments in later issues of Antiquity).

Chapter 2 The ‘New Archaeology’

I explore the links between Romanticism, empiricism (in the sense that
the data are held to link directly to the past without the need for
intervening theory) and historic landscape archaeology in Johnson
(2007). Of Peter Ackroyd’s novels, Hawksmoor and The House of Doctor Dee
are cult reading among archaeologists. Sir Thomas Browne’s essay can be
found in Robbins (1972) and is discussed by Schwyzer (2007). Indigenous
views of past and present: Watkins (2000, 2003) and Atalay (2006).

Further reading on archaeology before the New Archaeology: the
often-repeated phrase ‘long sleep’ comes from Renfrew (1982: 6). Lyman
et al. (1997a, 1997b) are introductions to Americanist ‘culture history’
and reprints of selected papers respectively. O’Brien et al. (2005)
discusses the development of North American archaeology from 1960
onwards. I have avoided going in to the historical development of New
Archaeology in any depth; such a project would involve looking at the
anthropological/North American influences of White, Steward, Seltzer,
Willey and Phillips on the one hand, and economic and
geographical/British influences of Childe, Higgs and Jarman, Grahame
Clark and David Clarke on the other. My thanks to Bob Preucel for
clarifying this point.

Childe’s view of culture is summarized in McNairn (1980: 46–74). It
should be noted that Childe’s thought changed markedly through his life
– see his 1958 Retrospect. Grahame Clark’s thought developed over time
from a stress on the economic (for example, Clark 1952) to a celebration
of a politically conservative humanism (for example, Clark 1982).

Meltzer (1979) and Patterson (1986) are good introductions to the New
Archaeology. Leone (1972) is a reader that includes most of the key
early papers and gets across the diversity and excitement of early New
Archaeology well. Binford’s early papers reprinted in his An
Archaeological Perspective (1972) are essential reading for anyone who
wants to understand the underlying mood and origins of the New
Archaeology. His introduction and connecting passages are also
entertaining and lucid, in contrast to his more formal academic writing
style; see also Schiffer (1995: 1–24), for a rather different account of
that time.

Flannery’s edited volume The Early Mesoamerican Village (1976) is an
edited volume of case studies that over 35 years later should be read by
specialists in all areas and periods. The case studies show New
Archaeology in action, warts and all; see also Flannery (2006). Lyman et
al. (2005) examine archaeological publication in Science and Scientific
American, showing that New Archaeology had little direct impact on
publication.

Read some of the texts, particularly in anthropology, the New
Archaeologists turned to. White’s The Science of Culture (1949) is
clearly written, and prefigures the processual stress on science and
systems. The chapter on Akenaton is a brilliant demolition of the idea
that individuals’ actions are random, unpredictable or important in
history. Much New Archaeology was anticipated by Walter Taylor in A
Study of Archaeology (1948); his emphasis on a ‘conjunctive’ approach is
a forerunner of functional emphases.

Clarke’s Analytical Archaeology (1978: the second edition revised by Bob
Chapman) is a difficult but essential read. It is hard to overestimate
the influence of this book. Clarke’s 1973 article also had wide impact
and sets the theoretical basis of New Archaeology alongside parallel
developments in method and technique.

Archaeology as anthropology: there is an important recent debate on the
position of North American archaeology within what is called the
‘fourfield approach’ – a configuration of archaeology and linguistic,
cultural and physical anthropology. See papers in Gillespie and Nicholls
(2003) and Segal and Yanagisako (2005). Brumfiel (2003) makes the case
for a renewed link with anthropology and also identitifies some of the
tensions from an Americanist perspective; see also Borofsky (2002).
Williamson and Bisson (2006: 8–12), comment on the differences between
Canadian and US archaeology. For the history of the relationship of
archaeology and anthropology, see Gosden (1999).

Megaliths: Renfrew (1973a) is a popular account. It’s worth comparing
Renfrew with more recent interpretations of megaliths – see, for
example, Bender et al. (2007), Thomas (1999a), Bradley (1993) and Tilley
(2004).

Hawkes (1968) is a short and in my view misconceived but influential and
oftenquoted critique of New Archaeology from the perspective of British
traditional archaeology. Klejn (1977) gives a more balanced view of the
state of play in the 1970s.

Chapter 3 Archaeology as a Science

Frankenstein: Mary Shelley’s novel has been interpreted as a feminist
critique of the moral limits of (masculine) scientific rationality: see
Gilbert and Gubar (1979: 213–47) and Mellor (1988). A major caveat has
to be added to comments on the disciplinary success of science from
recent policy-making: the ongoing struggle over creationism and the
political ‘war on science’ in the United States: see Mooney (2005) and
Coleman and Carlin (2004).

On theory in Classical archaeology, see Morris (2004) and Shanks (1996);
also Alcock (2002). Humanist distrust of science is often based on the
implicit premise that what makes ‘us’ distinctively human (culture, art,
religion) is precisely that which is ignored by science; therefore,
uncritical use of science will move archaeology away from ‘the proper
study of mankind’, that is ‘man’. See C. Hawkes (1954) and J. Hawkes
(1968).

Positivism in the human sciences: Roscoe (1995) is a useful commentary
on parallel issues in cultural anthropology. Bell (1994) takes a
‘refutationist’ approach though he is still positivist in the broad
sense used here.

Kuhn’s philosophy of science is explored in a classic but long and
difficult text (Kuhn 1962). For an introduction to the issues and a
clearly written exploration of Kuhn’s significance in the human sciences
as a whole, see Fuller (1992). For Feyerabend, see (1988 and 1995). I
could have led the reader away from positivism via the work of Hansen,
Quine and Putnam also.

Alison Wylie’s writings on epistemology (most collected in 2002) are
absolutely central. They make dense reading, but this is because they
deal with difficult issues and refuse to descend into platitudes. Gibbon
(1989) is a comprehensive archaeological critique of positivism and a
lucid view of a ‘realist’ position. Courbin (1988) argues, in detail,
that there is no example of ‘testing’ in archaeology that can be shown
to work in practice.

The literature on the ‘science wars’ is voluminous; for opposite ends of
the spectrum see Gross and Levitt (1994), Wolpert (1992), and Latour
(1987). Delanty (1997) steers a middle course. A summary can be found in
Parsons (2003); it is striking there has been much less discussion of
this topic since around 2000. Pickering (1984) is a brilliant case study
but difficult to follow if you don’t have a scientific background.
Feminist critiques of science include feminist standpoint theory, for
which see Harding (2004) and Wylie (2006).

Recent archaeological work bringing together interpretive theory and
scientific practice: Jones (2001); Sofaer (2007); Boivin and Owoc
(2004); Jones and Macgregor (2002); Wheatley et al. (eds) (2002).
Pollard and Bray (2007) reviews this recent literature. Davies et al.
(2005) combine scientific evidence for woodland clearance with a
phenomenological approach.

Chapter 4 Middle-range Theory, Ethnoarchaeology and Material Culture
Studies

The discussion on analogy here is necessarily brief. It owes much,
first, to Orme’s (1981) work stressing the large contribution
ethnographic analogy has played in all archaeology however ‘traditional’
and, second, to Wylie’s (1985) discussion, which demonstrates that there
is no clear alternative to analogical thinking in interpretation. The
new journal Ethnoarchaeology (first issue 2009) promises to be
important.

The best place to start with Binford is his In Pursuit of the Past
(2002, with a new Afterword, first published in 1983) before moving on
to his more difficult writings, particularly Bones (1981b) and
Constructing Frames of Reference (2001). Binford’s first essay on
analogy was1967; his Nunamiut work is discussed in 1980, 2002 and more
extensively in 1978. For the Mousterian debate, see Binford (1983b),
chapters 4 and 5.

Experimental archaeology: Ethnoarchaeological studies of crop processing
include studies by Hillman and Jones in Zeist and Casparie (1984); also
Hastorf (1988), Miksicek (1987). For taphonomy, see Huntley and
Stallibrass (eds) (2000).

Behavioural archaeology: Skibo and Schiffer (2008) is a good place to
start. Schiffer (1976, 1987, 1995), Skibo et al. (1995) and Gould and
Schiffer (1981). For the Tucson Garbage Project, see Rathje et al.
(1992) and references therein. Skibo and Schiffer (2008) set out a
complete manifesto for behavioural archaeology.

Hodder’s early work is in Hodder (1982a), though a more readable start
to ethnoarchaeology is Hodder (1982b). He criticizes Binford’s use of
analogy in (1982b: 20–4). Moore (1987) is important not just in its
implications for ethnoarchaeology but in its use of feminist and textual
theory in the interpretation of space.

There has been much recent interest in interdisciplinary studies of
modern material culture: start with Tilley et al. (eds) (2006) and
Miller (ed.) (2005); see also Miller (1987, 1995). Good introductions
are Woodward (2007) and Tilley et al. (eds) (2006). Mauss and Schlanger
(2006), Faure-Rouesnel (2001) and Warnier (1999, 2001) are good places
to start on the French anthropological tradition of material culture.
Olivier (2000) discusses memory. There are a host of excellent case
studies in the Journal of Material Culture; there is a useful review of
that journal from an archaeological standpoint by van Dommelen (2000).
See also further reading on materiality, below.

Chapter 5 Culture and Process

Metaphors of culture: Toynbee’s twelve-volume A Study of History was
fashionable in his day for his delineation of organic rhythms of
civilizations, though he is almost forgotten now. The view of societies
as embodiments of Big Ideas goes back to the nineteenth-century
philosopher Hegel and beyond (Hegel 1956). Furholt (2008) is an
effective case study critiquing the equation of archaeological ‘culture’
with cultural group; see also special issue of Archaeologia Polona 34
(1996).

Theoretical discussion in Central and Eastern Europe: Härke (ed.) (2000)
and Gramsch and Sommer (eds) are good places to start. There is a themed
section on Central European Archaeology in Transition in Antiquity 67.
Kobyliñski (2001); Biehl, Gramsch and Marciniak (2002), particularly
article by Neustupný; Hensel, Tabaczyñski and Urbañck (1998); Kuna and
Venclova (1995); Neustupný (1993). Klejn (1993c) is a comment on German
archaeology. Hänsell and Harding (1998) is an English translation of a
selection of Georg Kossack’s essays. Gramsch (2000) is an especially
thoughtful article. Klejn (1993b) comments on Soviet archaeology.
Gheorghiu (2003) is a short but powerful plea for post-communist eastern
Europe to resist the dominance of Western theory. Poland: Lech (1996);
Tabaczyñski (2006, 2007).

For the intellectual sources of culture as a system, see the New
Archaeology reading cited above, particularly Flannery, Renfrew and
Clarke. Johnson (2004) demonstrates the continuing importance of the
processual tradition. Early systems thinking: Earle and Erickson (1977)
is a good collection of systemic approaches to exchange. Compare with
Earle and Erickson (1982). Hodges (1982) is a processual approach to
early medieval Europe.

Collapse: Tainter (2006) and McAnaney and Yoffee (2009) are both
responses to Jared Diamond’s influential Collapse (2005). Schwartz and
Nichols (2006) look at regeneration after collapse. Yoffee and Cowgill
(1988). For the Classic Maya collapse in particular, see Sabloff (1990)
as an introduction; Neiman (1997) takes a self-styled Darwinian
evolutionary perspective; his arguments convince though I am not
entirely clear what is specifically Darwinian about his theory. For a
review of Maya literature see Fash (1994). See also Wilks (1985) for an
interesting perspective on how archaeologists’ changing explanations of
the collapse reflect contemporary political and environmental concerns.
For Chaco Canyon, Sebastian (1996) advances a ‘sociopolitically based’
model in opposition to the environmental explanations. Nelson et al.
(2006) make the point from the prespective of cultural ecology that
‘reorganization’ is a more common response than collapse.

Habermas’s critique is much broader than is indicated here, extending to
the nature of ideology in late capitalist society (see Habermas 1970,
1975; Bernstein 1985) and the nature of postmodernity. Giddens (1984) is
another useful critique.

Revised processual thinking: the key paper is Brumfiel (1992). Crumley
(1979, 1987); Brumfiel and Fox (1994); Brumfiel and Earle (1987);
Renfrew (1986); Ehrenreich et al. (1995). See also broader collections
of papers that balance generalizing approaches with emphasis on
historical uniqueness: Scarry (1996); Flannery and Marcus (1983).
Political economy: Earle (1997, 2002), Brumfiel and Earle (1987). Muller
(1997) is a good case study. Bayman (2002) combines contextual analysis
of the meanings of artefacts within a wider model of a prestige goods
economy.

World systems theory: the general inspiration is Wallerstein (1974).
Applications to archaeology include Kohl (1987), Kristiansen (1998), and
Kristiansen and Larsen (1987). Kristiansen and Larsson (2005) is
particularly interesting – many of the reviews of this book are coded
evaluations of whether an ‘archaeology of Europe’ at a WST scale is
intellectually admissible. World systems theory in Mesoamerica:
Schortman and Urban (1994).

Chaos and complexity theory: Kohler (1993); Reisch (1991); Gerding and
Ingemark (1997).

On ‘freedom’ and slavery, see Patterson (1982). I am grateful to Bob
Preucel for drawing my attention to this point.

Chapter 6 Thoughts and Ideologies

Hawkes (1954) for his seven ‘levels of inference’ and the difficulty of
looking at thoughts. Binford’s views on the inadmissibility of cognition
as a factor in archaeological explanation are best expressed in his
paper in Man (1987) and his brief Commentary in Renfrew and Shennan
(1982). Fogelin (2007) is a useful review of different approaches to
ritual and religion.

Terrenato (ed.) (2000) brings out the importance of Croce and the
idealist tradition (and the consequent reaction against idealism by
materialist scholars) in Italian archaeology, particularly papers by
Sestieri, Cuozzo, Guidi and Terrenato. There are useful papers also by
Maischberger and Tabaczinsky on German and Polish archaeology
respectively. See also Guidi 1996.

Structuralism: Bradbury (1987) is a brilliant parody. Conkey (1989) is a
good summary of structuralist concerns, tied to the example of cave art.
Other examples of structural analysis are discussed in other chapters,
but examples include Glassie (1975), Deetz (1977), Washburn (1983).
Bapty and Yates (1990) explore the implications of poststructuralism.
French archaeological theory has not been as influenced by French
structural traditions as one might expect: Demoule (1999), Fleury-Ilett
(1993), Coudart (1999); see also special issue of Antiquity vol. 73
(1999). Logicism: J-C Gardin (1980, 2002).

Marxism: Giddens (1979) is still a clear summary of the key points of
classical Marxism; it is best to get a grasp of classical Marxism, and
better still to read Marx himself (McLellan (ed.) 1977), before moving
on to more recent strands of thought and to archaeological applications.
Bloch (1983) discusses parallel debates in anthropology. McGuire (1992)
is a sophisticated discussion. Childe is the most famous Marxist
archaeologist – he combined a materialist model close to traditional
Marxism with a diffusionary element. See Childe (1958, 1979), his
‘popular’ books (1936, 1942) and discussions in McNairn (1980) and
Trigger (1980). For Roman Italy and the West, see papers in Keay and
Terrenato (eds) 2001.

Ideology: Eagleton (1991) reviews the concept in general terms in an
accessible and entertaining way. The writings of Mark Leone and the work
of the Archaeology in Annapolis Project are the best examinations of
ideology in archaeology. Start with Leone (2005) and move on to 1984,
1988 and 1995, and Potter (1994). See also McGuire (1992, 2008), Miller
and Tilley (1984) and references for chapter 11.

‘Cognitive archaeology’: the best place to start is Renfrew (2007).
Renfrew and Zubrow (1994) styles itself a collection of papers
addressing cognition from a processual viewpoint, though in my view the
intellectual affiliations of the various contributors are more diverse.
Flannery and Marcus (1993, 1976) are important studies. Davidson and
Noble (1996); Brown (1997) is a review of a variety of approaches as
applied to the Eastern Woodlands of North America. Cognitive archaeology
and human evolution: an important general book, written by a historian,
is Smail (2008). Gamble (2007) is an important study that every educated
person should read; see also Mithen (1997, 2005). Many of the key papers
for both ‘cognitive’ and ‘postprocessual’ approaches are collated in
Whitley (1998). De Beaune, Coolidge and Wynn (eds) (2009), and Renfrew,
Frith and Malafouris (eds) (2009), are up-to-date collections of papers;
see also Coimbra and Dimitriadis (eds) (2008) and Mellars and Gibson
(1997).

Chapter 7 Postprocessual and Interpretive Archaeologies

The place to start is Hodder and Hutson (2003). Origins: the interview
with Ian Hodder in Hodder, Karlsson and Olsen (2008) explains something
of the origins of postprocessual archaeology. For problems of testing
and simulation, see Hodder and Orton (1976); Hodder’s
ethnoarchaeological work can be found in Hodder (1982b). Watson’s (1991)
article pointed out to me the striking parallels between Binford and
Hodder in their intellectual development.

Shanks and Tilley (1987 and 1992, first published 1988) had a huge
impact on publication. They are both difficult, but absolutely central
to any understanding of postprocessual archaeology. Social Theory has a
summary at the back. It is worth asking as you read: most of this was
hugely controversial when it was published: how much is controversial
now? McGuire (1993) is not just an article about Marxism, but offers a
useful survey of the relationship between different strands of
postprocessual thought and their academic and social context.

Hodder et al. (1995) is an excellent overview. Many of the key early
papers are reprinted in Whitley (1998). Hodder (1999) is good not just
on how to do interpretive archaeology, but on theorized descriptions of
what all archaeologists do in practice and how all those practices are
underpinned by theory, ‘interpretation at the trowel’s edge’.

Historical idealism: Collingwood’s Idea of History (1946) is his
definitive statement of historical idealism; his Autobiography (1939) is
shorter, more readable, and makes the context of his thinking much
clearer – and also offers a cogent example of the political dangers of
relativism.

Agency: the current interest in agency is not confined to
postprocessualism; just as cognition is attracting attention from
processual thinking, so is ‘the individual’ however defined. The origins
of concerns with agency are usually traced to Bourdieu (1977) and
Giddens (1979, 1984; see Held and Thompson 1989 for useful critique and
bibliography). I have always found the work of Erving Goffman (1959,
1971) far more useful and lucid and recommend it as an introduction to
the issues surrounding structure and action. A different approach to
agency and structure is taken from within the postprocessual tradition
through the idea of practice (Barrett 1994).

Dobres and Robb (eds) (2000) offer case studies from a variety of
theoretical perspectives, while a double issue of Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 12:3 and 12:4 discusses methods for
‘doing’ agency; the papers by Pauketat, Tomášková and Owoc are
particularly useful. Dornan (2002) offers conceptual clarification.
Dobres (2000) is an important study of agency and technology. Object
agency: Gosden (2005), drawing on Gell (1998); see also references to
materiality. For criticism of the limitations of agency as a model, see
Kristiansen (2004) and succeeding discussion.

Critics of postprocessualism: many early critiques were responses to
Hodder and Shanks and Tilley rather than to postprocessualism as such.
These included Earle and Preucel (1987); Kristiansen (1988); Patterson
(1990); Wylie (1992a); Binford (1987); Knapp (1996); Preucel (1995); and
papers in Yoffee and Sherratt (1993). R.A. Watson (1990, 1991)
criticizes Shanks and Tilley from the angle of positivism. Klejn (1993a,
b) gives a reactionary view; see the thoughtful response to Klejn by
Murray (1995). The debate between Thomas and Mithen is revealing (Thomas
1988 and 1991; Mithen 1991). Englestad (1991) and Smith (1994) are
critiques of postprocessualism from a feminist perspective.

For an idea of the variance between different postprocessual traditions,
compare Bapty and Yates (1990) and Baker, Taylor and Thomas (1990), two
contrasting volumes that arose from the same conference.

Case studies: Johnson (1996, 2002) are my attempts to apply a
postprocessual perspective to the archaeology of late medieval and early
modern England, areas still dominated by culture-historical rather than
processual approaches. Tilley (1991, 1994) apply textual and
phenomenological approaches respectively to data from prehistoric
Europe. McGuire and Saitta (1996) approach the traditional question
‘were 14th century Southwestern pueblos egalitarian or hierarchical?’
and show how an approach stressing ‘lived experience’ can move beyond
such either/or thinking (though they would not give their approach a
specifically postprocessual label). See also the succeeding debate in
American Antiquity 63: 2. Duke and Wilson (1995) looks at North American
Plains archaeology.

Phenomenology: Much of the phenomenological literature is quite dense.
The best place to start is the essay ‘Building, dwelling, thinking’ in
Ingold (2000), though Ingold’s thought is too diverse to be classified
simply as a phenomenologist. Thomas (2004) and Tilley (2004) have been,
rightly, profoundly influential; see Ingold (2005) on the latter, and
also Tilley (2008) and Bender et al. (2007). See also Gosden (1994);
Tilley (1994, 2008); Thomas (1999b). Ingold and Vergunst (eds) (2008) is
also engaging and profound. Method: Hamilton and Whitehouse (2006).
Criado Boado and Villock Vásquez (2000) explore the building of a method
through an ‘archaeology of perception’. Snead (2008) is a case study of
ancestral Pueblo landscapes.

There is also an extensive literature on the subjective experience and
construction of place, in tune with but not necessarily formally derived
from phenomenological concerns, for example Bradley (2000); Sturt
(2006); papers in special issue of Journal of Archaeological Method and
Theory, 11:1 and 11:2.

Criticism of phenomenology: Fleming (2006) is a generalized denigration;
Brück (2005) and Barrett and Ko (2009) are more sophisticated
evaluations. Ingold (2007) is a thoughtful discussion of issues of
‘materiality’; Whitley (2002) critiques the over-generalized use of
‘ancestors’; Insoll (2007) critiques the human/natural opposition. In
Johnson (2006), I explore the intellectual and practical context of
phenomenology.

Semiotics: Preucel (2006) is an exploration and archaeological
application of the ideas of Peirce.

Chapter 8 Archaeology, Gender and Identity

There is a plethora of books on feminism in general. Humm (1992) is an
anthology that gets across the variety of perspectives; Harding’s paper
in that volume points to debates between different feminist philosophies
of science. McNay (1992) is a powerful anti-essentialist account of
feminist concerns. I’ve avoided going through the topic of sexist
language; for the basic arguments see Spender (1980). Moore (1988)
explores the background issues in anthropology with clarity and is a
useful synthesis of anthropological thought.

Studies specific to archaeology: the most up-to-date assessment is
Conkey (2007), which also lays down important challenges for the
practice of theory in general; it could be read in conjunction with
Nelson (ed.) (2007). Gero and Conkey (1991) is a definitive collection
of papers with a lucid introduction to the issues. Among the best papers
are Hastorf, Gero, Wylie and Handsman. Conkey and Gero (1997) is a
useful review of the literature. Hays-Gilpin and Whitley (1998) is an
excellent collection of significant reprinted articles. Wright (1996),
Claassen (1992), Walde and Willows (1991), duCros and Smith (1993) and
Balme and Beck (1995) are other edited collections. Franklin (2001) on a
Black feminist-inspired archaeology. Karlisch (ed.) (1997) and Merterns
(1993) on feminist approaches in German archaeology.

Issues of gendered archaeological practice: Gero (1985, 1991); Wylie
(1993b); Hutson (2002) on citation practices; Moser (1996). Tomášková
(2007) argues for greater feminist reflection on and transformation of
field practice, with specific reference to mapping. History of women in
archaeology: Diaz-Andreu and Sørensen (1998); Joyce (1994), Claassen
(1994). Career issues: various articles in Reyman (1992) and du Cros and
Smith (1995); Nelson et al. (1994); Wylie (1993); Gero (1985, 1988). Two
websites provide a focus for British and North American women
archaeologists: http://britishwomenarchaeologists.org.uk/index.xhtml and
http://www.saa.org/ForMembers/InterestGroups/tabid/129/Default.aspx

Archaeology of ‘women’: Ehrenberg (1989) weds a traditional
archaeological format to a search for ‘women’. A famous study is
Gimbutas (1989, 1991); most feminists would distance themselves from
Gimbutas’s arguments; see Russell (1993) for a discussion of the
underlying issues.

‘Processual’ approaches to gender: Brumbach and Jarvenpa (1997) use ‘a
gender-resource mapping approach’ in which gender is seen as a variable
within a more general ‘subsistence settlement model’. Again,
Mobley-Tanaka (1997) develops a gendered view of pueblo architecture
within a framework of ‘social stress’. Evolutionary approaches: Hager
(1997); McClure (2007) combines cultural inheritance theory with a
gendered analysis. Pyburn (2003) looks at gender issues in the ‘rise of
civilization’.

Case studies (many of these could be put under the ‘postprocessual’
subheading): Gilchrist (1993); Hodge McCoid and McDermott (1996). Gender
in historical archaeology: Wall (1994); Gilchrist (1993); Spector
(1993); Yentsch (1991). Seifert (1991) is an excellent edited
collection. Tomášková (2006) and Robin (2006) are important case studies
that show how gender permeates other historical categories of analysis.

Sørensen (2000) argues for a clear distinction between ‘gender
archaeology’ and feminist concerns. Anthony (1995) criticizes
‘eco-feminist’ approaches though most feminists would disavow these
approaches in any case. Nicholas (1994) makes pertinent comments on the
Goddess myth. Gero and Conkey (1997), writing from a feminist
standpoint, make some critical comments, implying that much gender
archaeology has failed to take the feminist critique sufficiently
seriously. Greater ‘feminist theorizing and engagement’ is also urged by
Englestad (2007), a theme that is also taken up by a special issue of
the Journal of Archaeologcial Method and Theory 14.

Archaeology and identity: Insoll (ed.) (2007); Casella and Fowler
(2005); Immonen (2005) for the case study of the Hanse. Hinton (2005),
though it does not wear its theory on its sleeve, is a nuanced study of
material culture and identity in the Middle Ages. Revell (2009) explores
‘Roman’ cultural identities. A special double issue of the Journal of
Material Culture examines isues of identity as they relate to space and
place: 11:1 and 11:2.

Masculinity: Johnson (2002); Wilkie (2010). Nottveit (2006) is a good
case study on medieval daggers and masculine identity. Childhood: Sofaer
(ed.) (2000); see also the new Journal of Childhood in the Past. Race:
Orser (2004); Franklin (2001). Sexuality: Meskell (1999) argues that
even ‘sex’ is culturally constructed. Voss (2008a) is a useful review of
archaeological studies of sexuality, while Meskell (2002) is an
important case study. Queer archaeologies: Dowson (ed.) (2000).
Theoretical approaches to the body: Sofaer (2006). Crossland (2009) is a
fascinating case study. For an archaeology of disability, see Hubert
(ed.) (2000). An important critique of the social model of disability,
and a readable introduction to disability studies, is Shakespeare
(2006).

Performativity: Judith Butler is the key thinker, though her writing
style is not easy. Butler (1990) and (1993) are classics that underpin
much of the recent work on identity.

Chapter 9 Archaeology and Cultural Evolution

Pluciennik (2005) is an excellent, highly critical general introduction
to social evolution. Chapman 2003 is the most authoritative recent book
on social complexity. Yoffee (2005) is a robust ‘apology’ for cultural
evolution, building in diversity to state studies. Peregrine (2001) is a
stout defence of a unilinear and cross-cultural approach to social
evolution. Trigger (1997) reviews the history of social evolutionary
ideas. For a sample of current ‘state of the art’ approaches see Kohring
and Wynne-Jones (eds) (2007).

Recent reviews of the literature include Stanish (2001) for state
societies in south America and Cobb (2003) for Mississsippian chiefdoms.
Smith (2004) discusses ancient state economies.

Earle (2000): cross-cultural survey of analyses of property within a
politicaleconomic framework. Beck et al. (2007) is a good example of a
combination of structural and agent-centred analysis. Rousseau (2006)
also combines human agency and evolutionary theory. Again, Ensor (2000)
stresses the importance of daily life or modo de vida. Segmentation and
war: Kelly (2000b), Flannery and Marcus (2003). Colonies: Hurst and Owen
(2005).

Evolution of social complexity: a good overview of Americanist work is
provided by Baines and Yoffee (2000), Crumley (1995), Wason (1994), Fash
(1994), Kowalewski (1990), Kolb (1994) and Spencer (1997). Smith (2003),
one of my favourite books, is a model study of how a different range of
concerns from political economy can be integrated within a generalizing
understanding of the ‘political landscapes’ of state societies.
Criticisms of social evolution and a refined approach attempting to
define and measure ‘inequality’ and ‘heterogeneity’ in societies is
outlined by McGuire (1983). The studies in Part IV of Preucel and Hodder
(1996) give a good flavour of the diversity of approaches to
socipolitical complexity.

Latin American social archaeology: Lumbreras (2005) and Bate (1998).
English discussions can be found in Patterson (1994); see also the
response to Patterson (Oyuela-Caycedo et al. 1997) and Patterson’s
response in turn, and McGuire (1993). Drawing on its terminology, Ensor
(2000) stresses the importance of modo de vida. See also Oyuela-Caycedo
(1994).

Cahokia: Pauketat (2001) uses the Mississippian as a case study in
proposing a ‘new paradigm’ of ‘historical processualism’. Holt (2009) on
Cahokia as a ‘theatre state’; also Brown (2006) and comments in Beck et
al. (2007).

Criticisms of cultural evolution in archaeology: Yoffee (1979); Trigger
(1984, 1997); Shanks and Tilley (1987); Patterson (1995); McGuire
(1992). Problems with chiefdoms: Pauketat (2007).

My concluding comments on phenomenology and cultural evolution share
ground with some elements of Whitley (2002), particularly his
identification of ‘ancestors’ with processual and Marxist models.

Chapter 10 Archaeology and Darwinian Evolution

As I also feel with strands of theory such as Marxism, it is advisable
for the student to grasp something of the structure of Darwinian thought
before asking how to apply it to archaeology. For an introduction to
Darwin and discussion of recent Darwinian thought, the two major
thinkers are Steven Jay Gould (1989, 1997, 2002) and Richard Dawkins
(1989). Both write accessibly and have been extremely influential; Gould
in particular has stressed the role of contingency and historical
accident in evolution, and has played an indirect role in the
‘softening’ of many evolutionary models in archaeology. I would add
Richerson and Boyd (2005) as an accessible and compelling account of
coevolutionary theory. The subtitle ‘Darwin’s dangerous idea’ is taken
from Dennett (1995).

Shennan 2008 is a good bibliographic review of the archaeological
literature, complemented for North America by Clark (2003). Shennan
(2002) is an important statement of a different approach to evolution –
note that there is almost no reference to the ‘Dunnell school’ in this
book. See also the critique of Shennan in Kristiansen (2004).

The style-function dichotomy: Brantingham (2007). Bentley and Shennan
(2003) is a good case study in Darwinian approaches to cultural
transmission. Costly signalling theory: McGuire and Hildebrandt (2005).
See also subsequent exchanges in American Antiquity 72:2.

Selectionist archaeology: O’Brien (ed.) (1996) is a good place to start,
and includes much of Dunnell’s writings. See also Dunnell (1980, 1989);
Rindos (1989). Teltser (1995) is a collection of papers dealing with
methodological issues raised by selectionist approaches. Barton and
Clark (1997) contains some good papers. In particular, Fraser Neiman is
a lucid and enthusiastic proponent of such models (1997). Other recent
collections include Maschner (1996), O’Brien (1996), Arnold (1996). For
the argument that culture history came close to a Darwinian approach,
see Lyman and O’Brien (1997a, 2006).

Case studies: Falk (1997) on the brain. Arnold et al. (1997) versus Raab
and Larson (1997): two contrasting views of the interpretation of the
same set of environmental data. Larson et al. (1996): compare with
McGuire and Saitta (1996), both parties working on similar material.

Fabian (1998) is an edited volume of accessible articles that gives a
good idea of the very wide variation in contemporary evolutionary
thought. Ridley (1997) is a good introductory ‘reader’. For a critical
approach see Midgley (1985) and Giddens (1984).

Optimal foraging theory: see Mithen for an individual-based approach to
cultural ecology; also the debate between Mithen and Thomas (Thomas
1988, 1991; Mithen 1991). Mithen (1989) on ecological approaches to art;
compare with other studies in the same volume. Risk: Halstead and O’Shea
(1989).

Case studies: Gamble (2007) is to my mind the best in its field. Larson
and Michaelsen (1990) and Larson et al. (1996) see Anasazi cultural
development as a response to population growth and climatic
deterioration; see reply by Allison (1996) focusing on whether their
chronology works. Contrast also with McGuire and Saitta in the same
volume. A variety of work balances ‘social’ and ‘ecological’ approaches
in a consideration of environment; for example, Hastorf and Johanessen
(1991) and Schortman and Urban (1992). See also studies in Crumley
(1994). ‘Sexy handaxe theory’: Kohn and Mithen (1999); Machin (2008);
Mithen (2008). Neiman (2008) is a fascinating study from historical
archaeology.

For the nineteenth-century cultural context of Darwin, see Beer (1996)
and Smith (2009).

Schiffer (1996) argues for a rapprochement between behavioural and
evolutionary archaeology.

Chapter 11 Archaeology and History

Current approaches to Classical archaeology: Morris (2004), Alcock and
Osborne (2007). Hingley (2005) looks at Roman archaeology.

Moreland (2006) is an authoritative summary of current thinking on the
relationship between archaeology and texts; see also Moreland (2001) and
Tabaczyñski (1993). O’Keeffe (2007) discusses the relationship between
archaeology and art history; in Johnson 2007, I discuss the relationship
between archaeology and landscape history. Special Issues of
Archaeologia Polona 44 (2006) has a series of papers on the relationship
between archaeology, anthropology and history. Malina and Vasicek (1990)
is a powerful statement of archaeology as a historical discipline, and a
useful summary in English of many of the concerns of central and eastern
European archaeology.

Early medieval Europe: Hills (2003), Halsall (1997), Staecker (2005) and
comments in the next issue, Hedeagar (2006) and responses in succeeding
issue.

Annales school: Le Goff and Nora (1985) is a collection of varied
papers, ranging from (early) work on climate, demography and
quantitative methods to (later) studies of ideologies and mental
structures. Braudel (1980) is a collection of his papers; see also Le
Roy Ladurie (1974, 1978). Annales archaeology: Knapp (1992) is the best
collection of Annales-influenced papers, the best of which is Duke
(1992), though Moreland’s paper in this volume argues convincingly
against the utility of Annales thinking for archaeology. Chartier (1994)
is the best example of his work.

The ‘linguistic turn’: Joyce (1995); Easthope (1993). The work of Hayden
White (1987) and Dominic LaCapra (1987) has been central in the critique
of history as a narrative: see Jenkins (1995, 1997). Hunt (1989) is a
useful introduction to the New Cultural History. For a critique, Evans
(2nd edn 2000) is a passionately written, influential, lucid
condemnation of postmodern forms of ‘theory’ in history. The responses
of Evans’s critics, and his response in turn, have been gathered
together by the Institute of Historical Research
(http://www.history.ac.uk/discourse/index.xhtml, accessed 10.10.2008).

‘Processual’ approaches to historical archaeology include South
(1977a,b), Binford (1977). Brumfiel (2003) explores the interfaces
between history, archaeology and anthropology within North American
traditions; see also Deagan (1991). Deagan (1983) for the St Augustine
project: an excellent case study is Voss’ (2008b) reformulation of
gender, race and labour.

Deetz’s work, particularly his application of structuralism to
historical archaeology, has had a huge influence. His simply written yet
theoretically sophisticated application of structuralism to historical
archaeology, In Small Things Forgotten (1977), remains my favourite
archaeology book. See also Deetz (1988) and Yentsch and Beaudry (1992).

The historical archaeology of capitalism is a huge field. A few
introductory references are Leone (2005); Orser (1996); Johnson (1996);
Delle (1998).

‘Contact period’ studies embody a wide range of approaches: compare
Leonard (1993) with Turnbaugh (1993) in the same volume. Contrasts
between colonial and Indigenous interpretations are discussed in Anawalt
(1996) and Crowell (1997). Oral traditions and ethnohistory: Damm (2005)
and comments in succeeding issues. Case studies: Bergman (2006) relates
archaeology to Saami ethnohistory; see response by Knutson (2007).
Hrobat (2007) looks at oral tradition, memory and landscape. David et
al. (2002) is a model case study.

Case studies of historical archaeology: Little (2007) is a good place to
start. Then Leone (2005) and Voss (2008c). McGuire and Paynter (1991),
especially the paper by Yentsch; Kepecs and Kolb (1997); and Tarlow and
West (1998). Yentsch (1994) is a classic study of historical
archaeology. Lightfoot et al. (1998) is a fascinating study of practices
and identities. Gilchrist (1993) is a study of medieval nunneries. See
also Wall (1994), Spector (1993).

African historical archaeology: Schmidt and Walz (2007); Hall (2000).
Schrire (1995) is a powerful and moving account of historical
archaeology in South Africa, for which see also Lucas and Hall (2006).

Bodiam Castle: Coulson (1992), Johnson (2002). Ronnes (1999), Hansson
(2006) and Virágos discuss comparable issues for other areas of Europe.
Platt (2007) is a restatement of traditional views; make your own mind
up.

Chapter 12 Archaeology, Politics and Culture

The postmodern condition: Lyotard (1984). Lyotard, rarely among
postmodern thinkers, writes in an accessible and elegant way. Rorty
(1989) also writes accessibly. Harvey (1989) is a classic review and
critique of postmodernism from a Marxist perspective. See also Rorty and
Engel (2007), and Hollinger (1994). Postmodernism in other disciplines:
Jencks (1977: architecture), Gregory (1994: geography), Jenkins (1995,
1997), White (1987) and Hunt (1989: history; Evans (2000) for critique).
No discussion of postmodernism would be complete without a discussion of
the ‘Sokal hoax’: see Sokal and Bricmont (1998), and Sokal (2008).
Ashman and Baringer (2000) contains a variety of responses to the hoax.

Foucault has an undeserved reputation as a difficult writer. It’s best
to take him on his own terms; he frequently writes in a rhetorical
rather than analytical style, and frequently uses extended metaphors
(most famously that of archaeology itself). Again, Foucault refuses to
be pinned down to a set of concrete causes or a cut-and-dried ‘model’.
Read some of his books on tangible issues such as Madness and
Civilisation and Discipline and Punish before moving on to his more
methodological works such as An Archaeology of Knowledge and The Order
of Things.

Archaeology and politics: parts VII and VII of Preucel and Hodder
(1996), especially Gero and Root and Trigger. Fawcett et al. (eds)
(2008) contains a range of recent work. See also Hinsley (1989). Eller
(1997) is a concise and lucid general introduction to the issues around
‘multiculturalism’. Bender (1998) is a passionate account of the
politics of Stonehenge. Jones (1997) is a fascinating account of past
interpretations of Chichen Itza. McGuire (2008) is a restatement of a
Marxist view and a fascinating case study.

Archaeology and Indigenous knowledge: start with Atalay (2006) and
Lippert (2006). Wilcox (2010) is an important discussion of NAGPRA which
has influenced my presentation of the issues here. Tuhiwai Smith (1999)
explores background issues. Watkins (2000) concentrates on
ethical/legislative issues; see also Watkins (2003). Ferguson (1996) is
a review of the literature on Native Americans and archaeology, now a
little out of date. Kennewick Man: Thomas (2000), Burke et al. (eds)
(2008). Lippert (2005) is an important move beyond simplistic and
polarized issues of ‘ownership’. López Austin and López Luján (2001) is
a powerful account of Mexico’s Indigenous past. Conkey (2005) discusses
the intersection between feminist and Indigenous archaeologies: see also
ensuing discussion. Indigenous archaeology in Australia: McNiven and
Russell (2005), who recommend ‘partnership research’ beyond community
archaeology, and the archaeology of oral tradition, as the way forward.
McGhee (2008) is a controversial rebuttal of ‘Indigenous archaeology’;
as I write responses in future issues of American Antiquity are
forthcoming. Blain and Wallis (2004, 2007) on modern Pagans.

Nationalism, for obvious reasons, is a major preoccupation with European
archaeologists: Hamilakis and Yalouri (1996); Atkinson et al. (1996).
Diaz-Andreu and Champion (1996) and Kohl and Fawcett (1996) are good
collections of case studies, though see Hamilakis (1996) and Lampeter
Archaeology Workshop (1997) for an effective critique of the latter.
Cooper et al. (1995) and Walsh (1992) discuss the theoretical basis of
‘heritage management’ and cultural identity in Britain. Curta (2001) and
Piontek (2006) discuss archaeology and Slavic identity; Piotrowska
(1997-8) is an important discussion of Biskupin. Hamilakis (2007) is an
important study, moving beyond an exclusive concern with nationalism.
Nationalism and archaeology in Iran: Abdi (2001). Zimbabwe: Fontein
(2006). Abu El-Haj (2001) is a scholarly and important study of Israeli
archaeology.

Archaeology under the Nazis: Arnold (1990) and Arnold and Hassmann
(1995); Härke and Wolfram (1993); Jones et al. (1996); Schulke (2000);
Legendre et al. (2007). Diaz-Andreu (1993) on archaeology under Franco.

Community archaeology: Marshall (ed.) (2002) is an important collection
of papers, especially Moser et al. (2002). The Annapolis Project is an
excellent case study in building a critical public awareness. See Leone
(2005); also Potter (1994). See also Sabloff (2008). Schmidt (2001)
discusses theoretical issues in museums interpretation and compares the
Anglo scene with Germany

Postcolonial issues: Gosden (2001); Chakrabarti (1998) on India; Andah
(1995), Hall (2000) and Shepherd (2002) on Africa. Cultural hybridity:
Falck (2003). Wilson (1999) is a fascinating series of studies of
cultural contact. Hingley (2005) is a postcolonial view of Roman
archaeology. Silliman (2005) discusses native North American archaeology
and argues for seeing it the period as ‘colonial’ rather than one of
‘contact’. Harrison (2003) explores mimesis in knapped bottle glass
artefacts. India: Chakrabarti (2003), Pratap (2009). The Americas:
Bernal (1980); Lumbreras (2005); Politis (2001, 2002); Politis and
Alberti (1999); various in Funari et al. (eds) (2005). Scheinsohn (2003)
argues that the dominance of North American scholarship has obscured
South American diversity with regard to the archaeological record for
hunter-gathers.

African burial ground: the National Parks Service website has a brief
account and links to the final reports
(http://www.nps.gov/afbg/historyculture/index.htm). On wider issues of
African-American archaeology, see Ferguson (1992), Blakey (1995) and
Singleton (1985, 1995, and references therein). On wider issues of the
misuse of genetics, see Pluciennik (1996); Mirza and Dungworth (1995).

Relativism: Trigger (1989); Wylie (1992b); Brumfiel (1996). Fotiadis
(1994) is a restatement that this claimed objectivity is illusory. Davis
(1992), Gosden (1992) and Saitta (1992) offer thoughtful discussion of
related aspects of this debate. Lampeter Archaeology Workshop (1997)
offers a critical response.

World Archaeological Congress and social justice issues: Smith and Ward
(2000) discuss the social background. Ucko (1989) is entertaining, but
should be read with critical caution.

Issues of representation and performativity: Shanks (1992); Shanks and
Pearson (2001). Moser (1996) discusses issues of visual representation.

Chapter 13 Conclusion: The Future of Theory

It is worth comparing consensual ‘position statements’ on aims and
priorities for archaeology, for example that of Nordic TAG
(http://www.aal.au.dk/nt/enkeltesessions/priorities, accessed
10.10.2008), the Archaeology Benchmarking Statement laying out a
‘benchmark’ for undergraduate teaching in the UK
(http://www.qaa.ac.uk/academicinfrastructure/benchmark/statements/Archaeology.asp,
accessed 10.10.2008), and its Australian counterpart
(www.australianarchaeologicalassociation.com.au/files/by_degrees.pdf,
accessed 23.08.2009). Critical comment on an earlier version of the UK
Benchmarking statement can be found in Rainbird and Hamilakis (2001).
Patrik’s (1985) influential article argues for the coexistence of
different schools of thought centred around different definitions of
what constitutes the archaeological record.

The current state: an extremely useful volume is Holtorf and Karlsson
(2000), which in its use of commentaries and replies by the author gives
a good flavour of diversity across the globe. Funari et al. (eds) (2005)
and Kobyliñski (ed.) (2001) are also useful in this context. ‘World
theory’: Schmidt and Patterson (1995); Ucko (1995); issues of
Archaeologies, published by the World Archaeological Congress.

Reflexive approaches to fieldwork: Berggrren and Hodder (2003); Chadwick
(2003); Lucas (2001); Yarrow (2003); Holtorf (2002); Moser (2007). Much
of this literature also contributes to the study of materiality and
artfeact biography. See also the extensive literature on the Çatalhöyük
project, including Hodder (1999) and http://www.catalhoyuk.com/.
Tomáskóva (2007) explores field practices, particularly mapmaking, from
a feminist standpoint.

Materiality: the proposition that things create people as much as people
create things is set out most clearly by Gosden (2005). For a range of
approaches, see Skibo and Schiffer (2008), DeMarrais et al. (eds)
(2004), Brumfiel (2003), Knappett (2005), Meskell (2004), Meskell (ed.)
(2005), Olsen (2003). Herva and Ikäheimo (2002) on rock art and
materiality.

Symmetrical archaeology: Latour has been especially influential; I find
his case studies (for example the Berliner Key essay in Graves-Brown
(ed.) 2000 and the first part of Latour 1987) more compelling than his
more general arguments, for example Latour (2005). Webmoor and Witmore
(2008) set out the case for a critique of ‘the social’, drawing on Gell
(1992, 1998) and Latour (2005). Witmore (2006); Webmoor (2007);
Gonzáles-Ruibal (2006) and responses in succeeding issues; papers in
Gonzáles-Ruibal (ed.) (2007); papers in World Archaeology 39:4.

Memory: Jan Assman’s work (2006) is especially important. Van Dyke and
Alcock (eds) (2003), Jones (2007), Campbell (2006) for a Polynesian case
study. Temporality: Lucas (2005), Harding (2005).

Bibliography

Abdi, K. 2001. Nationalism, politics and the development of archaeology
in Iran. American Journal of Archaeology 105: 51–76.

Abu El-Haj, N. 2001. Facts on the Ground: Archaeological Practice and
Territorial Self-Fashioning in Israeli Society. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press.

Alcock, L. 1976. Arthur’s Britain: History and Archaeology, ad 367–634.
London, Penguin.

Alcock, S. 2002. Archaeologies of the Greek Past: Landscape, Monuments,
and Memories. Cambridge, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Alcock, S. and Osborne, R. (eds) 2007. Classical Archaeology. Oxford,
Blackwell.

Allison, J.R. 1996. Comments on the impacts of changing variability and
population growth on virgin Anasazi cultural development. American
Antiquity 61(2): 414–18.

Anawalt, P.R. 1996. Aztec knotted and netted capes: colonial
interpretations versus Indigenous primary data. Ancient Mesoamerica 7:
187–206.

Andah, B.W. 1995. European encumbrances to the development of relevant
theory in African archaeology. In Ucko (ed.), 96–109.

Andersson, A.-C., Campbell, F., Gillberg, A., Hansonn, J., Jensen, O.W.,
Karlsson, H. and Rolöff, M. (eds) 1997. The Kaleidoscopical Past:
Proceedings of the 5th Nordic TAG Meeting, Gothenburg 1997. Gotarc Serie
C: Arkeologiska Skrifter. Dept of Archaeology, University of Gothenburg.

Andrén, A. 1998. Between Artefacts and Texts: Historical Archaeology in
Global Perspective. New York, Plenum.

Anthony, D.W. 1995. Nazi and eco-feminist prehistories: ideology and
empiricism in Indo-European archaeology. In Kohl and Fawcett (eds),
82–97.

Arnold, B. 1990. The past as propaganda: totalitarian archaeology in
Nazi Germany. Antiquity 64: 464–78. Reprinted in Hodder and Preucel
(eds), 549–69.

Arnold, B. and Gibson, D.B. (eds) 1995. Celtic Chiefdom, Celtic State.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Arnold, B. and Hassmann, H. 1996. Archaeology in Nazi Germany: the
legacy of the Faustian bargain. In Kohl and Fawcett (eds), 70–81.

Arnold, D.E. 1995. Ceramic Theory and Cultural Process. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Arnold, J.E. (ed.) 1996. Emergent Complexity: The Evolution of
Intermediate Societies. Archaeological Series 9. Ann Arbor,
International Monographs in Prehistory.

Arnold, J.E., Colten, R.H. and Pletka, S. 1997. Contexts of cultural
change in southern California. American Antiquity 62(2): 300–18.

Ashman, K.M. and Barringer, P.S. (eds) 2000. After the Science Wars:
Science and the Study of Science. London, Routledge.

Ashmore, W., Lippert, D. and Mills, B. (eds) 2010. Voices of American
Archaeology: 75th Anniversary of the SAA. SAA Press.

Assmann, J. 2006. Religion and Cultural Memory: Ten Studies. Stanford,
Stanford University Press.

Atalay, S. 2006. Indigenous archaeology as decolonizing practice.
American Indian Quarterly 30(3): 280–310.

Atkinson, J.A., Banks, I. and O’Sullivan, J. 1996. Nationalism and
Archaeology: Scottish Archaeological Forum. Glasgow, Cruithne Press.

Auel, J. 1980. Clan of the Cave Bear. London, Hodder and Stoughton.

Baines, J. and Yoffee, N. 2000. Order, legitimacy and wealth: setting
the terms. In Richards, J.E. and Van Buren, M., Order, Legitimacy, and
Wealth in Ancient States. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Balme, J. and Beck, W. (eds) 1995. Gendered Archaeology: The Second
Australian Women in Archaeology Conference. Research Papers in
Archaeology and Natural History 26. Canberra, Australian National
University.

Baker, F., Taylor, S. and Thomas, J. (eds) 1990. Writing the Past in the
Present. Lampeter, St David’s University College.

Bapty, I. and Yates, T. (eds) 1990. Archaeology After Structuralism:
Post-Structuralism and the Practice of Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Barrett, J.C. 1994. Fragments From Antiquity: An Archaeology of Social
Life in Britain, 2900–1200 BC. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Barrett, J. and Ko, I. 2009, forthcoming. A phenomenology of landscape:
a crisis in British landscape archaeology? Journal of Social
Archaeology.

Barton, C.M. and Clark, G.A. (eds) 1997. Rediscovering Darwin:
Evolutionary Theory in Archaeological Explanation. Papers of the
American Anthropological Association 7. Arlington, American
Anthropological Association.

Bate, L.F. 1998. El Proceso de Investigación en Arqueología. Barcelona,
Ediciones Crítica.

Baudrillard, J. 1995. The Gulf War Did Not Take Place. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.

Bayman, J.M. 2002. Hohokam craft economies and the materialization of
poer. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 9(1): 69–95.

Beck, L.A. (ed.) 1995. Regional Approaches to Mortuary Analysis. New
York, Plenum Press.

Beck, R., Bolender, D., Brown, J.A. and Earle, T.K. 2007. Eventful
archaeology: the space and place of structural transformation. Current
Anthropology 48(6): 833–60.

Beer, G. 1996. Open Fields: Science in Cultural Encounter. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.

Bell, J.A. 1994. Reconstructing Prehistory: Scientific Method in
Archaeology. Philadelphia, Temple University Press.

Benavides, O.H. 2001. Returning to the course: social archaeology as
Latin American philosophy. Latin American Antiquity 12(4): 355–70.

Bender, B. 1998. Stonehenge: Making Space. Oxford, Berg.

Bender, B., Hamilton, S. and Tilley, C. 2007. Stone Worlds: Narrative
and Reflexivity in Landscape Archaeology. Walnut Creek, Left Coast
Press.

Bentley, A. and Shennan, S.J. 2003. Cultural transmission and stochastic
network growth. American Antiquity 68(3): 459–85.

Bentley, R.A. 2006. Academic copying, archaeology and the English
language. Antiquity 80: 196–281.

Bergman, I. 2006. Indigenous time, colonial history: Sami conceptions of
time and ancestry and the role of relics in cultural reproduction.
Norwegian Archaeological Review 39: 151–61.

Berggren, A. and Hodder, I. 2003. Social practice, method, and some
problems of field archaeology. American Antiquity 68(3): 421–34.

Bernal, I. 1980. A History of Mexican Archaeology. London, Thames and
Hudson.

Bernbeck, R. 1997 Theorien in der Archäologie. Tübingen, Francke Verlag.

Bernstein, R.J. (ed.) 1985. Philosophy and Modernity. Cambridge, Polity
Press.

Bettinger, R.L. and Eerkens, J. 1997. Evolutionary implications of
metrical variation in Great Basin projectile points. In Barton and Clark
(eds), 177–91.

Biehl, P.F., Gramsch, A. and Marciniak, A. (eds) 2002. Archaeologies of
Europe: History, Methods, Theories. Münster, Waxmann.

Binford, L.R. 1962. Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity 11:
198–200.

Binford, L.R. 1964. A consideration of archaeological research design.
American Antiquity 29: 425–41.

Binford, L.R. 1967. Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use of analogy in
archaeological reasoning. American Antiquity 32(1): 1–12.

Binford, L.R. 1972. An Archaeological Perspective. New York, Seminar
Press.

Binford, L.R. 1977. Historical archaeology: is it historical or
archaeological? In Ferguson (ed.), 13–22. Reprinted in Binford 1983b,
169–78.

Binford, L.R. 1978. Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology. New York, Academic Press.

Binford, L.R. 1980. Willow smoke and dog’s tails: hunter-gatherer
settlement systems and archaeological site formation. American Antiquity
45: 4–20. Reprinted in Hodder and Preucel (eds), 39–60.

Binford, L.R. 1981a. Behavioural archaeology and the Pompeii premise.
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 37(3): 195–208.

Binford, L.R. 1981b. Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. New York,
Academic Press.

Binford, L.R. 1983. Working at Archaeology. New York, Academic Press.

Binford, L.R. 1983a. In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological
Record. London, Thames and Hudson.

Binford, L.R. 1987. Data, relativism and archaeological science. Man 22:
391–404.

Binford, L.R. 2001. Constructing Frames of Reference: An Analytical
Method for Archaeological Theory Building Using Hunter-Gatherer and
Environmental Data Sets. Berkeley, University of California Press.

Binford, L.R. 2002. In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological
Record. Berkeley, University of California Press. Second edition.

Blain, J. and Wallis, R.J. 2004. Sacred sites, contested rights:
contemporary pagan engagements with the past. Journal of Material
Culture 9(3): 237–61.

Blain, J. and Wallis, R.J. 2007. Sacred Sites, Contested Rights: Pagan
Engagements with Archaeological Monuments. Chichester, Sussex Academic
Press.

Blakey, M.L. 1995. Race, nationalism, and the Afrocentric past. In
Making Alternative Histories: The Practice of Archaeology and History in
Non-Western Settings. Santa Fe, School of American Research, 213–28.

Blakey, M.L. and Rankin-Hill, L.M. 2004. The New York African Burial
Ground Skeletal Biology Final Report Volume I. Electronic document,
http://www.nps.gov/afbg/historyculture/index.htm

Blanton, R., Feinman, G.M., Kowalewski, S.A. and Peregrine, P.N. 1996. A
dualprocessual theory for the evolution of Mesoamerican civilization.
Current Anthropology 37(1): 1–14.

Bloch, M. 1983. Marxism and Anthropology. Oxford, Clarendon Press.

Boivin, N. and Owoc, M.A. (eds) 2004. Spils, Stones and Symbols:
Cultural Perceptions of the Mineral World. London, UCL Press.

Borofsky, R. 2002. The four subfields: anthropologists as mythmakers.
American Anthropologist 104: 463–80.

Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Bradbury, M. 1987. Mensonge. London, Andre Deutsch.

Bradley, R. 1993. Altering the Earth: The Origins of Monuments in
Britain and Continental Europe. Edinburgh, Society of Antiquaries of
Scotland.

Bradley, R. 2000. An Archaeology of Natural Places. London, Routledge.

Bradley, R. and Edmonds, M. 1993. Interpreting the Axe Trade: Production
and Exchange in Neolithic Britain. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Brantingham, P.J. 2007. A unified evolutionary model of archaeological
style and function based on the Price Equation. American Antiquity
72(3): 395–416.

Braudel, F. 1980. On History. London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Brown, J.A. 1997. The archaeology of ancient religion in the Eastern
Woodlands. Annual Review of Anthropology 26: 465–85.

Brown, J.A. 2006 Where’s the power in mound building? An Eastern
Woodlands perspective. In Butler, B.M. and Welch, P.D. (eds.),
Leadership and Polity in Mississippian Society, Occasional Paper No. 33,
Center for Archeological Investigations, Carbondale, Southern Illinois
University 197–213.

Brown, M.F. 2008. Cultural relativism 2.0. Current Anthropology 49(3):
363–83.

Brück, J. 2005. Experiencing the past? The development of
phenomenological archaeology in British prehistory. Archaeological
Dialogues 12(1): 47–72.

Brück, J. 2007. Landscape politics and colonial identities: Sir Richard
Colt Hoare’s tour of Ireland, 1806. Journal of Social Archaeology 7:
224–49.

Brumbach, H.J. and Jarvenpa, R. 1997. Ethnoarchaeology of subsistence
space and gender: a subarctic Dene case. American Antiquity 62(3):
414–36.

Brumfiel, E.M. 1992. Distinguished lecture in archaeology: breaking and
entering the ecosystem – gender, class and faction steal the show.
American Anthropologist 94: 551–67.

Brumfiel, E.M. 1996. The quality of tribute cloth: the place of evidence
in archaeological argument. American Antiquity 61(3): 453–62.

Brumfiel, E. 2003. It’s a material world: history, artifacts and
anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology 32, 205–23.

Brumfiel, E. and Earle, T.K. (eds) 1987. Specialisation, Exchange and
Complex Societies. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Brumfiel, E.M. and Fox, J.W. (eds) 1994. Factional Competition and
Political Development in the New World. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Burke, H., Smith, C., Lippert, D., Watkins, J. and Zimmerman, L. (eds)
2008. Kennewic Man: Perspectives on the Ancient One. Walnut Creek, Left
Coast Press.

Burtt, F. 1987. ‘Man the hunter’: bias in children’s archaeology books.
Archaeological Review from Cambridge 6(2): 157–74.

Butler, J. 1990. Gender Trouble. London, Routledge.

Butler, J. 1993. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’.
London, Routledge.

Campbell, M. 2006. Memory and monumentality in the Rarotongan landscape.
Antiquity 80: 102–117.

Carey, J. 1992. The Intellectuals and the Masses: Pride and Prejudice
among the Literary Intelligentsia, 1880–1939. London, Faber.

Carneiro, R. 2003. Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Critical
History. Boulder, Westview Press.

Carr, C. and Neitzel, J.E. 1995. Style, Society and Person:
Archaeological and Ethnological Perspectives. New York, Plenum.

Cartwright, J. 2000. Evolution and Human Behaviour: Darwinian
Perspectives on Human Nature. Cambridge, MIT Press.

Casella, E. and Fowler, C. (eds) 2005. The Archaeology of Plural and
Changing Identities: Beyond Identification. New York, Kluwer.

Chadwick, A. 2003. Post-processualism, professionalisation, and
archaeological methodologies. Archaeological Dialogues 10: 97–117.

Chakrabarti, D. 1998. Colonial Indology: Sociopolitics of the Ancient
Indian Past. New Delhi, Munshiram Manoharlal.

Chakrabarti, D. 2003. Archaeology in the Third World: A History of
Indian Archaelogy since 1947. New Delhi, Printworld.

Chapman, R. 2003. Archaeologies of Complexity. London, Routledge.

Chartier, R. 1994. The Order of Books: Readers, Authors and Libraries in
Europe Between the 14th and the 18th Centuries. Cambridge, Polity.

Childe, V.G. 1929. The Danube in Prehistory. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.

Childe, V.G. 1936. Man Makes Himself. London, Watts.

Childe, V.G. 1942. What Happened in History. Harmondsworth, Penguin.

Childe, V.G. 1958. Retrospect. Antiquity 32: 69–74.

Childe, V.G. 1958. The Prehistory of European Society. Harmondsworth,
Penguin.

Childe, V.G. 1979. Prehistory and Marxism. Antiquity 53, 93–5.

Christenson, A.L. (ed.) 1989. Tracing Archaeology’s Past: The
Historiography of Archaeology. Carbondale, Southern Illinois University
Press.

Claassen, C. (ed.) 1992. Exploring Gender Through Archaeology. Madison,
Prehistory Press.

Claassen, C. (ed.) 1994. Women in Archaeology. Philadelphia, University
of Pennslyvania Press.

Clark, G.A. 2003. American archaeology’s uncertain future. In Gillespie
et al. (eds), 51–68.

Clark, J.G.D. 1952. Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London,
Methuen.

Clark, J.G.D. 1982. The Identity of Man as Seen by an Archaeologist.
London, Methuen.

Clarke, D.L. 1968. Analytical Archaeology. London, Methuen.

Clarke, D.L. 1973. Archaeology: the loss of innocence. Antiquity 47:
6–18.

Clarke, D.L. 1978. Analytical Archaeology. Second edition, revised by
Bob Chapman. London, Methuen.

Cobb, C.R. 1993. Archaeological approaches to the political economy of
nonstratified societies. In Schiffer, M. (ed.) Advances in
Archaeological Method and Theory 5. Tucson, University of Arizona Press,
43–100.

Cobb, C.R. 2003. Mississippian chiefdoms: how complex? Annual Review of
Anthropology 32: 63–84.

Cohen, G.A. 1978. Karl Marx’s Theory of History: A Defence. Oxford,
Clarendon Press.

Cohen, P.S. 1968. Modern Social Theory. London, Heinemann.

Coimbra, F. and Dimitriadis, D. (eds) 2008. Cognitive Archaeology as
Symbolic Archaeology: Proceedings of the 15th UISPP World Congress 23.
Oxford, British Archaeological Reports.

Coleman, S.M. and Carlin, L. (eds) 2004. The Cultures of Creationism:
AntiEvolutionism in English-Speaking Countries. Aldershot, Ashgate.

Collingwood, R.G. 1939. An Autobiography. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.

Collingwood, R.G. 1946. The Idea of History. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.

Conkey, M.W. 1989. The structural analysis of Palaeolithic cave art. In
LambergKarlovsky (ed.), 135–54.

Conkey, M.W. and Spector, J. 1984. Archaeology and the study of gender.
In Schiffer, M. (ed.) Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 7.
New York, Academic Press, 1–38.

Conkey, M. 2005. Dwelling at the margins, action at the intersection?
Feminist and Indigenous archaeologies 2005. Archaeologies: Journal of
the World Archaeological Congress 1: 9–80.

Conkey, M.W. 2007. Questioning theory: is there a gender of theory in
archaeology? Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14: 285–310.

Conkey, M.W. and Gero, J. 1997. From programme to practice: gender and
feminism in archaeology. Annual Review of Anthropology 26: 411–37.

Cooper, M.A., Firth, A., Carman, J. and Wheatley, D. (eds) 1995.
Managing Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Cooper, N. 1997. The gentry house in an age of transition. In Gaimster
and Stamper (eds), 115–26.

Coudart, A. 1999. Why is there no post-processual archaeology in France?
Antiquity 73: 161–7.

Coulson, C. 1992. Some analysis of the castle of Bodiam, East Sussex. In
Harper-Bill and Harvey (eds), 51–108.

Courbin, P. 1988. What is Archaeology? Chicago, Chicago University
Press.

Cowgill, G. 1993. Distinguished lecture in archaeology: beyond
criticising New Archaeology. American Anthropologist 95: 551–73.

Criado Boado, F. and Villoch Vásquez, V. 2000. Monumentalising
landscape: from present perception to the past meaning of Galician
megalithism (north-west Iberian peninsula). European Journal of
Archaeology 3(2): 188–216.

Croce, B. 1921. Theory and History of Historiography. London, Harrap.

Crossland, Z. 2009. Of clues and signs: the dead body and its evidential
traces. American Anthropologist 111(1): 69–80.

Crowell, A.L. 1997. Archaeology and the Capitalist World System: A Study
From Russian America. New York, Plenum.

Crumley, C.L. 1979. Three locational models: an epistemological
assessment of anthropology and archaeology. In Schiffer, M.B. (ed.)
Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 2. New York, Academic
Press, 141–73.

Crumley, C.L. 1987. A dialectical critique of hierarchy. In Patterson
and Galley (eds), 155–9.

Crumley, C.L. (ed.) 1994. Historical Ecology, Cultural Knowledge and
Changing Landscapes. Santa Fe, School of American Research Press.

Crumley, C.L. (ed.) 1995. Heterarchy and the Analysis of Complex
Societies. Archaeological Papers of the American Anthropological
Association 7.

Culler, J. 1997. Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.

Cumberpatch, C. and Hill, J.D. (eds) 1995. Different Iron Ages: Studies
on the Iron Age in Temperate Europe. BAR International Series 602.
Oxford, British Archaeological Reports.

Cunliffe, B., Davies, W. and Renfrew, A.C. (eds) 2002. Archaeology: The
Widening Debate. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Curta, F. 2001. Pots, Slavs and ‘imagined communities’: Slavic
archaeologies and the history of the early Slavs. European Journal of
Archaeology 4(3): 367–84.

D’Altroy, T.N. and Hastorf, C.A. (eds) 2001. Empire and Domestic
Economy. New York, Kluwer.

Damm, C. 2005. Archaeology, ethnohistory, and oral traditions:
approaches to the Indigenous past. Norwegian Archaeological Review
38(2): 73–87.

Daniel, G.E. 1941. The dual nature of the megalithic colonisation of
prehistoric Europe. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 7: 1–49.

David, B., McNiven, I., Manas, L., Manas, J., Savage, S., Crouch, J.,
Neiman, G. and Brady, L. 2003. Goba of Mua: archaeology working with
oral tradition. Antiquity 158–172.

David, D. 1996. Revolutionary archaeology in Cuba. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 3: 159–88.

Davidson, I. and Noble, W. 1996. Human Evolution, Language, and Mind: A
Psychological and Archaeological Enquiry. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Davies, P., Robb, J.G. and Ladbrook, D. 2005. Woodland clearance in the
Mesolithic: the social aspects. Antiquity 79, 280–288.

Davis, W. 1992. The deconstruction of intentionality in archaeology.
Antiquity 66: 334–47.

Dawkins, R. 1989. The Selfish Gene. Second edition. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.

De Beaune, S., Collidge, F.L. and Wynn, T. (eds) 2009. Cognitive
Archaeology and Human Evolution. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Deagan, K. 1983. Spanish St Augustine: The Archaeology of a Colonial
Creole Community. New York, Academic Press.

Deagan, K. 1991. Historical archaeology’s contributions to our
understanding of early America. In Falk (ed.), 97–112.

Deetz, J.F. 1972. Archaeology as a social science. In Leone, M. (ed.),
108–17.

Deetz, J.F. 1977. In Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of Early
American Life. New York, Anchor.

Deetz, J.F. 1988. History and archaeological theory: Walter Taylor
revisited. American Antiquity 55: 13–22.

Delanty, G. 1997. Social Science: Beyond Constructivism and Realism.
Milton Keynes, Open University Press.

Delle, J. 1998. An Archaeology of Social Space: Analysing Coffee
Plantations in Jamaica’s Blue Mountains. New York, Plenum.

Demarest, A.A. 1989. Ideology and evolutionism in American archaeology:
looking beyond the economic base. In Lamberg-Karlovsky (ed.), 89–102.

DeMarrais, E., Gosden, C. and Renfrew, A.C. (eds) 2004. Rethinking
Materiality: The Engagement of Mind with the Material World. Cambridge,
McDonald Institute.

Demoule, J. 1999. Ethnicity, culture and identity: French archaeologists
and historians. Antiquity 73: 190–8.

Dennett, D.C. 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings
of Life. London, Allen Lane.

Derrida, J. 1988. Afterword: toward an ethic of discussion. In Graff, G.
(ed), Limited Inc. Evanston, Northwestern University Press.

Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
London, Cape.

Diamond, J. 2005. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive.
London, Allen Lane.

Diaz-Andreu, M. 1993. Theory and ideology in archaeology: Spanish
archaeology under the Franco regime. Antiquity 67: 74–82.

Diaz-Andreu, M. and Champion, T. (eds) 1996. Nationalism and Archaeology
in Europe. London, University College London Press.

Diaz-Andreu, M. and Lucy, S. 2005. Archaeology of Identity. London,
Routledge.

Diaz-Andreu, M. and Sørenson, M.-L. (eds) 1998. Excavating Women: A
History of Women in European Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Dobres, M.-A. 2000. Technology and Social Agency. Oxford, Blackwell.

Dobres, M.-A. and Robb, J. (eds) 2000. Agency in Archaeology. London,
Routledge.

Dornan, J. 2002. Agency and archaeology: past, present and future
directions. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 9(4): 303–29.

Dowson, T. (ed.) 2000. Queer archaeologies. Special themed edition,
World Archaeology 32(2).

du Cros, H. and Smith, L. (eds) 1993. Women in Archaeology: A Feminist
Critique. Occasional Papers in Prehistory 23. Canberra, Australian
National University.

Duke, P. 1992. Braudel and North American archaeology. In Knapp (ed.),
99–111. Reprinted in Hodder and Preucel (eds) (1996), 240–57.

Duke, P. and Wilson, M.C. (eds) 1995. Beyond Subsistence: Plains
Archaeology and the Postprocessual Critique. Tuscaloosa, University of
Alabama Press.

Dunnell, R.C. 1980. Evolutionary theory and archaeology. In Schiffer, M.
(ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory vol. 3. New York,
Academic Press.

Dunnell, R.C. 1989. Aspects of the application of evolutionary theory in
archaeology. In Lamberg-Karlovsky (ed.), 35–49.

Eagleton, T. 1991. Ideology: An Introduction. London, Verso.

Eagleton, T. 2003. After Theory. New York, Basic Books.

Earle, T.K. (ed.) 1993. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy and Ideology.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Earle, T.K. 1997. How Chiefs Come to Power: The Political Economy in
Prehistory. Stanford, Stanford University Press.

Earl, T.K. 2000. Archaeology, property and prehistory. Annual Review of
Anthropology 29: 39–60.

Earle, T.K. 2002. Bronze Age Economics: The Beginnings of Political
Economies. Boulder, Westview Press.

Earle, T.K. and Erickson, J.E. (eds) 1977. Exchange Systems in
Prehistory. New York, Academic Press.

Earle, T.K. and Erickson, J.E. (eds) 1982. Contexts for Prehistoric
Exchange. New York, Academic Press.

Earle, T.K. and Preucel, R.W. 1987. Processual archaeology and the
radical critique. Current Anthropology 28(4): 501–38.

Easthope, A. 1993. Romancing the Stone: history-writing and rhetoric.
Social History 18(2): 235–49.

Easthope, A. 1999. Englishness and National Culture. London, Routledge.

Ehrenberg, M. 1989. Women in Prehistory. London, British Museum.

Ehrenreich, R.M., Crumley, C.L. and Levy, J.E. (eds) 1995. Heterarchy
and the Analysis of Complex Societies. Washington, American
Anthropological Association.

Eller, J.D. 1997. Anti-anti-multiculturalism. American Anthropologist
99(2): 249–58.

Elton, G.E. 1991. Return to Essentials. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Embree, L. (ed.) 1992. Metaarchaeology: Reflections by Archaeologists
and Philosophers. Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishing.

Engels, F. 1972. (first published 1884). The Origin of the Family,
Private Property and the State. In the Light of the Researches of Lewis
H. Morgan. London, Lawrence and Wishart.

Englestad, E. 1991. Images of power and contradiction: feminist theory
and postprocessual archaeology. Antiquity 65: 502–14.

Englestad, E. 2007. Much more than gender. Journal of Archaeological
Method and Theory 14: 217–34.

Ensor, B. 2000. Social formations, modo de vida, and conflict in
archaeology. American Antiquity 65(1): 15–42.

Evans, R.J. 2000. In Defence of History. Second edition. London, Granta.

Everson, W.K. 1974. Classics of the Horror Film. Secaucus, Citadel
Press.

Fabian, A.C. (ed.) 1998. Evolution: Society, Science and the Universe.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Falck, T. 2003. Polluted places: harbours and bybridity in archaeology.
Norwegian Archaeological Review 36(2): 105–18.

Falk, D. 1997. Brain evolution in females: an answer to Mr Lovejoy. In
Hays-Gilpin and Whitley (eds), 115–37.

Falk, L. (ed.) 1991. Historical Archaeology in Global Perspective.
Washington, Smithsonian.

Fash, W.L. 1994. Changing perspectives on Maya civilisation. Annual
Review of Anthropology 23: 181–208.

Faure-Rouesnel, L. 2001. French anthropology and material culture.
Journal of Material Culture 6: 236–45.

Fawcett, C. Habu, J. and Matsunaga, J. (eds) 2008. Evaluating Multiple
Narratives: Beyond Nationalist, Colonialist, Impreialist Archaeologies.
New York, Springer.

Ferguson, L. (ed.) 1997. Historical Archaeology and the Importance of
Material Things. Society for Historical Archaeology Special Publications
2.

Ferguson, L. 1992. Uncommon Ground: Archaeology and Early African
America, 1650–1800. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.

Ferguson, T.J. 1996. Native Americans and the practice of archaeology.
Annual Review of Anthropology 25: 63–80.

Feyerabend, P. 1988. Against Method. Second revised edition. London,
Verso.

Feyerabend, P. 1995. Killing Time: The Autobiography of Paul Feyerabend.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Flannery, K.V. 1972. The cultural evolution of civilisations. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 3: 399–426.

Flannery, K.V. 1973a. The origins of agriculture. Annual Review of
Anthropology 2: 271–310.

Flannery, K.V. 1973b. Archaeology with a capital S. In Redman (ed.),
47–58.

Flannery, K.V. (ed.) 1976. The Early Mesoamerican Village. New York,
Academic Press.

Flannery, K.V. 2006. On the resilience of anthropological archaeology.
Annual Review of Anthropology 55: 1–13.

Flannery, K.V. and Marcus, E.J. 1976. Formative Oaxaca and Zapotec
cosmos. American Scientist 64(4): 374–83.

Flannery, K.V. and Marcus, E.J. (eds) 1983. The Cloud People: Divergent
Evolution of the Zapotec and Mixtec Populations. New York, Academic
Press.

Flannery, K.V. and Marcus, E.J. 1993. Cognitive archaeology. Cambridge
Archaeological Journal 3: 260–70. Reprinted in Preucel and Hodder (eds)
(1996), 350–63.

Flannery, K.V. and Marcus, E.J. 2003. The origin of war: new C14 dates
from ancient Mexico. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
100(20): 11801–5.

Fleming, A. and Johnson, M.H. 1990. The Theoretical Archaeology Group
(TAG): origins, retrospect, prospect. Antiquity 64: 303–7.

Fleming, A. 2006. Post-processual landscape archaeology: a critique.
Cambridge Archaeological Journal 16(3): 267–80.

Fleury-Ilett, B. 1993. Identity of France: the archaeological
interaction. Journal of European Archaeology 1: 169–80.

Fogelin, L. 2007. The archaeology of religious ritual. Annual Review of
Anthropology 36: 55–71.

Fontein, J. 2006. The Silence of Great Zimbabwe: Contested Landscapes
and the Power of Heritage. Walnut Creek, Left Coast Press.

Fotiadis, M. 1994. What is archaeology’s ‘mitigated objectivism’
mitigated by? Comments on Wylie. American Antiquity 59: 545–55.

Foucault, M. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
Harmondsworth, Penguin.

Foucault, M. 1980. Power/Knowledge. Brighton, Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Fowles, J. and Brukoff, B. 1980. The Enigma of Stonehenge. London
Jonathan Cape.

Franklin, M. 2001. A Black feminist-inspired archaeology? Journal of
Social Archaeology 1(1): 108–25.

Fuller, S. 1992. Being there with Thomas Kuhn: a parable for postmodern
times. History and Theory 31(3): 241–75.

Funari, P.P.A. 1997a. European archaeology and two Brazilian offspring:
classical archaeology and art history. Journal of European Archaeology
5(2): 137–48.

Funari, P.P.A. 1997b. Archaeology, history, and historical archaeology
in South America. International Journal of Historical Archaeology 1(3):
189–206.

Funari, P.P.A., Zarankin, A. and Stovel, E. (eds) 2005. Global
Archaeological Theory: Recent Thoughts. New York, Kluwer.

Furholt, M. 2008. Pottery, cultures, people? The European Baden material
re-examined. Antiquity 82: 617–28.

Gaimster, D. and Stamper, P. (eds) 1997. The Age of Transition: The
Archaeology of English Culture 1400–1600. Oxford, Oxbow.

Galison, P. and Stump, P. (eds) 1996. The Disunity of Science. Palo
Alto, Stanford University Press.

Gamble, C. 2007. Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest
Prehistory. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Gamble, C. 2008. Archaeology: The Basics. London, Routledge.

Gardin, J-C. 1980. Archaeological Constructs: An Aspect of Theoretical
Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Gardin, J.-C. 2002. The logicist analysis of explanatory theories in
archaeology. In Franck, R. (ed.) The Explanatory Power of Models. New
York, Kluwer.

Geertz, C. 1984. Anti anti-relativism. American Anthropologist 86:
263–78.

Gell, A. 1992. The technology of enchantment and the enchantment of
technology. In Coote, J. and Shelton, A. (eds) Anthropology, Art and
Aesthetics. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 40–66.

Gell, A. 1998. Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory. Oxford,
Clarendon.

Gerding, H. and Ingemark, D. 1997. Beyond Newtonian Thinking – towards a
nonlinear archaeology: applying chaos theory to archaeology. Current
Swedish Archaeology 5: 49–64.

Gero, J. 1985. Socio-politics and the woman-at-home ideology. American
Antiquity 50: 342–50.

Gero, J. 1988. Gender bias in archaeology: here, then and now. In Rosser
(ed.), 33–43.

Gero, J. 1991. Gender divisions of labour in the construction of
archaeological knowledge. In Walde and Willows (eds), 96–102.

Gero, J. 1996. Archaeological practice and gendered encounters with
field data. In Wright (ed.), 251–80.

Gero, J. and Conkey, M. (eds) 1991. Engendering Archaeology: Women and
Prehistory. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Gheorgiu, D. 2003. Centres and peripheries amongst archaeologists –
archaeological theory after communism. Antiquity: 170–1.

Gibbon, G. 1989. Explanation in Archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell
Publishers.

Giddens, A. 1979. Capitalism and Modern Social Theory. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Giddens, A. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of
Structuration. Cambridge, Polity Press.

Giddens, A. 1993. The Giddens Reader. Stanford, Stanford University
Press.?

Gilbert, S.M. and Gubar, S. 1979. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman
Writer and the 19th Century Literary Imagination. New Haven, Conn., Yale
University Press.

Gilchrist, R. 1991. Women’s archaeology? Political feminism, gender
theory and historical revision. Antiquity 65: 495–501.

Gilchrist, R. 1993. Gender and Material Culture: An Archaeology of
Religious Women. London, Routledge.

Gillespie, S. and Nicholls, D.L. (eds) 2003. Archaeology is
Anthropology. Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological
Association 13. Arlington, American Anthropological Association.

Gimbutas, M. 1989. The Language of the Goddess. San Francisco, Harper
and Row.

Gimbutas, M. 1991. The Civilisation of the Goddess: The World of Old
Europe. San Francisco, Harper and Row.

Glassie, H. 1975. Folk Housing in Middle Virginia: A Structural Analysis
of Historic Artefacts. Knoxville, University of Tennessee Press.

Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York,
Anchor. Goffman, E. 1971. Relations in Public: Microstudies of the
Public Order. Harmondsworth, Penguin.

Gonzáles-Ruibal, A. 2006. The past is tomorrow: towards an archaeology
of a vanishing present. Norwegian Archaeological Review 39: 110–25.

Gonzáles-Ruibal, A. 2006. The dream of reason: an archaeology of the
failures of modernity in Ethiopa. Journal of Social Archaeology 6(2):
175–201.

Gonzáles-Ruibal, A. (ed.) 2007. Arqueologia Symétrica: Un Giro Teorico
sin Revolucion Paradigmática. Complutum 18.

Gosden, C. 1992. Endemic doubt: is what we write right? Antiquity 66:
803–8.

Gosden, C. 1994. Social Being and Time. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Gosden, C. 2001. Postcolonial archaeology: issues of culture, identity
and knowledge. In Hodder (ed.), 241–61.

Gosden, C. 2005. What do objects want? Journal of Archaeological Method
and Theory 12(3): 193–211.

Gosden, C. 1999. Anthropology and Archaeology: A Changing Relationship.
London, Routledge.

Gould, R. (ed.) 1978. Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology. Albuquerque,
University of New Mexico Press.

Gould, R. 1980. Living Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Gould, R. and Schiffer, M. (eds) 1981. The Archaeology of Us. New York,
Academic Press.

Gould, S.J. 1989. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of
History. New York, Norton.

Gould, S.J. 1997. The Mismeasure of Man. Second revised edition.
Harmondsworth, Penguin.

Gould, S.J. 2002. The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. Cambridge,
Harvard University Press.

Gramsch, A. 2000. ‘Reflexiveness’ in archaeology, nationalism and
Europeanism. Archaeological Dialogues 7(1): 4–19.

Gramsch, A. and Sommer, U. (eds) forthcoming. A History of Central
European Archaeology: Theory, Methods, Politics. Bonn, Habelt.

Graves-Brown, P.M. (ed.) 2000. Matter, Materiality and Modern Culture.
London, Routledge.

Gregory, D. 1994. Geographical Imaginations. Oxford, Blackwell
Publishers.

Griffin, W. 1991. Review of Reading the Past (second edition).
Archaeological Review from Cambridge 10(1): 124–8.

Gross, P.R. and Levitt, N. 1994. Higher Superstition: The Academic Left
and its Quarrels with Science. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Guidi, A. 1996. The Italian pluriverse: different approaches to
prehistoric archaeology. The European Archaeologist: Newsletter of the
European Association of Archaeologists 5: 5–8.

Habermas, J. 1970. Towards a Rational Society: Student Protest, Science
and Politics. London, Heinemann.

Habermas, J. 1975. Legitimation Crisis. London, Heinemann.

Hager, L. (ed.) 1997. Women in Human Evolution. London, Routledge.

Hall, M. 2000. Archaeology and the Modern World: Colonial Transcripts in
South Africa and the Chesapeake. London, Routledge.

Hall, M. 2006. Archaeology at the edge: an archaeological dialogue with
Martin Hall. Archaeological Dialogues 13(1): 55–67.

Halsall, G. 1997. Archaeology and historiography. In Bentley, M. (ed.),
805–27.

Halstead, P. and O’Shea, J. (eds) 1989. Bad Year Economics: Cultural
Responses to Risk and Uncertainty. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.

Hamilakis, Y. 1996. Through the looking glass: nationalism, archaeology
and the politics of identity. Antiquity 70: 975–8.

Hamilakis, Y. 2007. The Nation and its Ruins: Antiquity, Archaeology and
National Imagination in Greece. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Hamilakis, Y. and Yalouri, E. 1996. Antiquities as symbolic capital in
modern Greek society. Antiquity 70: 117–29.

Hamilton, P. 1996. Historicism. London, Routledge.

Hamilton, S. and Whitehouse, R. 2006. Phenomenology in practice: towards
a methodology for a ‘subjective’ approach. European Journal of
Archaeology 9(1): 31–71.

Hänsell, B. and Harding, A.F. (eds) 1998. Towards Translating the Past:
Georg Kossack – Selected Studies in Archaeology. Ten Essays Written From
the Years 1974 to 1997. Rahden, Verlag Marie Leidorf.

Hansonn, M. 2006. Aristocratic Landscape: The Spatial Ideoology of the
Medieval Aristocracy. Stockholm, Almqvuist & Wiksell.

Harding, J. 2005. Rethinking the great divide: long-term structural
history and the temporality of event. Norwegian Archaeological Review
38(2): 88–101.

Harding, S. ed. 2004. The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader:
Intellectual and Political Controversies. New York, Routledge.

Härke, H. (ed.) 2000. Archaeology, Ideology and Society: The German
Experience. Frankfurt, Lang.

Härke, H. and Wolfram, S. 1993. The power of the past. Current
Anthropology 34: 182–4.

Harper-Bill, C. and Harvey, R. (eds) 1992. Medieval Knighthood IV:
Papers from the Fifth Strawberry Hill Conference 1990. Woodbridge,
Boydell.

Harrison, R. 2003. ‘The magical virtue of these sharp things’:
colonialism, mimesis and knapped bottle glass artefacts in Australia.
Journal of Material Culture 8(3): 311–36.

Harvey, D. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the
Origins of Cultural Change. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Hastorf, C.A. 1988. The use of palaeoethnobotanical data in prehistoric
studies of crop production, processing, and consumption. In Hastorf and
Popper (eds), 119–44.

Hastorf, C.A. 1992. Agriculture and the Onset of Political Inequality
before the Inka. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hastorf, C.A. and Johanessen, S. 1991. Understanding changing
people/plant relationships in the prehispanic Andes. In Preucel (ed.),
140–55. Reprinted in Hodder and Preucel (eds) (1996), 61–78.

Hastorf, C.A. and Popper, V.S. (eds) 1988. Current Palaeoethnobotany:
Analytical Methods and Cultural Interpretations of Archaeological Plant
Remains. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Hawkes, C. 1954. Archaeological theory and method: some suggestions from
the Old World. American Anthropologist 56: 155–68.

Hawkes, J. 1968. The proper study of mankind. Antiquity 42: 255–62.

Hawkes, T. 1976. Structuralism and Semiotics. London, Methuen.

Hays-Gilpin, K. and Whitley, D.S. (eds) 1998. Reader in Gender
Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Hedeager, L. 2006. Scandinavia and the Huns: an interdisciplinary
approach to the migration era. Norwegian Archaeological Review 40:
42–58.

Hegel, G.W.F. 1956. The Philosophy of History. New York, Dover.

Hegmon, M. 2003. Setting theoretical egos aside: issues and theory in
North American archaeology. American Antiquity 68(2): 213–43.

Held, D. and Thompson, J.B. (eds) 1989. Social Theory of Modern
Societies: Anthony Giddens and His Critics. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Hensel, W., Tabaczyñski, S. and Urbañczyk, P. (eds) 1998. Theory and
Practice of Archaeological Research. Vol. III: Dialogue with the Data:
The Archaeology of Complex Societies and its Context in the 90s. Warsaw,
Insitute of Archaeology and Ethnology, Polish Academy of Sciences.

Herva, V.P. and Ikäheimo, J. 2002. Defusing dualism: mind, materiality
and prehistoric art. Norwegian Archaeological Review 35(2): 95–108.

Hill, J.D. and Cumberpatch, C.G. (eds) 1995. Different Iron Ages:
Studies on the Iron Age in Temperate Europe. BAR International Series
602. Oxford, British Archaeological Reports.

Hill, J.N. 1970. Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organisation in the
American Southwest. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Hillman, G. 1984. Interpretation of archaeological plant remains: the
application of ethnographic plant models from Turkey. In Zeist and
Casparie (eds), 1–42.

Hills, C. 2003. Origins of the English. London, Duckworth.

Hingley, R. 2005. Globalising Roman Culture: Unity Diversity and Empire.
London, Routledge.

Hinsley, C.M. 1989. Revising and revisioning the history of archaeology:
reflections on region and context. In Christenson (ed.), 79–96.

Hinton, D.A. 2005. Gold and Gilt, Pots and Pins: Possessions and People
in Medieval Britain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hodder, I. 1982a. The Present Past. London, Batsford.

Hodder, I. 1982b. Symbols in Action: Ethnoarchaeological Studies of
Material Culture. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I. (ed.) 1987. The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I. (ed.) 1991a. Archaeological Theory in Europe: The Last Thirty
Years. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Hodder, I. (ed.) 1991b. Archaeological Theory in Europe: The Last Three
Decades. London, Routledge.

Hodder, I. 1997. ‘Always momentary, fluid and flexible’: towards a
reflexive excavation method in archaeology. Antiquity 71: 691–700.

Hodder, I. 1999. The Archaeological Process: An Introduction. Oxford,
Blackwell Publishers.

Hodder, I. (ed.) 2001. Archaeological Theory Today. Cambridge, Polity
Press.

Hodder, I. 2006. Triggering post-processual archaeology and beyond. In
Williamson and Bisson (eds) 16–24.

Hodder, I. and Hutson, S. 2003. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to
Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I., Karlsson, H. and Olsen, B. 2008. 40 years of theoretical
engagement: a conversation with Ian Hodder. Norwegian Archaeological
Review 41(1): 26–42.

Hodder, I. and Orton, C. 1976. Spatial Analysis in Archaeology.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I., Shanks, M., Alexandri, A., Buchli, V., Carman, J., Last, J.
and Lucas, G. (eds) 1995. Interpreting Archaeology: Finding Meaning in
the Past. London, Routledge.

Hodge McCoid, C. and McDermott, L.D. 1996. Towards decolonising gender:
female vision in the Upper Palaeolithic. American Anthropologist 98(2):
319–26.

Hodges, R. 1982. Dark Age Economics. London, Duckworth.

Hollinger, R. 1994. Postmodernism and the Social Sciences. London, Sage.

Holt, J.Z. 2009. Rethinking the Ramey state: was Cahokia the centre of a
theatre state? American Antiquity 74(2): 231–54.

Holtorf, C. 2000. Review – Matthew Johnson: Archaeological Theory: An
Introduction. Norwegian Archaeological Review 33: 125–30.

Holtorf, C. 2002. Notes on the life history of a pot sherd. Journal of
Material Culture 7(1): 49–71.

Holtorf, C. 2007. Archaeology is a Brand! The Meaning of Archaeology in
Contemporary Popular Culture. Walnu Creek, Left Coast Press.

Holtorf, C. and Karlsson, H. (eds) 2000. Philosophy and Archaeological
Practice: Perspectives for the 21st Century. Göteborg, Bricoleur Press.

Hrobat, K. 2007. Use of oral tradition in archaeology: the case of
Ajdovšcina above Rodik, Slovenia. European Journal of Archaeology 10(1):
31–56.

Hubert, J. (ed.) 2000. Madness, Disability and Social Exclusion: The
Archaeology and Anthropology of Difference. London, Routledge.

Humm, M. (ed.) 1992. Feminisms: A Reader. London, Harvester.

Hunt, L. (ed.) 1989. The New Cultural History. Berkeley, University of
California Press.

Huntley, J.P. and Stallibrass, S. (eds) 2000. Taphonomy and
Interpretation. Oxford, Oxbow.

Hurst, H. and Owen, S. (eds) 2005. Ancient Colonisations: Analogy,
Similarity and Difference. London, Duckworth.

Hutson, S. 2002. Gendered citation practices in American Antiquity and
other journals. American Antiquity 68(2): 213–43.

Immonen, V. 2005. Defining a culture: the meaning of Hanseatic in
medieval Turku. Antiquity 81: 720–32.

Ingold, T. 2000. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on
Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill. London, Routledge.

Ingold, T. 2005. Comments on Christopher Tilley: The Materiality of
Stone: Explorations in Landscape Phenomenology. Norwegian Archaeological
Review 38(2): 122–9.

Ingold, T. 2007. Materials against materiality. Archaeological Dialogues
14(1): 1–16.

Ingold, T. and Vergunst, J.L. (eds) 2008. Ways of Walking: Ethnography
and Practice on Foot. Aldershot, Ashgate.

Insoll, T. 2007. ‘Natural’ or ‘human’ spaces? Tallensi sacred groves and
shrines and their potential implications for aspects of northern
European prehistory and phenomenological interpretation. Norwegian
Archaeological Review 40(2): 138–58.

Insoll, T. (ed.) 2007. The Archaeology of Identities: A Reader. London,
Routledge.

Jencks, C. 1977. The Language of Postmodern Architecture. New York,
Pantheon. Jenkins, K. 1995. On ‘What is History?’: From Carr and Elton
to Rorty and White. London, Routledge.

Jenkins, K. (ed.) 1997. The Postmodern History Reader. London,
Routledge.

Johnson, A.G. 1995. The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology: A User’s
Guide to Sociological Language. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Johnson, A.L. (ed.) 2004. Processual Archaeology: Exploring Analytical
Strategies, Frames of Reference, and Culture Process. Oxford, Praeger.

Johnson, M.H. 1989. Conceptions of agency in archaeological
interpretation. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 8: 189–211.

Johnson, M.H. 1993. Housing Culture. London, University College London
Press.

Johnson, M.H. 1996. An Archaeology of Capitalism. Oxford, Blackwell
Publishers.

Johnson, M.H. 1999. Archaeological Theory: An Introduction. Oxford,
Blackwell.

Johnson, M.H. 2002. Behind the Castle Gate. London, Routledge. Johnson,
M.H. 2006 On the nature of theoretical archaeology and archaeological
theory. Archaeological Dialogues 13(2): 117–32.

Johnson, M.H. 2007. Ideas of Landscape. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Jones, A.M. 2001. Archaeological Theory and Scientific Practice.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Jones, A.M. and Macgregor, G. (eds) 2002. Colouring the Past. Oxford,
Berg.

Jones, G. 1984. Interpretation of archaeological plant remains:
ethnographic models from Greece. In Zeist and Casparie (eds), 43–62.

Jones, L. 1997. Conquests of the imagination: Maya-Mexican polarity and
the story of Chichen Itza. American Anthropologist 99(2): 275–90.

Jones, M. 2007. Memory and Material Culture. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Jones, S., Graves-Brown, P. and Gamble, C.S. (eds) 1996. Cultural
Identity and Archaeology: The Construction of European Communities.
London, Routledge.

Joyce, P. 1995. The end of social history? Social History 20(1): 73–85.

Joyce, R.A. 1994. Dorothy Hughes Popenhoe: Eve in an archaeological
garden. In Claassen (ed.), 51–66. Reprinted in Preucel and Hodder (eds)
(1996), 501–16.

Joyce, R.A. with Preucel, R.W., Lopiparo, J., Guyer, C. and Joyce, M.
2002. The Languages of Archaeology: Dialogue, Narrative, and Writing.
Oxford, Blackwell.

Karlisch, S.M. (ed.) 1997. Vom Knochenmann zur Menschenfrau.
Feministische Theorie und archäologische Praxis [in Stralsund 1996].
Münster, AgendaVerlag.

Karlsson, H. (ed.) 2000. It’s About Time: The Concept of Time in
Archaeology. Göteborg, Bricoleur Press.

Keay, S. and Terrenato, N. (eds) 2001. Italy and the West: Comparative
Issues in Romanisation. Oxford, Oxbow.

Kelley, J.H. and Hanen, M.P. 1988. Archaeology and the Methodology of
Science. Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.

Kelly, R.L. 2000. Elements of a behavioural ecological paradigm for the
study of prehistoric hunter-gatherers. In Schiffer (ed.), 63–78.

Kelly, R.L. 2000. Warless Societies and the Origin of War. Ann Arbor,
University of Michigan Press.

Kepecs, S. and Kolb, M.J. (eds) 1997. New approaches to combining the
archaeological and historical records. Journal of Archaeological Method
and Theory 4.

Klejn, L.S. 1977. A panorama of theoretical archaeology. Current
Anthropology 18(1): 1–42.

Klejn, L.S. 1993a. It’s difficult to be a god. Current Anthropology 34:
508–11.

Klejn, L.S. 1993b. To separate a centaur: on the relationship of
archaeology and history in Soviet tradition. Antiquity 67: 339–48.

Klejn, L.S. 1993c. Is German archaeology atheoretical? Norwegian
Archaeological Review 26(1): 49–54.

Kluckholn, C. 1939. The place of theory in anthropological studies.
Philosophy of Science 6: 328–44.

Knapp, B. (ed.) 1992. Archaeology, Annales and Ethnohistory. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Knapp, B. 1996. Archaeology without gravity: postmodernism and the past.
Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 3: 127–58.

Knappett, C. 2005. Thinking Through Material Culture: An
Interdisciplinary Perspective. Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania
Press.

Knutson, K. 2007. Comment on Ingela Bergman: Indigenous time, colonial
history: Sami conceptions of time and ancestry and the role of relics in
cultural reproduction. Norwegian Archaeological Review 40: 103–7.

Kobyliñski, Z. (ed.) 2001. Quo Vadis Archaeologia? Whither European
Archaeology in the 21st Century? Warsaw, Polish Academy of Sciences.

Kohl, P. 1987. The use and abuse of world systems theory: the case of
the pristine West Asian state. Advances in Archaeological Method and
Theory 11: 1–35.

Kohl, P. and Fawcett, C. (eds) 1995. Nationalism, Politics and the
Practice of Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Kohler, T.A. 1993. News from the Northern American southwest: prehistory
on the edge of chaos. Journal of Archaeological Research 1(4): 267–321.

Kohn, M. and Mithen, S. 1999. Handaxes: products of sexual selection?
Antiquity 73, 518–26.

Kohring, S. and Wynne-Jones, S. (eds) 2007. Socialising Complexity:
Structure, Interaction and Power in Archaeological Discourse. Oxford,
Oxbow.

Kolb, M.J. 1994. Monumentality and the rise of religious authority in
precontact Hawai’i. Current Anthropology 45: 521–33.

Kowalewski, S.A. 1990. The evolution of complexity in the Valley of
Oaxaca. Annual Review of Anthropology 19: 39–260.

Kristiansen, K. 1988. The black and the red: Shanks and Tilley’s
programme for a radical archaeology. Antiquity 62: 473–82.

Kristiansen, K. 1998. Europe Before History. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Kristiansen, K. 2004. Genes versus agents: a discussion of the widening
theoretical gap in archaeology. Archaeological Dialogues 11(2): 77–99.

Kristiansen, K. 2008. Do we need the ‘archaeology of Europe’?
Archaeological Dialogues 15(1): 5–25.

Kristiansen, K. and Larsen, M. (eds) 1987. Centre and Periphery in the
Ancient World. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Kristiansen, K. and Larsson, T.B. 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society:
Travels, Transmissions and Transformations. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Kroeber, A.L. 1948. Anthropology. London, Harrap.

Kuhn, T. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.

Kuna, M. and Venclova, N. (eds) 1995. Whither Archaeology? Papers in
Honour of Evzen Neustupný. Prague, Institute of Archaeology.

LaCapra, D. 1987. History, Politics and the Novel. Ithaca, Cornell
University Press.

Lampeter Archaeology Workshop 1997. Relativism, objectivity and the
politics of the past. Archaeological Dialogues 2: 164–98.

Larson, D.O. and Michaelsen, J. 1990. Impacts of climatic variability
and population growth on Virgin Branch Anasazi cultural developments.
American Antiquity 55: 227–49.

Larson, D.O., Neff, H., Graybill, D.A., Michaelsen, J. and Ambos, E.
1996. Risk, climatic variability, and the study of southwestern
prehistory: an evolutionary perspective. American Antiquity 61(2):
217–41.

Latour, B. 1987. Science in Action. Milton Keynes, Open University
Press.

Latour, B. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
Actor-Network Theory. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Le Goff, J. and Nora, P. 1985. Constructing the Past: Essays in
Historical Methodology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Le Roy Ladurie, E. 1974. The Peasants of Languedoc. London, Scolar
Press.

Le Roy Ladurie, E. 1978. Montaillou: Cathars and Catholics in a French
Village, 1294–1324. London, Scolar Press.

Le Roy Ladurie, E. 1979. The Territory of the Historian. London,
Harvester.

Lech, J. 1996. A short history of Polish archaeology. World
Archaeological Bulletin 8: 177–95.

Lechte, J. 1994. Fifty Key Contemporary Thinkers. London, Routledge.

Legendre, J.-P., Olivier, L. And Schnitzler, B. (eds) 2007.
L’Archaeologie NationaleSocialiste dans les Pays Occupés a L’Ouest du
Reich. Gollion, Infolio.

Leonard, R.D. 1993. The persistence of an explanatory dilemma in Contact
Period studies. In Rogers and Wilson (eds), 31–42.

Leone, M.P. (ed.) 1972. Contemporary Archaeology: A Guide to Theory and
Contributions. Carbondale, Southern Illinois University Press.

Leone, M.P. 1984. Interpreting ideology in historical archaeology: using
the rules of perspective in the William Paca Garden in Annapolis,
Maryland. In Miller and Tilley (eds), 25–36.

Leone, M.P. 2005. The Archaeology of Liberty in an American Capital:
Excavations in Annapolis. Berkeley, University of California Press

Leone, M.P. and Potter, P. 1984. Archaeological Annapolis: A Guide to
Seeing and Understanding Three Centuries of Change. Annapolis, Historic
Annapolis Foundation. Reprinted in Preucel and Hodder (eds) (1996),
570–98.

Leone, M.P. and Potter, P. 1988. The Recovery of Meaning: Historical
Archaeology in the Eastern United States. Washington, Smithsonian
Institution.

LePage, M. 2008. Evolution: a guide for the not-yet-perplexed. New
Scientist 2652, 19 April: 24–5.

Lightfoot, K., Martinez, A. and Schiff, A.M. 1998. Daily practice and
material culture in pluralistic social settings: an archaeological study
of culture change and persistence from Fort Ross, California. American
Antiquity 63(2): 199–222.

Lippert, D. 2005. Remembering humanity: how to include human values in a
scientific endeavour. International Journal of Cultural Property 12(2):
275–80.

Lippert, D. 2006. Building a bridge to cross a thousand years. American
Indian Quarterly 30: 431–40.

Little, B. 2007. Historical Archaeology: Why the Past Matters. Walnut
Creek, Left Coast Press.

López Austin, L. and López Luján, L. 2001. Mexico’s Indigenous Past.
Norman, University of Oklahoma Press.

Lubbock, J. 1865. Pre-historic Times, as Illustrated by Ancient Remains,
and the Manners and Customs of Ancient Savages. London, Williams and
Northgate.

Lucas, G. 2001. Critical Approaches to Fieldwork: Contemporary and
Historical Archaeological Practice. London, Routledge.

Lucas, G. 2005. The Archaeology of Time. London, Routledge.

Lucas, G. and Hall, M. 2006. Archaeology at the edge: an archaeological
dialogue with Martin Hall. Archaeological Dialogues 13(1): 55–67.

Lumbreras, L.G. 2005. Arqueología y Sociedad. Lima, Instituto de
Estudios Peruanos.

Lyman, R.L. and O’Brien, M.J. 2006. Measuring Time with Artifacts: A
History of Methods in American Archaeology. Lincoln, University of
Nebraska Press.

Lyman, R.L., O’Brien, M.J. and Dunnell, R.C. 1997a. The Rise and Fall of
Culture History. New York, Plenum.

Lyman, R.L., O’Brien, M.J. and Dunnell, R.C. (eds) 1997b. Americanist
Culture History: Fundamentals of Time, Space and Form. New York, Plenum.

Lyman, R.L., O’Brien, M.J. and Schiffer, M.B. (eds) 2005. Publishing
archaeology in Science and Scientific American, 1940–2003. American
Antiquity 70(1): 157–67.

Lyotard, J.-F. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
Manchester, Manchester University Press.

McAnaney, P.A. and Yoffee, N. (eds) 2009. Questioning Collapse: Human
Reselience, Ecological Vulnerability, and the Aftermath of Empire.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

McClure, S.B. 2007. Gender, technology and evolution: cultural
inheritance theory and prehistoric potters in Valencia, Spain. American
Antiquity 72(3): 485–508.

Mace, R., Holden, C.J. and Shennan, S. (eds) 2005. The Evolution of
Cultural Diversity: A Phylogenetic Approach. London, UCL Press.

McGhee, R. 2008. Aboriginalism and the problems of Indigenous
archaeology. American Antiquity 73(4): 579–97.

McGuire, K. and Hildebrandt, W. 2005. Re-thinking Great Basin foragers:
prestige hunting and costly signaling during the Middle Archaic period.
American Antiquity 70(4): 695–712.

McGuire, R.H. 1983. Breaking down cultural complexity: inequality and
heterogeneity. In Schiffer, M.B. (ed.) Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory 8. New York, Academic Press, 91–142.

McGuire, R.H. 1992. A Marxist Archaeology. San Diego, Academic Press.

McGuire, R. 1993. Archaeology and Marxism. In Schiffer, M. (ed.)
Archaeological Method and Theory 5. Tucson, University of Arizona Press,
101–58.

McGuire, R.H. 2008. Archaeology as Political Action. Berkeley,
University of California Press.

McGuire, R.H. and Paynter, R. (eds) 1991. The Archaeology of Inequality.
Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

McGuire, R.H. and Saitta, D.J. 1996. Although they have petty captains,
they obey them badly: the dialectics of Prehispanic Western pueblo
social organisation. American Antiquity 61: 197–216.

Machin, A. 2008. Why handaxes just aren’t that sexy: a response to Kohn
and Mithen. Antiquity 82: 761–9.

Mackenzie, I. (ed.) 1994. Archaeological Theory: Progress or Posture?
Aldershot, Avebury.

McLellan, D. (ed.) 1977. Karl Marx: Selected Writings. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.

McNairn, B. 1980. The Method and Theory of V. Gordon Childe. Edinburgh,
Edinburgh University Press.

McNay, L. 1992. Foucault and Feminism: Power, Gender and the Self.
Oxford, Polity Press.

McNiven, I.J. and Russell, L. 2005. Appropriated Pasts: Indigenous
Peoples and the Colonial Culture of Archaeology. Lanham, AltaMira.

Malina, J. and Vasicek, Z. 1990. Archaeology Yetserday and Today: The
Development of Archaeology in the Human Sciences. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Marcus, J. 2008. The archaeological evidence for social evolution.
Annual Review of Anthropology 37: 251–316.

Marshall, Y. (ed.) 2002. Community archaeology. Special issue, World
Archaeology 34(2).

Maschner, H.D.G. 1996. Darwinian Archaeologies. New York, Plenum Press.

Mauss, M. and Schlanger, N. 2006. Techniques, Technology and
Civilisation. Oxford, Berghahn Books.

Mellars, P. and Gibson, K. (eds) 1997. Modelling the Early Human Mind.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Mellor, A.K. 1988. Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters.
London, Routledge.

Meltzer, D. 1979. Paradigms and the nature of change in American
archaeology. American Antiquity 44: 644–57.

Mertens, E. M. (ed.) 1993. Feministische Archäologie. In Bericht zur
Archäologinnentagung 1992 in Kiel [1. Tagung des Netzwerks archäologisch
arbeitender Frauen 1992 in Kiel], edited by E. M. Mertens, J. K. Koch
and J. E. Fries, Kiel, Selbstverlag, 17–23.

Meskell, L. 1999. Archaeologies of Social Life: Age, Sex, Class, etc. in
Ancient Egypt. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Meskell, L. (ed.) 2002. Private Life in New Kingdom Egypt. Oxford,
Princeton University Press.

Meskell, L. 2004. Object Worlds in Ancient Egypt: Material Biographies
Past and Present. Oxford, Berg.

Meskell, L. (ed.) 2005. Archaeologies of Materiality. Oxford, Blackwell.

Meskell, L. and Preucel, R. (eds) 2004. A Companion to Social
Archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell.

Midgley, M. 1985. Evolution as a Religion: Strange Hopes and Stranger
Fears. London, Methuen.

Miksicek, C.H. 1987. Formation processes of the archaeobotanical record.
Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 10: 211–47.

Miller, D. 1987. Material Culture and Mass Consumption. Oxford,
Blackwell Publishers.

Miller, D. (ed.) 1995. Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of New
Studies. London, Routledge.

Miller, D. (ed.) 2005. Materiality. Durham, Duke University Press.

Miller, D. and Tilley, C. (eds) 1984. Ideology, Power and Prehistory.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Milner, G.R. 1998. The Cahokia Chiefdom. Washington, Smithsonian.

Mirza, M.N. and Dungworth, D.B. 1995. The potential misuse of genetic
analyses and the social construction of ‘race’ and ‘ethnicity’. Oxford
Journal of Archaeology 14(3): 345–54.

Mitchell, P. 1981. The Open Book of the Prehistoric World. London,
Hodder and Stoughton.

Mithen, S. 1989. Ecological interpretations of Palaeolithic art.
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 57: 103–14. Reprinted in Preucel
and Hodder (eds) (1996), 79–96.

Mithen, S. 1990. Thoughtful Foragers: A Study of Prehistoric Decision
Making. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Mithen, S. 1991. ‘A cybernetic wasteland’? Rationality, emotion and
Mesolithic foraging. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 57(2): 9–14.

Mithen, S. 1997. The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of
Art, Religion and Science. London, Thames and Hudson.

Mithen, S. (ed.) 1998. Creativity in Human Evolution and Prehistory.
London, Routledge.

Mithen, S. 2005. The Singing Neanderthals: The Origin of Music,
Language, Mind and Body. London, Weidenfeld and Nicholson.

Mithen, S. 2008. ‘Whatever turns you on’, a response to Anna Machin,
‘Why handaxes just aren’t that sexy’. Antiquity 82: 766–9.

Mobley-Tanaka, J.L. 1997. Gender and ritual space during the pithouse to
pueblo transition: subterranean mealing rooms in the North American
Southwest. American Antiquity 62(3): 437–48.

Mooney, C. 2005. The Republican War on Science. New York, Basic Books.

Moore, H.L. 1987. Space, Text and Gender. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Moore, H.L. 1988. Feminism and Anthropology. Oxford, Polity Press.

Moreland, J. 2001. Archaeology and Text. London, Duckworth.

Moreland, J. 2006. Archaeology and texts: subservience or enlightenment.
Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 136–228.

Morris, I. 2004. Classical archaeology. In Bintliff (ed.), 253–71.

Moser, S. 1996. Science, stratigraphy, and the deep sequence: excavation
vs regional survey and the question of gendered practice in archaeology.
Antiquity 70: 813–23.

Moser, S. 1998. Ancestral Images: The Iconography of Human Origins.
Ithaca, Cornell University Press.

Moser, S. 2007. On disciplinary culture: archaeology as fieldwork and
its gendered associations. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory
14(3): 235–63.

Moser, S., Glazier, D., Phillips, J.E., Nasser el Nemr, L., Saleh Mousa,
M., Nasr Aiesh, R., Richardson, S., Connor, A. and Seymour, M. 2002.
Transforming archaeology through practice: strategies for collaborative
archaeology and the Community Archaeology Project at Quseir, Egypt.
World Archaeology 34(2): 220–48.

Moss, M. 2005. Rifts in the theoretical landscape of archaeology in the
United States: a comment on Hegmon and Watkins. American Antiquity
70(3): 581–7.

Muller, J. 1997. Mississippian Political Economy. New York, Plenum.

Murray, T. 1995. On Klejn’s agenda for theoretical archaeology. Current
Anthropology 36: 290–2.

Neiman, F.D. 1997. Conspicuous consumption as wasteful advertising: a
Darwinian perspective on spatial patterns in Classic Maya terminal
monument dates. In Barton and Clark (eds), 267–90.

Neiman, F.D. 2008. The lost world of Monticello: an evolutionary
perspective. Journal of Anthropological Research 64(2): 161–94.

Nelson, M.C., Nelson, S.M. and Wylie, A. (eds) 1994. Equity Issues for
Women in Archaeology. Archaeological Papers No.5. Washington, American
Anthropological Association.

Nelson, M.C., Hegmon, M., Kulow, S. and Schollmeyer, K.G. 2006.
Archaeological and ecological perpectives on reorganization: a case
study from the Mimbres region of the US Southwest. American Antiquity
71(3): 403–32.

Nelson, S.M. (ed.) 2007. Women in Antiquity: Theoretical Approaches to
Gender and Archaeology. Lanham, AltaMira Press.

Neustupný, E. 1993. Archaeological Method. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Nicholas, G.P. 1994. On the Goddess Myth and methodology. Current
Anthropology 35: 448–9.

Nottveit, O.-M. 2006. The kidney dagger as a symbol of masculine
identity – the Ballock dagger in Scandinavian context. Norwegian
Archaeological Review 39(2): 138–50.

O’Brien, M.J. (ed.) 1996. Evolutionary Archaeology: Theory and
Application. Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.

O’Brien, M. and Lyman, R.L. 2000. Darwinian evolution is applicable to
historical archaeology. International Journal of Historical Archaeology
4(1): 71–112.

O’Brien, M.J., Lyman, R.L. and Schiffer, M.B. (eds) 2005. Archaeology a
Process: Processualism and its Progeny. Salt Lake City, University of
Utah Press.

O’Keeffe, T. 2007. Archaeology and the Pan-European Romanesque. London,
Duckworth.

Olivier, L. 2000. L’impossible archaéologie de la mémoire: à propos de W
ou le souvenir d’enfance de Georges Perec. European Journal of
Archaeology 3(3): 387–406.

Olivier, L. 2008. Le Sombre Abîme du Temps: Memoire et Archéologie.
Paris, Seuil.

Olsen, B. 2003. Material culture after text: re-membering things.
Norweigan Archaeological Review 36: 87–104.

Orme, B. 1981. Anthropology for Archaeologists: An Introduction. Ithaca,
Cornell University Press.

Orser, C. 1996. An Historical Archaeology of the Modern World. New York,
Plenum.

Orser, C. 2004. Race and Practice in Archaeological Interpretation.
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press.

Oyuela-Caycedo, A. (ed.) 1994. History of Latin American Archaeology.
Aldershot, Avebury.

Oyuela-Caycedo, A., Anaya, A., Elera, C.G., and Valdez, L.M. 1997.
Social archaeology in Latin America? Comments to T.C. Patterson.
American Antiquity 82(2): 365–76.

Parcero Oubiña, C. 2003. Looking forward in anger: social and political
transformations in the Iron Age of the North-western Iberian peninsula.
European Journal of Archaeology 6(3): 267–99.

Parsons, K. 2003. The Science Wars: Debating Scientific Knowledge and
Technology. New York, Prometheus Press.

Patrik, L.E. 1985. Is there an archaeological record? In Schiffer, M.B.
(ed.) Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 8. New York, Academic
Press, 27–62.

Patterson, O. 1982. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study.
Cambridge, Harvard University Press.

Patterson, T.C. 1986. The last sixty years: towards a social history of
Americanist archaeology. American Anthropologist 88: 7–26.

Patterson, T.C. 1990. Some theoretical tensions within and between the
processual and the postprocessual archaeologies. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 9(2): 189–200.

Patterson, T.C. 1994. Social archaeology in Latin America: an
appreciation. American Antiquity 59: 531–7.

Patterson, T.C. 1995. Towards a Social History of Archaeology in the
United States. Fort Worth, Harcourt Brace.

Patterson, T.C. and Galley, C.W. (eds) 1987. Power Relations and State
Formation. Washington, American Anthropological Association.

Pauketat, T.R. 2001. Practice and history in archaeology.
Anthropological Theory 1(1): 73–98.

Pauketat, T.R. 2004. Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Pauketat, T.R. 2007. Chiefdoms and Other Archaeological Delusions.
Lanham, AltaMira.

Peregrine, P.N. 2001. Cross-cultural comparative approaches in
archaeology. Annual Review of Anthropology 30: 1–18.

Pickering, A. 1984. Constructing Quarks: A Sociological History of
Particle Physics. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press.

Piggott, S. 1968. Ancient Europe. Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press.

Piontek, J. 2006. Origin of the Slavs as a pretext for discussion.
Archaeologia Polona 44: 317–31.

Piotrowska, D. 1997–98. Biskupin 1993–1996: archaeology, politics and
nationalism. Archaeologia Polona 35–6: 255–85.

Platt, C. 1981. The Parish Churches of Medieval England. London, Secker
and Warburg.

Platt, C. 2007. Revisionism in castle studies: A caution. Medieval
Archaeology 51: 83–102.

Pluciennik, M. 1996. Genetics, archaeology and the wider world.
Antiquity 70: 13–14.

Pluciennik, M. 2005. Social Evolution. London, Duckworth.

Politis, G. 2001. On archaeological praxis, gender bias and Indigenous
peoples in South America. Journal of Social Archaeology 1: 90–107.

Politis, G. 2002. South America: in the garden of forking paths. In
Cunlifee et al. (eds), 193–244.

Politis, G. and Alberti, A. 1999. Archaeology in Latin America. London,
Routledge.

Pollard, A.M. and Bray, P. 2007. A bicycle made for two? The integration
of scientific techniques into archaeological interpretation. Annual
Review of Anthropology 36: 245–59.

Potter, P. 1994. Public Archaeology in Annapolis: A Critical Approach to
History in Maryland’s Ancient City. Washington, Smithsonian Institution.

Pratap, A. 2009. Indigenous Archaeology in India: Prospects of an
Archaeology of the Subaltern. BAR International Series 1927. Oxford,
British Archaeological Reports.

Pratezellis, A. 2000. Death by Theory: A Tale of Mystery and
Archaeological Theory. New York, Altamira.

Preucel, R.W. 1991a. The philosophy of archaeology. In Preucel (ed.),
17–29.

Preucel, R.W. (ed.) 1991b. Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies:
Multiple Ways of Knowing the Past. Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale Occasional Paper No. 10. Carbondale, Southern Illinois
University Press.

Preucel, R.W. 1995. The postprocessual condition. Journal of
Archaeological Research 3(2): 147–75.

Preucel, R.W. 2006. Archaeological Semiotics. Oxford, Blackwell.

Preucel, R. and Hodder, I. (eds) 1996. Contemporary Archaeology in
Theory: A Reader. Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Pyburn, K.A. (ed.) 2003. Ungendering Civilisation: Rethinking the
Archaeological Record. London, Routledge.

Raab, L.M. and Larson, D.O. 1997. Medieval climatic anomaly and
punctuated cultural evolution in coastal southern California. American
Antiquity 62(2): 319–36.

Rainbird, P. and Hamilakis, Y. (eds) 2001. Interrogating Padagogies:
Archaeology in Higher Education. BAR International Series 948. Oxford,
British Archaeological Reports.

Rathje, W.L., Hughes, W.W., Wilson, D.C., Tani, M.K., Archer, G.H.,
Hunt, R.G. and Jones, T.W. 1992. The archaeology of contemporary
landfills. American Antiquity 57(3): 437–47.

Redman, C. (ed.) 1973. Research and Theory in Current Archaeology. New
York, Wiley.

Redman, C.L. 1978. The Rise of Civilisation: From Early Farmers to Urban
Society in the Ancient Near East. San Francisco, Freeman.

Redman, C.L. 1991. Distinguished lecture in archaeology: in defence of
the seventies. American Anthropologist 93: 295–307.

Reisch, G.A. 1991. Chaos, history, and narrative. History and Theory
30(1): 1–20.

Renfrew, A.C. 1973a. Before Civilisation: The Radiocarbon Revolution and
Prehistoric Europe. Harmondsworth, Penguin.

Renfrew, A.C. (ed.) 1973b. The Explanation of Culture Change. London,
Duckworth.

Renfrew, A.C. 1982. Socio-economic change in ranked societies. In
Renfrew et al. (eds), 1–8.

Renfrew, A.C. 1984. Approaches to Social Archaeology. Edinburgh,
Edinburgh University Press.

Renfrew, A.C. (ed.) 1986. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-Political
Change. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Renfrew, A.C. 1993. Cognitive archaeology: some thoughts on the
archaeology of thought. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3(2): 248–50.

Renfrew, A.C. 2005. Cognitive archaeology. In Renfrew and Bahn (eds),
41–5.

Renfrew, A.C. 2007. Prehistory: Making of the Human Mind. London,
Weidenfeld and Nicholson.

Renfrew, A.C. and Bahn, P. 2004. Archaeology: Theories, Methods and
Practice. Fourth revised edition. London, Thames and Hudson.

Renfrew, A.C. and Bahn, P. (eds) 2005. Archaeology: The Key Concepts.
London, Routledge.

Renfrew, A.C. and Bahn, P. 2008. Archaeology: Theories, Methods and
Practice. Fifth edition. London, Thames and Hudson.

Renfrew, A.C. and Cooke, K. (eds) 1979. Transformations: Mathematical
Approaches to Culture Change. London, Academic Press.

Renfrew, A.C. and Shennan, A. (eds) 1982. Ranking, Resource and
Exchange. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Renfrew, A.C. and Zubrow, E. 1994. The Ancient Mind: Elements of
Cognitive Archaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Renfrew, A.C., Frith, C. and Malafouris, L. (eds) 2009. The Sapient
Mind: Archaeology Meets Neuroscience. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Revell, L. 2009. Roman Imperialism and Local Identities. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Reyman, J. (ed.) 1992. Rediscovering Our Past: Essays on the History of
American Archaeology. Aldershot, Avebury.

Richerson, P.J. and Boyd, R. 2005. Not By Genes Alone: How Culture
Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Ridley, M. (ed.) 1997. Evolution: An Oxford Reader. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.

Rindos, D. 1989. Undirected variation and the Darwinian explanation of
cultural change. Archaeological Method and Theory 1: 1–45.

Robbins, R. (ed.) 1972. Sir Thomas Browne: Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia,
and the Garden of Cyrus. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Robin, C. 2006. Gender, farming, and long-term change: Maya historical
and archaeological perspectives. Current Anthropology 47(3): 409–33.

Rogers, J.D. and Wilson, S.M. (eds) 1993. Ethnohistory and Archaeology:
Approaches to Postcontact Change in the Americas. New York, Plenum.

Ronnes, H. 1999. Architecture and Elite Culture in the United Provinces,
England and Ireland, 1500–1700. Amsterdam University Press.

Rorty, R. 1989. Contingency, Irony and Solidarity. Oxford, Blackwell
Publishers.

Rorty, R. and Engel, P. 2007. What’s The Use of Truth? New York,
Columbia University Press.

Roscoe, P.B. 1995. The perils of ‘positivism’ in cultural anthropology.
American Anthropologist 97(3): 492–504.

Rosser, S.V. (ed.) 1988. Feminism within the Science and Health Care
Professions: Overcoming Resistance. New York, Pergamon.

Rouseeau, J. 2006. Rethinking Social Evolution: The Prespective from
MiddleRange Societies. Montreal, McGill-Queen’s University Press.

Rubertone, P.E. 2000. The historical archaeology of native Americans.
Annual Review of Anthropology: 425–46.

Russell, P. 1993. The Palaeolithic mother-goddess: fact or fiction? In
du Cros and Smith (eds), 93–7. Reprinted in Hays-Gilpin and Whitley
(eds) (1998), 261–8.

Sabloff, J. 1990. New Archaeology and the Ancient Maya. New York,
Scientific American.

Sabloff, J. 2008. Archaeology Matters: Action Archaeology in the Modern
World. Walnut Creek, Left Coast Press.

Sahlins, M. 1995. How ‘Natives’ Think: About Captain Cook, For Example.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Saitta, D. 1992. Radical archaeology and middle-range theory. Antiquity
66: 886–97.

Santley. R.S. and Alexander, R.T. 1992. The political economy of
core-periphery systems. In Schortman and Urban (eds), 23–49.

Saunders, A.D. 1977. Introduction to five castle excavations.
Archaeological Journal 134: 1–10.

Scarry, J.F. (ed.) 1996. Political Structure and Change in the
Prehistoric Southeastern United States. Gainesville, University of
Florida Press.

Scheinsohn, V. 2003. Hunter-gatherer archaeology in south America.
Annual Review of Anthropology 32: 339–61.

Schiffer, M.B. 1976. Behavioural Archaeology. New York, Academic Press.

Schiffer, M.B. 1987. Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
Albuquerque, University of New Mexico Press.

Schiffer, M.B. 1995. Behavioral Archaeology: First Principles. Salt Lake
City, University of Utah Press.

Schiffer, M.B. 1996. Some relationships between behavioural and
evolutionary archaeologies. American Antiquity 61: 643–62.

Schiffer, M.B. (ed.) 2000. Social Theory and Archaeology. Salt Lake
City, University of Utah Press.

Schiffer, M.B. 2002. Behavioral Archaeology. Second edition. New York,
Percheron.

Schiffer, M.B. and Miller, A.R. 1999. The Material Life of Human Beings:
Artifacts, Bahviour and Communication. London, Routledge.

Schmidt, M. 2001. Untitled review. European Journal of Archaeology 4:
273–8.

Schmidt, P.R. and Patterson, T.C. (eds) 1995. Making Alternative
Histories: The Practice of Archaeology and History in Non-Western
Settings. Santa Fe, School of American Research Press.

Schmidt, P.R. and Walz, J.R. 2007. Re-presenting African pasts through
historical archaeology. American Antiquity 72(1): 53–70.

Schnapp, A. 1993. The Discovery of the Past. Paris, Editions Carré.

Shnirelman, V.A. 1995. Alternative prehistory. Journal of European
Archaeology 3: 1–20.

Schortman, E.M. and Urban, P.A. (eds) 1992. Resources, Power, and
Regional Interaction. New York, Plenum.

Schortman, E.M. and Urban, P.A. 1994. Living on the edge: core/periphery
relations in ancient southeastern Mesoamerica. Current Anthropology 35:
401–13.

Schrire, C. 1995. Digging Through Darkness: Chronicles of an
Archaeologist. Charlottesville, University of Virginia Press.

Schulke, A. 2000. ‘Die Mittel- und Osteuropäische Ür und
Frühgesichtsforschung in den Jahren 1933–1945’, Berlin, 19–23 November
1998. Journal of European Archaeology 3(3): 417–29.

Schwartz, G.M. and Nichols, J.J. (eds) 2006. After Collapse: The
Regeneration of Complex Societies. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Schwyzer, P. 2007. Archaeologies of English Renaissance Literature.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Sebastian, L. 1996. The Chaco Anasazi: Sociopolitical Evolution in the
Prehistoric Southwest. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Segal, D.A. and Yanagisako, S.J. 2005. Unrapping the Sacred Bundle:
Reflections on the Disciplining of Anthropology. Durham, Duke University
Press.

Seifert, D. (ed.) 1991. Gender in historical archaeology. Historical
Archaeology 25(4): 1–155.

Shakespeare, T. 2006. Disability Rights and Wrongs. London, Routledge.

Shalin, D.N. 1992. Critical theory and the pragmatist challenge.
American Journal of Sociology 98(2): 237–79.

Shanks, M. 1992. Experiencing the Past. London, Routledge.

Shanks, M. 1996. Classical Archaeology of Greece: Experiences of the
Discipline. London, Routledge.

Shanks, M. and Pearson, M. 2001. Theatre/Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. 1987. Social Theory and Archaeology. Oxford,
Polity Press.

Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. 1992. Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory and
Practice. Second edition. London, Routledge.

Shanks, M. and McGuire, R. 1996. The craft of archaeology. American
Antiquity 61(1): 75–88.

Shennan, S.J. (ed.) 1988. Archaeological Approaches to Cultural
Identity. London, Routledge.

Shennan, S.J. 2001. Demography and cultural innovation: a model and its
implications for modern human culture. Cambridge Archaeological Journal
11: 5–16.

Shennan, S.J. 2002. Genes, Memes and Human History. London, Duckworth.

Shennan, S.J. 2008. Evolution in archaeology. Annual Review of
Anthropology 37: 75–1.

Shepherd, N. 2002. The politics of archaeology in Africa. Annual Review
of Anthropology 31: 189–209.

Silliman, S. 2005. Culture contact or colonialism? Challenges in the
archaeology of native North America. American Antiquity 70(1): 55–74.

Singleton, T. (ed.) 1985. The Archaeology of Slavery and Plantation
Life. Orlando, Academic Press.

Singleton, T. 1995. The archaeology of slavery in North America. Annual
Review of Anthropology 24: 119–40.

Skibo, J.M. and Schiffer, M. 2008. People and Things: A Behavioural
Approach to Material Culture. New York, Springer.

Skibo, J.M., Walker, W.H. and Neilsen, A.E. 1995. Expanding Archaeology.
Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press.

Smail, D.L. 2008. On Deep History and the Human Brain. Berkeley,
University of California Press.

Smith, A.T. 2003. The Political Landscape: Constellations of Authority
in Early Complex Societies. Berkeley, University of California Press.

Smith, C. and Ward, G.K. (eds) 2000. Indigenous Cultures in an
Interconnected World. London, Allen and Unwin.

Smith, C. and Wobst, M. 2005a. Decolonising archaeological theory and
practice. In Smith and Wobst (eds), 5–16.

Smith, C. and Wobst, M. (eds) 2005b. Indigenous Archaeologies:
Decolonising Theory and Practice. London, Routledge.

Smith, J. 2009. Charles Darwin and Victorian Visual Culture. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Smith, L. 1994. Heritage management as postprocessual archaeology.
Antiquity 88: 300–9.

Smith, M.E. 2004. The archaeology of ancient state economies. Annual
Review of Anthropology 33: 73–102.

Snead, J.E. 2008. Ancestral Landscapes of the Pueblo World. Tucson,
University of Arizona Press.

Sofaer, J. 2006. The Body as Material Culture: A Theoretical
Osteoarchaeology. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Sofaer Derevenski, J. (ed.) 2000. Children and Material Culture. London,
Routledge.

Sokal, A. 2008. Beyond the Hoax: Science, Philosophy and Culture.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Sokal, A. and Bricmont, J. 1998. Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern
Intellectuals’ Abuse of Science. New York, Picador.

Sommer, U. 2000. Theory and tradition in German archaeology.
Archaeological Dialogues 7: 160–8.

Sørensen, M.L.S. 1992. Gender archaeology and Scandinavian Bronze Age
studies. Norwegian Archaeological Review 25(1): 31–49.

Sørensen, M.L.S. 2000. Gender Archaeology. Oxford, Polity.

South, S. 1997a. Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. New York,
Academic Press.

South, S. (ed.) 1997b. Research Strategies in Historical Archaeology.
New York, Academic Press.

Spector, J. 1993. What This Awl Means: Feminist Archaeology at a
Wahpeton Dakota Village. St Paul, Minnesota Historical Society Press.

Spencer, C.S. 1997. Evolutionary approaches in archaeology. Journal of
Archaeological Research 5: 209–64.

Spencer, C.S. and Redmond, E. 2004. Primary state formation in
Mesoamerica. Annual Review of Anthropology 33: 173–99.

Spender, D. 1980. Man Made Language. London, Routledge.

Staecker, J. 2005. The concepts of imitation and translation:
perceptions of a Viking Age past. Norwegian Archaeological Review 38(1):
3–28.

Stanish, C. 2001. The origin of state societies in south America. Annual
Review of Anthropology 30, 41–64.

Steward, J. 1955. Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of
Multilinear Evolution. Chicago, University of Illinois Press.

Steward, J. 1977. Evolution and Ecology. Chicago, University of Illinois
Press.

Stout, A. 2008. Creating Prehistory: Druids, Ley Hunters and
Archaeologists in PreWar Britain. Oxford, Blackwell.

Sturt, F. 2006. Local knowledge is required: a rhythm analytical
approach to the late Mesolithic and early Neolithic of the East Anglian
fenland. Journal of Maritime Archaeology 1: 119–39.

Tabaczyñski, S. 1993. The relationship between history and archaeology:
elements of the present debate. Medieval Archaeology 37: 1–14.

Tabaczyñski, S. 2006. Archaeology – anthropology – history: unconscious
foundationsn and conscious expressions of social life. Archaeologia
Polonia 44: 15–39.

Tabaczyñski, S. 2007. Polish archaeology in my lifetime. Antiquity 81:
1074–82.

Tainter, J. 1990. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Tainter, J. 2006. Archaeology of overshoot and collapse. Annual Review
of Anthropology 35: 59–74.

Tarlow, S. and West, S. (eds) 1998. The Familiar Past? Archaeologies of
Late Historic Britain. London, Routledge.

Taylor, C.C., Everson, P. and Wilson-North, R. 1990. Bodiam Castle,
Sussex. Medieval Archaeology 34: 155–7.

Taylor, W. 1948. A Study of Archaeology. Memoirs of the American
Anthropological Association 69.

Teltser, P.A. 1995. Evolutionary Archaeology: Methodological Issues.
Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Terrenato, N. (ed.) 2000. Archaeologia Teorica: X Ciclo di Lezioni Sulla
Richercha Applicata in Archaeologia Certosa di Pontignano (Siena), 9–14
Augusto 1999. Firenze, Insegna del Giglio.

Thomas, D.H. 1998. Archaeology. Third edition. Orlando, Harcourt Brace.

Thomas, D.H. 2000. Skull Wars: Kennewick Man, Archaeology, and the
Battle for Native American Identity. New York, Basic Books.

Thomas, D.H. and Kelly, R.L. 2006. Archaeology. Belmont, Wadsworth.

Thomas, J. 1988. Neolithic explanations revisited: the
Mesolithic-Neolithic transition in Britain and south Scandinavia.
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 54: 59–66.

Thomas, J. 1991. A reply to Steven Mithen. Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society 57(2): 15–20.

Thomas, J. 1999. Understanding the Neolithic. London, Routledge.

Thomas, J. 1999. Time, Culture and Identity: An Interpretative
Archaeology. London, Routledge.

Thomas, J. 2004. The great dark book: archaeology, experience, and
interpretation. In Bintliff (ed.), 21–36.

Thomas, J. 2004. Archaeology and Modernity. London, Routledge.

Thompson, E.P. 1978. The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays. London,
Merlin Press.

Tilley, C. 1991. Material Culture and Text: The Art of Ambiguity.
London, Routledge.

Tilley, C. 1994. A Phenomenology of Landscape. London, Routledge.

Tilley, C. 2004. The Materiality of Stone: Explorations in Landscape
Phenomenology. Oxford, Berg.

Tilley, C. 2005. Phenomenology. In Renfrew and Bahn (eds), 201–7.

Tilley, C. 2008. Body and Image: Explorations in Landscape
Phenomenology. Walnut Creek, Left Coast Press.

Tilley, C., Keuchler-Fogden, S., Keane, W., Rowlands, M. And Spyer, P.
(eds) 2006. Handbook of Material Culture. London, Sage.

Tomášková, S. 2006. Yes, Virginia, there is gender: shamanism and
archaeology’s many histories. In Williamson and Bisson (eds), 92–113.

Tomášková, S. 2007. Mapping a future: archaeology, feminism, and
scientific practice. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14:
264–84.

Toynbee, A.J. 1934. A Study of History. Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Trigger, B.G. 1980a. Gordon Childe: Revolutions in Archaeology. London,
Thames and Hudson.

Trigger, B.G. 1980b. Archaeology and the image of the American Indian.
American Antiquity 45: 662–76.

Trigger, B.G. 1984. Archaeology at the crossroads: what’s new? Annual
Review of Anthropology 13: 275–300.

Trigger, B.G. 1989. Hyperrelativism, responsibility and the social
sciences. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26: 776–91.

Trigger, B.G. 1991. Distinguished lecture in archaeology: constraint and
freedom a new synthesis for archaeological explanation. American
Anthropologist 93: 551–69.

Trigger, B.G. 1993. Marxism in contemporary Western archaeology. In
Schiffer, M. (ed.) Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 5.
Tucson, University of Arizona Press, 159–200.

Trigger, B.G. 1995a. Expanding middle-range theory. Antiquity 69:
449–58.

Trigger, B.G. 1995b. Romanticism, nationalism, and archaeology. In Kohl
and Fawcett (eds), 263–79.

Trigger, B.G. 1997. Sociocultural Evolution. Oxford, Blackwell
Publishers.

Trigger, B.G. 2000. Roger Beefy’s primer. Cambridge Archaeological
Journal 10(2): 367–91.

Trigger, B.G. 2006. A History of Archaeological Thought. Second edition.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Tringham, R. 1991. Households with faces: the challenge of gender in
prehistoric architectural remains. In Conkey and Gero (eds), 93–131.

Trinkaus, E. and Shipman, P. 1992. The Neandertals: Changing the Image
of Mankind. New York, Knopf.

Tuhiwai Smith, L. 1999. Decolonising Methodologies: Research and
Indigenous Peoples. Dunedin, University of Otago Press.

Turnbaugh, W.A. 1993. Assessing the significance of European goods in
17th century Naragansett society. In Rogers and Wilson (eds), 133–57.

Tusa, N. and Kirkinen, T. (eds) 1992. Nordic TAG: The Archaeologist and
His/Her Reality. Report from the 4th Nordic TAG Conference. Helsinki,
University of Helsinki.

Ucko, P. 1989. Academic Freedom and Apartheid. London, Duckworth.

Ucko, P. (ed.) 1995. Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspective. London,
Routledge.

Unstead, R.J. 1953. Looking at History 1: From Cavemen to Vikings.
London, Black.

Van Dyke, R. and Alcock, S. (eds) 2003. Archaeologies of Memory. Oxford,
Blackwell.

Van Dommelen, P. 2000. Material concerns and boundless diversity.
European Journal of Archaeology 3(3): 409–16.

Veit, U. 1988. Ethnic concepts in German prehistory: a case study in the
relationship between cultural identity and archaeological objectivity.
In Shennan (ed.), 35–56.

Virágos, G. 2006. The Social Archaeology of Residential Sites: Hungarian
Noble Residences and Their Social Context From the 13th Through to the
16th Century: An Outline for Methodology. BAR International Series 1583.
Oxford, British Archaeological Reports.

Voss, B. 2008a. Sexuality studies in archaeology. Annual Review of
Anthropology 37: 317–36.

Voss, B. 2008b. Gender, race and labor in the archaeology of the Spanish
colonial Americas. Current Anthropology 49(5): 861–93.

Voss, B. 2008c. The Archaeology of Ethnogenesis: Race and Sexuality in
Colonial San Fransisco. Berkeley, University of California Press.

Walde, D. and Willows, N.D. (eds) 1991. The Archaeology of Gender.
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Chacmool Conference. Calgary, University
of Calgary Press.

Wall, D.Z. 1994. The Archaeology of Gender: Separating the Spheres in
Urban America. New York, Plenum.

Wallerstein, I. 1974. The Modern World-System. New York, Academic Press.

Walsh, K. 1992. The Representation of the Past: Museums and Heritage in
the Postmodern World. London, Routledge.

Warnier, J.-P. 1999. Construire la Culture Materielle: l’homme qui
pensait avec ses doigts. Paris, Presses Universitaires de France.

Warnier, J.-P. 2001. A praxeological approach to subjectivation in a
material world. Journal of Material Culture 6(1): 5–24.

Washburn, D.K. (ed.) 1983. Structure and Cognition in Art. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Wason, P.K. 1994. The Archaeology of Rank. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Watkins, J. 2000. Indigenous Archaeology: American Indian Values and
Scientific Practice. Walnut Creek, AltaMira Press.

Watkins, J. 2003. Beyond the margin: American Indians, First Nations,
and archaeology in north America. American Antiquity 68: 273–85.

Watson, P.J. 1991. A parochial primer: the new dissonance as seen from
the midcontinental United States. In Preucel (ed.), 265–76.

Watson, P.J. 1995. Archaeology, anthropology and the culture concept.
American Anthropologist 97(4): 683–94.

Watson, P.J., LeBlanc, S.A. and Redman, C.L.R. 1971. Explaation in
Archaeology: An Explicitly Scientific Approach. New York, Columbia
University Press.

Watson, P.J., LeBlanc, S.A. and Redman, C.L.R. 1984. Archaeological
Explanation: The Scientific Method in Archaeology. New York, Columbia.

Watson, R.A. 1990. Ozymandias, king of kings: post-processual radical
archaeology as critique. American Antiquity 41: 410–15.

Watson, R.A. 1991. What the New Archaeology has accomplished. Current
Anthropology 32: 275–91.

Webmoor, T. 2007. What about ‘one more turn after the social’ in
archaeological reasoning? Taking things seriously. Word Archaeology
39(4): 369–78.

Webmoor, T. and Witmore, C.L. 2008. Things are us! A commentary on
human/things relations under the banner of a ‘social’ archaeology.
Norwegian Archaeological Review 41(1): 53–70.

Wheatley, D., Earl, G.P. and Poppy, S. (eds) 2002. Contemporary Themes
in Archaeological Computing. Oxford, Oxbow.

White, H. 1987. The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and
Historical Representation. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.

White, L. 1949. The Science of Culture: A Study of Man and Civilisation.
New York, Farar, Stroux and Giroux.

Whitley, D.S. (ed.) 1998. Reader in Archaeological Theory:
Post-Processual and Cognitive Approaches. London, Routledge.

Whitley, J. 2002. Too many ancestors. Antiquity 76: 119–26.

Wilcox, M. 2010. NAGPRA and Indigenous peoples: the social context,
controversies and the transformation of American archaeology. In Ashmore
et al. (eds).

Wilkie, L. 2010. The Lost Boys of Zeta Psi: A Historical Archaeology of
Masculinity in a University Fraternity. University of California Press,
Berkeley.

Wilks, R.R. 1985. The ancient Maya and the political present. Journal of
Anthropological Research 41(3): 307–26.

Willey, G.R. and Sabloff, J. 1993. A History of American Archaeology,
Third edition. New York, Freeman.

Williams, R. 1988. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society.
London, Fontana.

Williamson, R.F. and Bisson, M.S. (eds) 2006. The Archaeology of Bruce
Trigger: Theoretical Empiricism. Montreal, McGill-Queen’s Press.

Williamson, T. and Bellamy, E. 1983. Ley Lines in Question. London,
Heinemann.

Wilson, E.O. 2006. From So Simple a Beginning: The Four Great Books of
Charles Darwin. New York, Norton.

Wilson, S. 1999. The Emperor’s Giraffe And Other Stories of Cultures in
Contact. New York, Basic Books.

Witmore, C.L. 2006. Vision, media, noise and the perception of time:
symmetrical approaches to the mediation of the natural world. Journal of
Material Culture 11(3): 267–92.

Wolpert, L. 1992. The Unnatural Nature of Science. London, Faber.

Woodward, I. 2007. Understanding Material Culture. London, Sage.

Wright, R. (ed.) 1996. Gender and Archaeology. Philadelphia, University
of Pennsylvania Press.

Wylie, A. 1985. The reaction against analogy. Advances in Archaeological
Method and Theory 8: 63–111.

Wylie, A. 1992a. On scepticism, philosophy, and archaeological science.
Current Anthropology 33: 209–13.

Wylie, A. 1992b. The interplay of evidential constraints and political
interests: recent archaeological research on gender. American Antiquity
57: 15–35. Reprinted in Preucel and Hodder (eds), 431–59.

Wylie, A. 1992c. On ‘heavily decomposing red herrings’: scientific
method in archaeology and the ladening of evidence with theory. In
Embree (ed.) (1992), 269–88.

Wylie, A. 1993a. A proliferation of new archaeologies: ‘Beyond
Objectivism and Relativism’. In Yoffee and Sherratt (eds), 20–6.

Wylie, A. 1993b. Workplace issues for women in archaeology: the chilly
climate. In du Cros and Smith (eds), 245–60.

Wylie, A. 1996. The constitution of archaeological evidence: gender
politics and science. In Galison and Stump (eds), 311–43.

Wylie, A. 2002. Thinking From Things: Essays in the Philosophy of
Archaeology. Berkeley, University of California Press.

Wylie, A. 2006. Moderate relativism, political objectivism. In
Williamson, R.F. and Bisson, M.S. (eds), 25–35.

Yarrow, T. 2003. Artefactual persons: the relational capacities of
persons and things in the practice of excavation. Norwegian
Archaeological Review 36(1): 65–73.

Yentsch, A. 1991. The symbolic divisions of pottery: sex-related
attributes of English and Anglo-American household pots. In McGuire and
Paynter (eds), 192–230. Reprinted in Preucel and Hodder (eds) (1996),
315–48.

Yentsch, A.E. 1994. A Chesapeake Family and Their Slaves. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Yentsch, A.E. and Beaudry, M.C. (eds) 1992. The Art and Mystery of
Historical Archaeology: Essays in Honour of James Deetz. Boca Raton, CRC
Press.

Yoffee, N. 1979. The decline and rise of Mesopotamian civilisation: an
ethnoarchaeological perspective on the evolution of social complexity.
American Antiquity 44: 5–35.

Yoffee, N. 2005. Myths of the Archaic State: Evolution of the Earliest
Cities, States and Civilisations. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Yoffee, N. and Cowgill, G.L. (eds) 1988. The Collapse of Ancient States
and Civilisations. Tucson, University of Arizona Press.

Yoffee, N. and Sherratt, A. (eds) 1993. Archaeological Theory: Who Sets
The Agenda? Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Zeist, W.V. and Casparie, W.A. (eds) 1984. Plants and Ancient Man:
Studies in Palaeoethnobotany. Rotterdam, Balkema.

Index

Acheulean

Ackroyd, P.

actor-network theory

actualistic studies

Adams, D.

Adaptation; and creativity; see also Darwinism

Aegean

African-American archaeology; see also African Burial Ground

African Burial Ground

African historical archaeology

agency

Alcock, L.

Alexander, R.

Althusser, L.

analogy; formal versus relational; organic

Anasazi see ancestral pueblo

ancestor(s)

ancestral pueblo (Anasazi)

androcentrism

Anglo-Saxons

Anglophone bias

Annales school

Annapolis, the Archaeology in Annapolis Project

anthropology

antiquarianism

archaeological practice

Arizona

art and architectural history

Atalay, S.

artefacts, analysis; expressions of cultural norms; expressions of
shared ideas; knowledge of; love of

Arts and Humanities Research Council

Atkinson, R.

Atwill, L.

astronomy

Auel, J.

Australian Indigenous peoples (Aborigines)

Avebury

awl handles

Ayodha

Azande

Bacon, F.

Bahn, P.

Baines, J.

band societies

Bede, the Venerable

behaviourism; behavioural archaeology see also Schiffer, Rathje, Skibo

Bellamy, L.

benchmarking in the UK; Australia

Berkeley, G.

Berlin wall

Bettinger, R.L.

Bible

Binford, L.

Blakey, M.

Bloch, M.

Boas, F.

Bodiam castle

body

Bordes, F.

Bosch-Gimpera, P.

Bourdieu, P.

Boyd, R.

Braudel, F.

Braveheart

British Empire

Britons, ancient

Bronze Age

Browne, Sir Thomas

Brumfiel, E.

Brunel, I.K.

Butler, J.

Cahokia

Calvanism

Cambridge Group for the study of population and social structure

capitalism

Carandini

carbon-

Carey, J.

Carroll, L.

Cartesian view

castle(s)

Çatal Höyük

Celts

Central and Eastern European archaeology

Centre for the evolution of cultural diversity UCL

Chaco Canyon

chaines operatoires

Chaney, L.

Chartier, R.

chemical analysis

chiefdom(s); chiefdom societies

Childe, V.G.

children, archaeology of; childhood

chimneys; see also medieval houses

China

chunkey

Churchill, W.

civilization

Clark, Grahame

Clarke, D.L.

class; see also Marxism

Classical archaeology; classical civilization; classics departments;
classical period; classical vases

co-evolutionary theory

Cobb, C.

cognitive archaeology

cognitive processualism

Cohen, G.A.

Collingwood, R.G.

common sense, inadequacy of

community archaeology

competition

complex societies

complexity theory

computers, and archaeology

Comte, A.

conflict

Conkey, M.

Conservative party

context; contextual approach

contingency

contradiction

Copernicus

correlation

Coulson, C.

craft specialization

Creationism

creativity

critical theory

Croce, B.

crop processing

Crumley, C.

Culler, J.

cultural ecology

cultural evolution

cultural materialism

culture; archaeological; aquatic view; essence; gay and lesbian
subculture; normative view of; as polythetic as system; see also systems

culture history; as fetish

culture process; see also process

cybernetics

Dakota

Dalyngrygge, Sir Edward

Daniel, G.

Dark age(s)

Darwin, C.

Darwinian archaeology; Darwinian ideas; Darwinian models; evolution

Dawkins, R.

Deagan, K.

death of the author

decentring of the subject

deconstruction

Deetz, J.F.

demographic

Denmark

Dennett, D.C.

Derrida, J.

Descartes, R.

diachrony

dialectic

diffusion

direct historical approach

disability

disciplinarity

discourse

diversity

DNA studies

dog(s), gnawing

Donne, J.

Dorset cursus

Down House

drift

dual inheritance theory; see also co-evolutionary theory

Dunnell, R.

Durkheim, E.

Earle, T.

Easthope, A.

ecology; see also cultural ecology

ecosystems

Eerkens, J.

Einstein, A.

emic, versus etic

emotions

empiricism; as machismo

Engels, F.

English Heritage

English school of landscape archaeology and history; see also landscape

Englishness

Enlightenment philosophy

environment; environmental archaeology; see also cultural ecology

epistemology

equifinality

Ertebølle

essentialism

ethnicity

ethnoarchaeology

ethnocentrism

ethnogenesis

ethnography; ethnographic present

European Community

evaluation and testing; hypotheses

Evans, R.

evolution; multilinear

evolutionary psychology

exchange and trade

experimental archaeology

faction

falsificationism

fascism

feedback

feminism; and careers issues; feminists

fetishism

Feyerabend, P.

fieldwork; see also practice

Flannery, K.

food preparation

formalism; versus substantivism debate

Foucault, M.

fourfield approach

Fowles, J.

Frankenstein

Frankfurt School; see also critical theory

freedom, and slavery

French archaeology; archaeological theory

Freud, S.

Fried, M.

Frisians

Fukuyama, F.

function; functionalism; functional explanantion

Furholt, M.

Galileo

Gamble, C.

Garrod, D.

gay and lesbian studies; see also queer theory

Geertz, C.

gender; and sex

generalization

genes

geographical information systems

geology

George, St

Georgian Order

Gero, J.

Giddens, A.

giraffe(s)

Glassie, H.

Glastonbury

Goffman, E.

Gould, S.J.

Greek stoa

Griffin, W.

Habermas, J.

hall, open; see also medieval houses

Hallström, G.

hand

Harris, M.

Hawkes, C.

Hawkes, J.

Hegel, F.

Hegmon, M.

Heidegger

hermeneutics

heterarchy

heterosexism

heuristic models

Hillman, G.

historical archaeology; history departments

historical idealism

historical narrative

historical periods

historicism

historiography

history, and archaeology

Hobbes, T.

Hodder, I.

Hodges, R.

Holocaust denial groups

Holt, J.Z.

Holthorf, C.

homeostasis

Hopewell culture

Hopi; see also ancestral pueblo

Hoskins, W.G.

Howard University

human behavioural ecology; see also cultural ecology

human remains

humanism

Husserl, E.

hypothetico-deductive-nomological (HDN) model

icon

idealism

identity

ideology

inclusion

index

Indigenous knowledge

individualism

individuals

inductivism

Industrial Revolution

innocence, loss of

interpretative archaeology; see also postprocessual

Inuit

Italian archaeology

jargon

Jung, C.

Jutes

Kant, I.

Karlsson, H.

Kelly, R.

Kennewick Man

Kidder, A.

Klejn, L.S.

Kluckholn, C.

Kohn, M.

Kristiansen, K.

Kroeber, A.

Kuhn, T.

Kula

!Kung San

Ladurie, Emmanuel le Roy

Lamarck, A.

landscape; see also English school of landscape archaeology and history

Latin American social archaeology

Latour, B.

LeBlanc, S.A.

LeGoff, J.

LePage, M.

legitimation; see also ideology

Leone, M.

Leroi-Gourhan, A.

Lévi-Strauss, C.

ley lines

Linearbandkeramik (LBK)

linguistic turn

Little Rapids

Little Red Riding Hood

lived experience

Livy

Locke, J.

logicism

logocentrism; logocentric fallacy

longue dureé

lordship

lost tribes of Israel

Lubbock, Sir John

Lucas, G.

Lyell, J.

Lyman, R.L.

Lyotard, F.

Macmillan, H.

Maine, Sir Henry

Major, J.

male bias; male dominance

Marcus, J.

Marinato, S.

marriage, historical interpretation of

Marx, K.

Marxism

masculinity

material culture,

materialism; materiality

Materialschlacht

Maya; classic collapse of; temples

Mazaokeyiwin

McCarthyism

meanings

medieval archaeology; medieval europe; medieval history; medieval houses

megaliths

meme(s)

memory

mentalism

Merleau-Ponty

Merton, R.

Mesoamerica

Mesopotamia

method

methodological individualism

methodology; and theory

Mexico

middle-range theory

Minnesota

Minoan civilization

Mithen, S.

moda de vida

modernism; in architecture

Moore, H.

morality; Victorian

Moreland, J.

Morgan, L.H.

Mousterian question

multiculturalism

multilinear evolution

multivocality

Nämforsen

National Parks Service (US)

National Science Foundation

National Trust

nationalism

Native American(s); pottery

Nelson, Lord Horatio

Neolithic

New Age travellers

New Archaeology

New Cultural History

New Geography

New Social History

Newfoundland

Nietszche, F.

norms; normative approach

North America

North American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)

Nuba

Nunamiut

Oaxaca

Obama, B.

Obeyesekere, G.

O’Brien, M.J.

Olivier, L.

Olmec(s)

ontology

optimal foraging theory

origins human; Descent of Man evolutionary; Origins of Species

Orkney

Orme, B.

Orton, C.

Orwell, G.

Palaeolithic; art; see also Mousterian

paradigm(s)

Parthenon frieze

particularism

patriarchy

Payne, S.

performativity

phallocentrism; see also androcentrism

phenomenology

phenotypes

philosophy of science

Pickering, A.

Pierce, C.

Piggott, S.

Pitt Rivers, A.L.F.; museum

Plato

Platt, C.

Pluciennik, M.

Politics; political engagement; political economy; political present

Polynesia

polythetic

positivism; logical positivism; see also empiricism

postcolonialism

postmodernism

postprocessual archaeology; see also processual archaeology

poststructuralists

practice; gendered; as machismo; see also agency and archaeological
practice

practice theory; see also agency

Praetzellis, A.

pragmatism

prehistory, as a distinct discipline

prestige

Preucel, R.W.

problem orientation

process; processual approaches to gender; processual archaeology;
processualism; see also culture process and postprocessual archaeology

production

progress

Propertius

Protestantism

psychologists

quarks

queer archaeologies; theory; see also gay and lesbian theory

race

Radcliffe-Brown, P.

Radical Archaeologists Talk Shop

Randsborg, C.

Ranke

ranking

Rathje, W.

realism

Redman, C.

reductionism

reflexivity

reification

relativism

religion; and science

Renaissance

Renfrew, A.C.

rescue archaeology

resistance; archaeology of

Ricardo, D.

Richerson, P.J.

risk

Robin, C.

rock art

Roman Empire; forts; parade grounds; Romano-British culture; villas

Romanticism; German philosophers; romantic appeal; romantic view of
past; romantic ways

Rome

Rosetta stone

Rousseau, J.J.

Rowley-Conwy, P.

Ruskin, J.

Saami

Sabloff, J.

Sahlins, M.

sampling

Santley, R.

Sartre

Saussure, F. B. de

Schanidar I

Scheinsohn, V.

Schiffer, M.B.

Schlepp effect

Schortman, E.M.

Schutz, A.

science; approach; archaeology as; bad science; scientific techniques;
wars

seasonality

seeds

selectionist archaeology

semiotics

Service, E.

sex; see also gender

sexual selection

sexuality, archaeology of

sexy handaxe theory

Shakespeare, T.

Shakespeare, W.

Shanks, M.

sheep

Shelley, M.

Shennan, S.

simulation

site catchment analysis

Skibo

Slavs

Smith, A.T.

Smith, C.

Smith, W.

Smithsonian museum

social complexity

social constructivism

social inequality; see also social complexity

social justice

sociobiology

Sofaer, J.

Sokal hoax

Solecki, R.

Sommer, U.

South Africa

Soviet Russia

Spector, J.

Spencer, D. Lady

Spencer, H.

Spirit, celtic; Indo-European

Star Carr

state; state formation

Steward, J.

stone tools

Stonehenge

stratigraphy

structuralism

structuration theory; see also agency, practice

subsistence; see also cultural ecology

substantivism

symbols

symmetry; symmetrical archaeology

synchrony

systems; systems collapse; theory; thinking; see also culture

taphonomy

Taylor, W.

teleology

Tennyson, Alfred Lord

Terrenato, N.

testing see evaluation

text(s)

Theoretical Archaeology Group (TAG); Arbeitsgemeinschaft Theorie;
Nordic-TAG

Theorifeindlichkeit

theory; definition of; difficulty of; evaluation of interpretations; as
necessary; as painful; long sleep; relationship to method; relevant to
practice; as a visit to the dentist

Thompson, E.P.

three age system

Tilley, C.

Tomášková, S.

totalizing

Toynbee, A.

trade

tribe(s)

Trichterbandkeramik (TRB)

Trigger, B.

Tucson Garbage Project

Tylor, E.

typology

Umatilla

unilinear evolution

University of California at Berkeley

Urban, P. A.

Ussher, Archbishop

utopia(s)

value judgements

variability

Vico

Victorian(s); Victorian Britian; Victorian view

Vietnam

Vin Diesel

Voss, B.

Wales

Wallerstein, E.

Watkins, A.; see also ley lines

Watson, P.J.

Wessex

West, R.

White, H.

White, J.

White, L.

Whitley, J.

Wilkie, L.

Wilks, R.

Willey, G.R.

Williamson, T.M.

wissenschaft

Witmore, C.

Wittgenstein, L.

Wobst, M.

women; in archaeology

World Archaeological Congress

world systems theory

Wylie, A.

Yoffee, N.

Yugoslavia, former republic of

Zapotec ‘Indians’

zeitgeist

Zimbabwe

Zubrow, E.
