6

New Kingdom Egypt: the mature state



I live in a paradoxical world. Many claim it to be an age of reason and progress. Technology streaks ahead. Yet in people’s minds there seem still to loom the essence and trappings of antique hierarchical power. Those who actually seek power find aspects of the ancient stage-managed style irresistible. They build monuments, they elevate symbols, they identify enemies to smite. We can argue that early societies, lacking a rational philosophical basis for government, needed, for the maintenance of unity and stability, leaders whose position was defined by transcendental ideas and whose person was treated with the reverence and ceremonial of a god. The sweeping ideas and the presentational devices had a real point. The divine ruler’s authority was unique, beyond question, the threat of subdivision or duplication arising only in times of civil war. But humankind has moved on since the days of the Pharaohs. Between ourselves and ancient Egypt stretches a long and complex history of developing political thought and varieties of forms of government, in part based on philosophies that do not depend on gods. We know what some form of rational harmonious society might look like. Yet as the host society has changed, so the forms and trappings of rule by a divine leader have shown a remarkable capacity to adapt and to live on, often much loved. Rationality lures, atavism rules.

With the New Kingdom – the five centuries or so (1550–1069 BC) of the Eighteenth to Twentieth Dynasties – we can see that Egypt was already well advanced along the path of complex accommodation between political reality and the myths of the state. We will find no evidence that people seriously considered alternative forms of government to direct rule by a divine king. What we can observe is, on the one hand, the evolution of a more pluralist society which destroyed the possibility of the state ever fully developing into a single hierarchy in which everyone knew and accepted their place; and, on the other, the adaptation of divine monarchy to the changing circumstances in ways that have proved to be indestructible. It is the purpose of this chapter (and parts of Chapter 8) to delineate the apparatus that articulated state myth and yet had the flexibility to accommodate a form of rule which was essentially political. All readers of this book will live under a similar compromise.

Outwardly the style of the New Kingdom was still in the tradition created in the earlier periods. It was, nevertheless, a different society from the one that had seen the building of the pyramids. The bureaucratic tendency advanced no further. Kings still wallowed in the exercise of personal power, but their state had to allow for a changed balance of internal forces, which had arisen principally through the emergence of institutions with a greater professional coherence. From their earliest stages states require the services of loyal agents who will offer advice and carry out the king’s wishes, defend and even enlarge the realm by armed force, and look after the many ways of expressing deference towards real and imagined persons, thus the performance of cult and the elaboration of underlying meanings. Ministers, soldiers, priests: these three fundamental servants of the state are identifiable in Egypt in the Old Kingdom. The first and the last also looked to a distinctive and prominent physical setting for their lives, palace and temple. The palace must early have become an institution, and by the Fourth Dynasty so had the larger royal mortuary temples at the pyramids. But whereas in earlier periods the different sides to government appear to be facets of a single system, with the New Kingdom we can recognize their separate institutionalization. To this we must add Egypt’s unprecedented international position as an imperial power. And overall there were developing a polish and style that make the New Kingdom more like the states that have come and gone in the world ever since, down to recent times. We must reckon, too, with another force quietly and almost invisibly eating away at the prescriptive society: personal economic emancipation. This will form the basis of the next chapter. Ancient Egypt has a modern reputation for cultural conservatism. But the New Kingdom demonstrates that this is itself something of a myth, brought about by confusion between form and substance. Circumstances had changed, and basic ideology and practices were adapting to them.





Temples and their staffs


Ideology needs architecture for its fullest expression. By its potential for a dwarfing scale architecture compels respect in the individual and becomes the dominating horizon for crowds. Together with its style and detailing it creates a mood, often one of deference to whatever the building stands for. We will begin our survey of the New Kingdom with the temples, which now and in later periods also brought a kind of corporatism to Egypt. Subsequent to the New Kingdom they became the repositories of what was distinctive about ancient Egypt within a society that was otherwise moving on, including in ethnic composition.

If we look back to the Old and Middle Kingdoms, as far as we can tell, monumental architecture in the shape of the pyramids and their temples was kept to the periphery of the visible world: the edge of the western desert between the entrance to the Fayum and Abu Rawash, to the north of Giza. Local temples or shrines (the words are interchangeable below the scale of the monumental temple), built largely of mud brick, were scaled to fit within the dense vistas of modest brick-built towns and could be almost invisible. The balance is illustrated at Elephantine, between the popular shrine of Hekaib in its urban setting (Figure 5.4, p. 201) and the small (but beautifully decorated) stone shrine which was built early in the Twelfth Dynasty somewhere in front of the original sacred place within the niche in the granite boulders and which honoured the goddess Satis. As an institution, the local temple was an adjunct to the office of the head of the local community, so that the title ‘superintendent of priests/temple staff’ was frequently held by the local ‘mayor’. In the New Kingdom the monumental scale and the preference for building in stone was brought into towns (Photograph 6.1). This was the age of the Mature Formal Temple, as outlined in Chapter 3. People in general began to live in the shadow of giant stone constructions that proclaimed the gentlemen’s agreement between king and gods that power was exclusively theirs. New Kingdom Thebes epitomizes this, and will be illustrated later in this chapter.



Photograph 6.1The main temple to Amun at Karnak, viewed (in 1963) to the south-east from the top of the First Pylon. In the background is the processional route between the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Pylons (Figure 6.2, p. 251).



For a fuller appreciation of the New Kingdom style in temples two particular factors need to be pointed out. The first arose from the structural dualism of temple cult, accommodating a hidden and a revealed aspect (Chapter 3, pp. 148–9). The New Kingdom paid great attention to the latter (the portable religious image) of which the most familiar was the portable boat shrine. Sacred boats were not new. They seem from early times to have had an important symbolic and ceremonial role. The New Kingdom contribution was to lavish great attention on certain of them (especially the barge of Amun of Karnak called Userhat-Amun, ‘Mighty of prow is Amun’, which was a full-size riverine boat), and to develop the smaller portable version. One ‘Superintendent of Carpenters and Chief of Goldsmiths’ called Nakht-djehuty, who lived in the reign of Rameses II and evidently specialized in making them, was repeatedly commissioned to make new ones for a variety of temples, probably up to a total of 26.1 Both the riverine and the portable boats were put at the centre of temple design and temple celebrations. The portable boat shrines were made of wood, but ornately gilded and decorated and equipped with a closed cabin (sometimes called a seh-netjer, ‘Tent shrine of the god’; see pp. 149–54) in which the image of the deity sat (Figure 6.1). Long carrying-poles on each side or set laterally and up to five in number bore the shrine along on the shoulders of those privileged to carry it.2



Figure 6.1Temple processions in the New Kingdom centred on portable sacred barques. In this scene the barque is the major one for the image of Amun, having its own name, ‘Userhat’ (‘mighty of prow’). It is shown at the mortuary temple of Seti I at western Thebes during the ‘Beautiful Festival of the Valley’. The pylon of Seti’s temple (identified faintly by painted cartouches, not shown in this drawing) is at the left side. The barque is carried by a group of men who represent the range of people who could participate in temple ceremonies: (1) and (2) priests; (3) chief priests; (4) Ipy, a sculptor from Deir el-Medina; (5) the vizier Paser; (6) the scribe of Deir el-Medina, Amenemipet. From a sculpted block from Deir el-Medina, reign of Rameses II, in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo 43591. After G. Foucart, BIFAO 24 (1954), Pl. XI (omitting texts); texts: Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 403.



The resting places of boat shrines have a distinctive plan: an oblong chamber with a doorway at each end and a central square stone pedestal on which the shrine rested (Figure 6.2, ‘processional way-station’, p. 251). We should recall here the pedestals in early temples on which portable images were set, sheltered by a curved canopy of matting (see Chapter 3, and Figure 3.17, p. 147). Most New Kingdom temples were in fact built around the shrine of the sacred boat, and the plans of their interiors and the layouts of their exterior sacred precincts began from the desire to parade the boat shrine to the most dramatic advantage. Temples continued to contain fixed images of gods, but these now had second place. The elevation of the boat shrine to a position of eminence matched the new monumental scale of local temples. Not only did they dominate the city physically, the processions of the boat shrines along prepared avenues brought a greatly enhanced degree of spectacle to the life of the city (Figure 6.2). The scale and professionalism of New Kingdom temple cult now held the populace more in thrall, replacing some of the older bureaucratic control with greater and more overt psychological manipulation. Then as now people love festive processions put on by the state, and feel more amicably disposed towards their rulers.



Figure 6.2The grand setting for temple processions provided by monumental architecture and colossal sculpture: the processional route linking the temples of Amun-Ra and the goddess Mut at Karnak, Thebes; see also Figure 5.16, p. 225.



For the second factor, we must turn to the external architecture of temples, how they looked to the world outside, a world that, for the most part, was excluded from passing through the temple doors. The stone walls bearing scenes painted in hard bright colours on dazzling white backgrounds did not rise directly from streets or public spaces. Between the temple and the outside world lay a precinct filled with brick service buildings and perhaps lesser shrines, all surrounded by a massive mud-brick wall. It was by this wall that the temple made its most public statement. In the New Kingdom the enclosure walls of the larger temples were made to look like fortresses, with towers and battlements.3 Part of the evidence comes from excavation. At Karnak the same excavation to the east of the sacred lake which revealed the planned Middle Kingdom town beneath (see Chapter 5, and Figure 5.17, p. 226) also uncovered a 200m-long stretch of the Eighteenth Dynasty enclosure wall with square towers set at roughly 17m intervals. Other more complete examples are known from other sites. There is also, however, contemporary representational evidence. This is important because it depicts what the tops of the walls looked like, something that the excavation of foundations can never reveal. The most explicit source is a limestone libation tank of the Nineteenth Dynasty from Memphis, which is modelled to show a wall with regularly spaced towers along all four sides and protecting the corners, and with a line of battlemented crenellations running all the way round the top (Figure 6.3).4 The sides are inscribed with prayers to the god Ptah of Memphis, one of them reading: ‘Praise to you at the great rampart; it is the place where prayer is heard.’ To emphasize this a human ear has been carved at the top of each tower. There can be little doubt that this castellated structure represents the main enclosure wall of the New Kingdom temple of Ptah at Memphis, into the interior of which the public was not admitted. To the citizen of Memphis who made the model as part of a votive statue the temple was not a wondrous stone house of god, it was a citadel before which he could only stand and, in a small shrine beside or between the towers, appeal to the power of god to pass through the massive barriers that his fellow citizens had erected. The eastern temple at Karnak, mentioned below, is probably an example of the same phenomenon.5



Figure 6.3The forbidding appearance of large New Kingdom temples, surrounded by walls built to resemble fortresses. Above. Ancient model of the walls surrounding the temple of Ptah at Memphis, originally carved in the form of an offering-basin being presented by a kneeling statue. After J. Jacquet, MDAIK 16 (1958), 164, Fig. 1. Below. Portrayal of a temple wall and portal at Karnak, from a scene inside the temple of Khonsu at Karnak, reign of Herihor, transition to the Twenty-first Dynasty, after Epigraphic Survey, Khonsu, Pl. 53.



In later periods, following the end of the New Kingom, the temple enclosure became in reality an urban citadel, containing the local community’s principal assets and places of residence for its leaders, becoming in consequence a target for invading armies to attack.6 But in the New Kingdom the castellated appearance of temple walls must have been largely symbolic. In cases where the front pylon of the temple interrupted the wall and bore, as it normally did, giant scenes of the king vanquishing his foes in the presence of the gods, the towers and battlements on either side continued the mood. In scale, style and detailing the temple wall had, in a world now more militarily conscious than it had been, taken over the starkest image of coercion. Thus did the temple present to its community two contrasting faces: one of temporal might, the other, on feast days, of release through communal celebration. This did not prevent people from trying to establish a more personal contact with the great deity who dwelt within, as the Memphis shrine at the ramparts reveals.

So much that has survived from ancient Egypt is to do with gods and cult that we might conclude that Egypt was a sacerdotal state. If we were unable to read hieroglyphs we might well deduce that Egypt was ruled by a high priest in view of the frequent occurrence of pictures of the king performing acts of deference towards figures of gods. We would not, in fact, be far wrong as long as we remember that modern English words like ‘king’ and ‘priest’ are not coloured in quite the way that they were in ancient times. But we would be wrong if we interpreted this as demonstrating that the state rested upon a greater degree of otherworldly contemplation. Whilst the vocabulary of gods and their attributes supplied the language in which weighty and important matters were announced, surviving diplomatic correspondence with foreign rulers shows that matters of mutual interest could be discussed in a more prosaic style.7

Somewhere amidst the ranks of temple staff whose names we know were the thinkers responsible, for example, for the elaborate mythological texts and scenes which appear in the royal tombs, and who carefully copied and studied old texts which explored the world of the imagination and read into them new interpretations. They are the ones who most resemble our image of a ‘priest’. But they are hard to identify. As they appear in the sources that have survived people with ‘priestly’ titles look very much like the officials in other branches of the administration. Indeed, they might well possess a string of titles that cover a priestly role as well as others quite unconnected. The modern term ‘priesthood’, although convenient, misleads if it implies the existence of a class of people leading a distinctive way of life. Much of the work in temples was either the routine performance of well-established rites and ceremonies or the administration of commodities and personnel. The temples as institutions are of interest in a study of the New Kingdom as much for their economic role as for their contribution to ideas, and for their part in bolstering the monarchy.

Egyptian temples were conceived, with some literalness, as a shelter for the divine images and a house for the gods who dwelt within them. The vital essence of gods (and of kings and indeed of any person who could be represented in the form of a statue or a carving or painting on a flat surface) required the sustenance that could be derived from food offerings placed regularly before them. Offerings derived from productive sources owned by the temple. But this was not the only function of temple property. It also bestowed on the gods a status that corresponded to power and importance on a strictly material scale. The gods were given the status of landed nobility, which suited some of the Egyptians’ concrete conceptions of who the gods were. Furthermore, we find the material enrichment of divine property a major theme in texts dealing with the duties of kingship.

The riches bestowed on the gods seem to have been drawn from the full diversity of Egyptian material resources, consisting of both durable forms of wealth (precious substances as well as vessels in valuable materials) and permanent sources of revenue. Foremost amongst the latter was cultivable grain land, not necessarily in the vicinity of the temple itself, but possibly several hundred kilometres distant, or even in the conquered territories of Nubia.8 Although New Kingdom temples possessed their own labourers, often prisoners of war, much of temple land seems to have been farmed on a complex rented basis, with up to 30 per cent of the crop paid to the temple in rent.9 One document late in the period, the Wilbour Papyrus (reign of Rameses V, c. 1146–1141 BC), reveals a picture of temple land subdivided into an elaborate tapestry of holdings, some cultivated by temple agents, and others by people who cover almost the entire spectrum of Egyptian society, from small farmers cultivating on their own behalf, through temple staff and soldiers, to the vizier himself, these latter groups being clearly landlords employing labourers and so introducing a third party into the division of produce (Figure 6.4). The relatively high proportion of women is notable, as are the numbers of soldiers (including Sherden mercenaries, Figure 1.5, p. 33).10 The implications of this for our understanding of the basis of middle-class life will be pursued in the next chapter. In another document, the Amiens-Baldwin Papyrus, we meet a fleet of 21 barges cruising slowly up the Nile and making repeated landings to collect the rents (in grain) from smallholdings of this nature for transportation probably to temple granaries at Thebes.11



Figure 6.4Temple business: categories of persons renting temple land in Middle Egypt in the Twentieth Dynasty (after Papyrus Wilbour). Each square represents ten persons.



Other forms of agricultural holding donated to temples included animal herds, fishing and fowling rights, flax fields to provide the raw material from which linen garments were manufactured in temple workshops or under licence by private households, vegetable beds, vineyards and beehives. Animals, like crops grown from seed, multiply if tended properly, and it seems that, as with the land, it was common in the New Kingdom for people to look after livestock under a leasing arrangement with a temple. So a royal butler named Neferperet, who had fought in one of Tuthmosis III’s Palestinian campaigns, was by a special decree of the king put in charge of four Palestinian cows, two Egyptian cows, one bull and a bronze bucket (presumably for carrying the milk).12 His brother was to look after them and his son was to carry the bucket. The cattle were, however, to be ‘offered’ to the mortuary temple of Tuthmosis III, meaning that this temple was their real owner (the word ‘offering’ is not always to be taken literally). The decree made the arrangement heritable, so that Neferperet’s heirs would go on looking after this little collection of livestock. It was also specifically excluded from the authority of the Overseer of Cattle, a mini-example of a well-documented area of ancient Egyptian law: protection from institutional poaching (which will be examined more in the next chapter). Thus Neferperet would go on tending his little herd, obliged to deliver to the king’s mortuary temple a quota of offspring and of milk (which his son had to carry), and allowed to keep the rest for himself, secure in his legal protection from the official who was normally in charge of such arrangements.

Temples could be granted access to mineral resources. So the temple of Seti I at Abydos was granted rights at the gold mines in the eastern desert (Kanais, in the Wadi Mia), a gang of workmen to bring the gold back to the temple, and a settlement with a well at the mines themselves.13 The temple of Amun at Karnak seems to have had a similar arrangement for gold mining in this area, and another for acquiring galena (the lead ore, lead sulphide), used for eye pigment and as a medicament, also from the eastern desert.14 Direct gifts of precious stones and metals also appear as a regular expression of royal generosity towards the gods. It was to the temples, too, that the king turned to dispose of surplus or unwanted booty from foreign campaigns. The temples offered secure storage and administration and, perhaps even more important, a receipt in the form of texts and scenes displayed in the temple that recorded the gift as a royal donation worthy of permanent commemoration. These gifts would also be entered into the written inventories of temple property. All of these various types of wealth, from beehives to boats, were designated by a common word for ‘offerings’. What was actually presented to the god during the offering-ceremonies must have been regarded merely as tokens.

In considering the economic role of temples we are faced with a classic example of the general problem which one culture (our own) has in categorizing another. Temple records were written as if each temple were an independent institution, and this can create the impression that they were independent sources of wealth and power. But if we take a more objective stance we can see that, shorn of ideological nuance, temples comprised a major sector of ‘the state’ as we would see it, working in a symbiotic relationship with the palace, though with a balance of responsibility (in favour of the temples) compared with what we see in the Old Kingdom (where greater responsibility for directing temple income rested with the king; see p. 166). Thus a separate section of the Wilbour Papyrus is devoted to a special category of agricultural land, called khato-land, which belonged to the Pharaoh but was administered by temples.15

The absence of demarcation between temples and other areas of administration becomes very prominent when we consider the example of the payment of the necropolis workers of Deir el-Medina at Thebes whose job it was to prepare the royal tomb in the Valley of the Kings.16 They were essentially employees of the king, and so it seems natural to find that their wages sometimes come from the ‘Treasury of Pharaoh’ or the ‘Granary of Pharaoh’ and its overseers. The Theban temples nevertheless regularly supplied them with seemingly small quantities of a special kind of pastry or cake (containing fat and honey) and beer.17 Late in the Twentieth Dynasty (apparently a time of economic difficulty at Thebes), we find grain from tax assessments on various temples, and from khato-land administered by them, taken to western Thebes for the necropolis workmen and stored in granaries under the charge of the mayor of western Thebes (another interesting use of mayors).18 Earlier in the Dynasty we find the same official blamed for not having paid these workmen from the ‘offerings’ of the century-old mortuary temple of Rameses II (the Ramesseum). The demonstration by these men outside others of these temples might suggest that they, too, regarded the mortuary temples as potential sources of payment, although perhaps they targeted them as the nearest representative of authority.19 At other times these men were paid from the temple of Maat at Karnak, across the river.20 And when things went wrong, the ultimate court of appeal was the vizier. The independence of temples as owners of wealth was probably very much a matter of ideological nuance.

A second channel of expenditure was temple overheads, principally the payment of staff in kind. By a ceremony called the ‘Reversion of offerings’ the offerings actually presented to the god were next taken before statues of lesser gods, and then finally divided amongst the various groups of the temple staff. The daily offering-list carved on the walls of the temple of Medinet Habu, for example, includes 5,500 loaves, 54 cakes, 34 dishes of sweets, 204 jars of beer, and an extensive array of other foods.21 But temple stores were designed to handle even larger quantities and we have no way of knowing how many other people had entitlement to payments, although the Theban necropolis workmen from Deir el-Medina were amongst them. Did temples pay for their own aggrandizement and fabric maintenance? It is reasonable to think so. The building and enlargement of temples was another traditional duty of kings, but since temple income was initially bestowed by the king, the further use of this to pay for improvements would have remained within the spirit of the original bequest; and, in any case, his authority was presumably necessary for any major alteration in the disposal of temple income. By the Late Period, sources become explicit that temple building owed much to the initiative of the leaders of local communities. The system had an element of elasticity, too. Apart from a degree of ad hoc requisitioning by one institution from another (see Chapter 7, p. 298), it was possible for one temple to rent lands from another temple and, as a result of occasional inventories and revisions of temple property, for parcels of land to be transferred from an old endowment to a new one which now seemed worthier. Behind the florid language of piety lay a reassuring rationality.22

It seems clear from ancient written testimony as well as from the logic of the situation that temple economies produced a surplus of income over requirements. Some years were good to farmers, some years were bad. Temples expected in general to build up substantial reserves or buffer stocks of grain and other commodities that they stored in massive warehouse blocks (or magazines) within the temple enclosure. Several relatively complete layouts have survived, and these are supplemented by detailed contemporary pictures (Figure 6.5, top). The best preserved on the ground is the set of magazines attached to the Ramesseum, the mortuary temple of Rameses II (Figure 6.6 and Photograph 6.2).



Figure 6.5The key to economic stability: buffer stocks of grain. The long narrow storerooms – ‘magazines’ – in large temples such as the Ramesseum at western Thebes (Figure 6.6 and Photograph 6.2) were used to store a wide variety of commodities, as illustrated by the Amarna tomb scene (top, tomb of Meryra), which depicts part of a magazine block at Amarna. However, it is highly likely that in any large magazine block most of the capacity was used to store cereal grain, as at the Ramesseum. We know (from Papyrus Amiens-Baldwin) that the average capacity of a grain barge was 650 standard sacks, or khar. It would have taken about 350 boatloads of grain to fill the Ramesseum granary. Cereal yields varied according the quality of the land, between about 5 and 10 khar per aroura (2,735 sq. metres). At the low but common yield of 5 khar from land which paid to the temple a 30 per cent harvest-rent, the Ramesseum would have been drawing on a tract of land equivalent to about 412 sq. km. To give the reader some idea of what is involved, a piece of land about one-third of this is marked on a map of the Theban area. In practice temple landholdings were split into large numbers of widely spaced fields. If one considers an extrapolation from the diagram to include the numerous lesser provincial temples it is easy to envisage just how much farmland was tied in some way to temple ownership or management. Amarna magazines after Davies, Rock Tombs I, Pl. XXXI; the boat-loading scene after Landström, Ships, 134, Fig. 393.





Figure 6.6The Ramesseum, mortuary temple of Rameses II at western Thebes. The stone temple is rendered in grey; the surrounding brickwork (Photograph 6.2, p. 260) in black. The latter includes a small palace or rest house with a Window of Appearance (cf. Figure 6.10, p. 271), and a huge set of granary chambers (shaded). It has been assumed that all those blocks with staircases were granaries, the staircases enabling them to be filled through roof apertures. The total floor area is about 8261 sq. m. The storechambers were tall and vaulted (Photograph 6.2) and it is reasonable to assume that grain was stored (perhaps in compartments) to a depth of 2 m. This would give a total capacity of 16,522 cu. m, or 16,522,000 litres, equivalent to about 226,328 khar. On an average annual ration for a working family of 66 khar of emmer and barley combined, the Ramesseum granary would have supported about 3,400 families, easily the population of a medium-sized city. After Hölscher, Mortuary Temple I, Pl. 10, opp. p. 74.





Photograph 6.2Institutional wealth: some of the mud-brick granary chambers in the magazine blocks attached to the Ramesseum, mortuary temple of Rameses II at western Thebes, viewed to the north-east. The arched brick roofs belong to the original building.



To give the reader some idea of the immense concentration of cereal wealth that a major temple could store, the total capacity of the chambers most likely to have stored grain has been calculated and is given in the caption to Figure 6.6. When converted to ancient Egyptian measures it amounts to 226,328 khar (or ‘sacks’). On an average ration for a workman’s family of 66 khar per year of emmer and barley (attested in New Kingdom records from Deir el-Medina), the Ramesseum granaries, if ever filled to capacity, would have supported about 3,400 families for a year, that is, 17,000 to 20,000 people, the population of a fair-sized ancient city (and the same as the estimated population for Amarna; see pp. 331, 361), and a considerably greater population than the Memphis palace of Seti I discussed later in this chapter (pp. 279–80). We can make two general observations on this exercise. It is unlikely that at any one time the granary of more than one mortuary temple was fully in use; and, like the granaries at the Nubian forts discussed in the last chapter, storage capacity encompassed much more than the needs of an immediately resident and dependent population. The Pharaonic economy in times of internal stability operated at a level much higher than that of subsistence. Grain was wealth, and great stores of it were there for shipping around the country and even abroad for the realization of grandiose royal schemes. Major temples were the reserve banks of their day.

The ideal was excessive abundance, with granaries overflowing. There is no mention in ancient texts of a ‘profit’, but in practice that was what good harvests brought. For the larger temples also possessed their own trading ships, not only in Egypt but also abroad. The temple of Seti I at Abydos, for example, was given a sea-going ship for foreign trade equipped with ‘traders’ by Rameses II.23 ‘Traders’ seem to have been a regular component of temple staffs and presumably bore the responsibility for exchanging surplus produce – not only grain but other things such as linen – for goods for which the temple had a demand, which might be sesame oil or papyrus rolls.24 Since everything in Egypt was exchangeable, a gradual accumulation of non-perishable goods, particularly metals, in the temple stores increased the temple’s permanent reserves. The consequences of this are difficult to assess. But the way that institutions (primarily temples) dominated the country’s economy, especially their capacity to build up massive reserves, must have had a markedly steadying influence on the general economy, balancing out, for example, the effects of good and bad harvests and so keeping prices reasonably stable through the year and from one year to another. Hence the parallel with modern reserve banks. When we come to consider the private sector in the next chapter this will emerge as a significant factor amidst the little evidence that we possess.

The wealth of the large temples and the authority of their gods lead to a key question. Did the managers – the priests – perceive the extent of their power? In particular, were those in charge of the cult of Amun at Thebes a political threat to kings? To find an answer we have to consider two further aspects of New Kingdom society: the interrelationship between the monarchy and the cult of Amun, and the power of other institutions, namely the palace and more particularly the army.





Monarchy and the cult of Amun


The demands on kings were now considerable. They stood at the head of a large administration that, in the case of the temples, now included substantial institutions of a semi-independent nature; theirs was the responsibility for leading armies into battle against the well-equipped forces of western Asia; and in them resided the dignity of an imperial state with far-reaching diplomatic ties. Respect for kings was essential if they were to hold the edifice of state together. Monarchy on its own, however, does not guarantee respect. Too much hangs on accidents of birth. It requires the backing of myth and the regular reinforcement of ceremony to put into perspective the shortcomings of individual kings. By myth and ceremony, a king is not left to stand entirely by his own merits. He assumes a transcendental role and the respect of his people focuses on the office. The New Kingdom put much effort into this, and nowhere more so than in the mutual absorption of king and Amun.

During the Old Kingdom, the concept emerged that the king was the son of Ra, the sun god. From the mid-Fourth Dynasty onwards, one of the king’s two cartouche names described his manifestation as just this: ‘The Son of Ra, N’ (where N was the personalized Ra name of the king), as in the example, ‘Enduring are the souls of Ra’ (Ra name of King Menkaura, builder of the third pyramid at Giza). The importance of the royal dependence on the sun was proclaimed in stone in the form of the pyramids and, in the Fifth Dynasty, by large solar temples attached to the pyramids. The Egyptians sometimes used the word ‘son’ metaphorically, to refer to a loyal and loving son-like status that a person, including a king, might hold vis-à-vis someone else. However, the ‘son of Ra’ claim was taken more literally. A late Middle Kingdom tale (Papyrus Westcar) set in past time, at the court of King Khufu, contains an account of how the future ultra-pious kings of the Fifth Dynasty were born from a sexual union between Ra and the wife of a priest of Ra.25

Having the sun as a supreme deity creates a difficulty. It is the most visible and obvious of sources of superhuman or transcendental power. Yet its very visibility and fixed shape make it more difficult to comprehend in personalized terms. Hymns and prayers and offerings tend to assume a human-like capacity on the part of the deity to receive them. The Egyptians instinctively appreciated this, and at an early date gave to most of the gods and goddesses of Egypt the form of a human body, though sometimes retaining as an emblem an animal head. One form of the sun god, Ra-Horus of the Horizon (Ra-Horakhty), was a man with the falcon head of the god Horus. But in other contexts the sun’s disk was left as a detached element, perhaps symbolically conveyed forwards by a scarab-beetle, itself a symbol of creation as the god Kheprer, or journeying in a solar barge above the head of a ram-headed god. When it came to the direct worship of the sun by hymns and the presentation of food offerings, the air of mystery that is needed to cloak a somewhat artificial act was difficult to sustain. Sun temples were open to the sky, and the hymns were chanted and offerings presented from the top of an open platform. The sun provided a good poetic image for the king, but was far less suitable a model for his divine counterpart.

New Kingdom thinkers found a way to overcome this (but not to the satisfaction of all, including King Amenhetep IV/Akhenaten, as we will see in Chapter 8). The supreme god who fathered the king and remained the ultimate basis of royal respect was given the form of a man. This was the god Amun. It was not an arbitrary choice, for Amun was an ancient god of Thebes, the home of the kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty. The early history of Amun is not well documented, but it is clear that his pre-eminence in the New Kingdom was a result of deliberate ideological emphasis. Two characteristics, at least as old as the Middle Kingdom, gave Amun a particularly powerful image. With no modification to his human form he had become the sun god, Amun-Ra, and was now the recipient (even under the simpler name Amun) of hymns addressed to the sun. He also took over the powerful ithyphallic image of Min of Coptos, a neighbouring city (Figure 3.13, p. 140). In the New Kingdom, his position was well expressed by a common epithet: ‘Amun-Ra, King of the Gods.’ At Thebes especially he was shown in the temples as the divine father-figure who looked after the king and presided over his victories, and this role extended to the mortuary cult now centred in new-style mortuary temples on the west bank of Thebes.

Amun also moved to the heart of the myth of the divine birth of the king, which now joined the repertoire of scenes on temple walls. Two complete examples have survived – in Queen Hatshepsut’s mortuary temple at Deir el-Bahari, and in Amenhetep III’s temple at Luxor – but fragments of others are known.26 The crucial episode of the whole sequence is handled with great delicacy (Figure 6.7). The reigning monarch’s mother is shown seated opposite the god Amun, who with one hand touches one of her hands, and with the other offers her the emblematic hieroglyph for ‘life’. The protective goddesses Neith and Selket sit below on the marriage bed, holding the couple aloft. The accompanying text is a little more explicit:

Words spoken by Amun-Ra, Lord of Karnak, pre-eminent in his harim, when he had assumed the form of this her husband, King Menkheperura (Tuthmosis IV), given life. He found her as she slept within the innermost part of her palace. She awoke on account of the divine fragrance, and turned towards His Majesty. He went straightway to her, he was aroused by her. He allowed her to see him in his divine form, after he had come before her, so that she rejoiced at seeing hisperfection. His love, it entered her body. The palace was flooded with the divine fragrance, and all his odours were those of the land of Punt.27





Figure 6.7The divine origin of kings: the god Amun (upper right) impregnates Queen Mutemwia (upper left), wife of Tuthmosis IV and mother of the future god-king Amenhetep III. Beneath them sit the goddesses Selket (left) and Neith (right). A scene from the divine birth cycle at Luxor temple (see Figure 6.9, p. 268 for the location). After H. Brunner, Die Geburt des Gottkönigs; Studien zur Überlieferung eines altägyptischen Mythos, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 1964, Taf. 4; E. Otto, Egyptian Art and the Cults of Osiris and Amun, London, T&H, 1968, Pl. 30 (redrawn by B. Garfi).



After a brief speech of joy by the queen he declares: ‘Amenhetep, prince of Thebes, is the name of this child which I have placed in your womb.’ Subsequent scenes portray the fashioning of the child and his spirit (ka) on a potter’s wheel by the ram-headed creator god Khnum, and the birth itself in the presence of numerous protector spirits.

Queen Hatshepsut’s version goes on to illustrate how the power and authority of well-tailored mythical portrayals can replace reality. Historically she was the daughter of Tuthmosis I and wife of the next king Tuthmosis II, whom she outlived by more than twenty years. For the first few years of her widowhood she acted as regent for the young successor, her nephew Tuthmosis III, but then had herself proclaimed king, and ruled as the dominant partner. In her mortuary temple at Deir el-Bahari, western Thebes, she appears throughout as the rightful king, depicted and frequently referred to in texts as being of male gender. In this latter respect the conventions of kingship offered no choice. A fine set of scenes at Deir el-Bahari records the story of her origins. Early on occurs the divine birth sequence, in which she is from the beginning designated as king of Egypt. As the story unfolds it shifts gradually to the mortal world. She visits Lower Egypt with her real father, Tuthmosis I, and is taken in hand by all the gods of Egypt, who crown her and draw up her titulary. Now merging more closely into the material world her father presents her to the court and appoints her as his successor and co-regent:

This is my daughter, Khnemet-Amun Hatshepsut, may she live. I designate her as my successor. She it is who shall be on this throne. Assuredly, it is she who shall sit on this heavenly throne. She shall issue decrees to the people from all departments of the palace. Assuredly, it is she who shall guide you. Obey her word, assemble you at her command … For she is your god, the daughter of a god.28



The people react with joy, the lector-priests compose her titulary, her name is set on buildings and on official seals, and finally her coronation takes place on New Year’s Day. Other records of this situation – that Hatshepsut was the heir and successor of Tuthmosis I with no reference to either Tuthmosis II or III – have survived at Karnak. All of them describe on a monumental scale events that are specific, detailed, but, as far as we can see, fictitious. Even the New Year’s Day coronation date referred back to an ancient custom now obsolete. Had accident deprived us of all sources for the period other than these, their detail and consistency would oblige us to accept their record as authentic history. Therein lies a warning.

This aspect of Hatshepsut’s reign takes us back to Chapter 2 and to the basic myth of the state: the uninterrupted sequence of legitimate kings ruling in a single line of succession descended from the gods. Hatshepsut’s reign was made to conform to the ideal image. To dismiss the sources as propaganda misses the point, particularly if it is implied that they differ in purpose from formal documents of other reigns. The temples recorded for eternity and provided only a single formula for kingship into which earthly events had to be fitted with whatever degree of transformation was necessary. The record of Hatshepsut’s reign was made consistent with an ancient, established pattern, and this was all that mattered.





Thebes: the ceremonial city


Thebes was not really, in the New Kingdom, Egypt’s capital city in the sense that the court and the highest tiers of administration were centred there. This was the role of Memphis and, in the later New Kingdom, the eastern delta city of Per-Rameses (near the modern town Qantir). The family of the Eighteenth Dynasty kings had come from Thebes, and during the New Kingdom the Theban god Amun was given extraordinary prominence. This left the city with a special role in the state: a sacred city given over to festivals in which the cult of divine monarchy held a leading place. Poetry celebrated its primacy:

Thebes is the pattern for every city. Water and earth were within her from the beginning of time. There came the sands to furnish land, to create her ground as a mound when the earth came into being. And so mankind also came into being within her, with the purpose of founding every city in her proper name. For all are called ‘City’ after the example of Thebes.29



Two comments are required: the basic image is that of the first primaeval mound emerging from the waters of chaos and on which the act of creation was first performed. Here the mound is identified as the site of Thebes. The second point is linguistic: Thebes was frequently called simply ‘The City’.

The monumental heart of New Kingdom Thebes was the temple of Amun at Karnak (Photograph 6.1, p. 249). This now stands within a huge enclosure surrounded by a massive brick wall of the Thirtieth Dynasty. In places, particularly on the south, this wall must follow the line of the New Kingdom enclosure wall, but on the east it takes a course somewhat outside. Even so, in the New Kingdom the enclosure must have covered an area of at least 400 × 400 m.

The temple as we now see it appears to be flush with the surrounding fields and with the modern town of Luxor. Excavations into the ground below (summarized in Chapter 5; Figures 5.16 and 5.17, pp. 225 and 226) have revealed, however, that the New Kingdom temple was laid out at the expense of the earlier city of Thebes. This had grown by the late Middle Kingdom into an extensive city mound covering an area at least 1,000 × 500 m. This puts it into a category of places that were quite large by ancient standards. A part of it had been laid out to conform to a grid plan, and within it lay palaces (known also from texts). During the Eighteenth Dynasty, the city was evacuated and levelled to provide a foundation platform for the new dominating stone temples. This probably occurred on a piecemeal basis, with some parts of the site, notably the ‘Treasury’ of Tuthmosis I and the southern part of the southward processional avenue (between pylon nos 8 and 10), aligned according to the prevailing street and plot pattern of the old city, whilst the rest of the temple took on an alignment perpendicular to the river which the old Middle Kingdom temple had followed as well.30

The residential part of Thebes must have been built anew, on open ground, involving a fresh allocation of plot ownership. Being on new ground meant that it was at a lower level than the new temple now perched on the flattened top of the old city mound. The remains of this new city must now be beneath the general level of the ground water. Modern excavations have encountered it in only small exposures. The location of one neighbourhood is given by an inscription on a giant obelisk quarried in the reign of Tuthmosis III and finally erected by Tuthmosis IV in a chapel built against the back, in other words, the eastern wall of the temple of Amun-Ra. This chapel was intended for people who had no right of access to the main temple. It was a ‘place of the ear’ for the god Amun, where the god could hear the prayers of the townspeople. It seems also to have contained a statue of ‘Rameses who hears prayer’, a revealing glimpse of the reality behind the cult of divine kings.31 The obelisk inscription states that it was set up in ‘The Upper Gateway of Karnak, opposite Thebes.’32 The implication is that it faced towards the city lying over to the east. We should imagine, however, a city covering a much larger area than before, reflecting the more expansive atmosphere of the New Kingdom and lack of city walling, a feature of the age (Figure 6.8). The short-lived city of Amarna spread its main built-up part over an area about 5 km long by 1 km wide (Figure 8.3, p. 328).



Figure 6.8Map of Thebes, the ‘Estate of Amun’, in the New Kingdom, showing main temples and processional routes. The rectangles marked along the western desert edge are royal mortuary temples. ‘VofK’ = Valley of the Kings. For Malkata and the Birket Habu see Figure 6.12, p. 276. The numbered parts of the latter are as follows: (1) hypothetical first basin; (2) palace for the first Sed-festival; (3) probably second basin, defined by earth mounds. For a more detailed map of processional routes see L. Bell, in Shafer, Temples, 159, Fig. 65.



There is evidence at other sites to show that what happened to Thebes in the New Kingdom was not unusual. The period seems to have been characterized by urban renewal. For the Middle Kingdom, we can speak of urbanization as a policy of the state, achieved by laying out planned settlements which in their rigid grid plans reflected an intense bureaucratic control of society. Urban renewal in the New Kingdom displays far less of this, and may have arisen as a consequence of the redevelopment of key sites within towns as temple precincts. Provincial temple building on a grand scale became a priority of state expenditure in the New Kingdom for the first time; the rebuilding of towns and cities, in a more open style which reflected the changed nature of Egyptian society, was a by-product which became generally desirable in itself.

The main part of the temple of Karnak was constructed during the Eighteenth Dynasty, surrounding on four sides the old Middle Kingdom temple that had an alignment which approximately followed the main axis of the planned Middle Kingdom quarter of the city and faced directly towards the river. Egyptian temples of the Eighteenth Dynasty display considerable variation and originality in design, and this is particularly true at Karnak. The layout is unique, both in its internal complexity and in the small allocation of open space (although this was allowed for in subsequent developments).33 The central element was a shrine, open at both ends, which contained the portable barque by which the image of Amun could be carried outside the temple on important festivals. The present granite shrine is a very late replacement (by the Macedonian King Philip Arrhidaeus) of the New Kingdom original. In the reign of Tuthmosis III the main temple building was enlarged by about 50 per cent through the addition at the rear of a stone building that has come to be known as the ‘Festival Hall’ of Tuthmosis III, a building evidently designed for the celebration of the varied aspects of kingship (the performance of the Sed-festival included).

Somewhere in the grounds of Karnak temple lay a royal palace.34 Its position changed during the New Kingdom as the temple was enlarged. It must have been built of mud brick for nothing has been found either of foundations or of loose stone blocks. But we are sure of its existence from references in inscriptions. In the case of Queen Hatshepsut, they are sufficiently explicit to suggest an actual location: in front of the Eighteenth Dynasty temple façade, on the north side of the temple axis. References to a palace at Karnak continue through the New Kingdom, even though by the mid-Eighteenth Dynasty kings were no longer residing at Thebes. The texts themselves make it clear, however, that this was no ordinary domestic palace, but a ceremonial building used, for example, during a royal coronation. The king visited Thebes as the divine son of Amun. Wherever he was accommodated took on the character of a sacred building.

The Hatshepsut texts also reveal the political value of the Amun cult at Karnak. On various festivals, the portable barque containing the god’s image was carried out of the main temple, borne on poles resting on the shoulders of temple staff and maybe other officials. This could be made the opportunity for Amun to perform a ‘miracle’. A movement from the heavy wooden barque would be communicated to the shoulders of the bearers, and magnified so that a distinct deviation from the prescribed course occurred, and sometimes a dipping forwards of the shrine. The texts also claim that speeches were communicated from the god, but by what means is unclear. In this way Hatshepsut was publicly picked out by Amun and the miracle interpreted as being a divine choice of the next monarch.35 Subsequently Tuthmosis III claimed that by a similar miracle at Karnak he also had been chosen by Amun.36

How should we react to claims of this kind? Should we be cynical and say that it was all made up afterwards for propaganda reasons? Should we be more broad-minded and consider that chosen people in a state of excitement might actually hear voices, or voice openly the urgings of their conscience? Or was there a device by which the god’s voice was made to speak? The question is made more acute by a case where a king (Tuthmosis III again) claims that in the important cord-stretching ceremony preparatory to building a new temple at Karnak (his ‘Festival Hall’), ‘the majesty of this revered god (i.e. Amun) desired to do the extending of the line himself’.37 How much deeply felt transcendental experience, as against cynical use of stereotyped religious phraseology, we think was present will depend very much upon the individual reader’s own mind. It is not something that scholarly research can properly answer. What we can say is that statements of this kind make an ideological point, stressing the particular importance of the event in question. The reader is informed that the choice of the next king or the laying out of a temple (or the various other acts sanctioned by Amun’s ‘miracle’) have the greatest authority that mind and vocabulary can convey. They demonstrate the legitimizing role of Amun and the use of the Karnak temple precinct as the proper arena for it.

The parading of the divine image was a basic part of temple life in ancient Egypt, Thebes in particular. We know this from the architectural design of Karnak as much as from the scenes and inscriptions on the temple walls. From the New Kingdom onwards, almost as much attention and resources were directed towards laying out processional routes as to the temples themselves. Processional routes were, ideally, paved with stone, lined on both sides with sphinxes or similar statues, and punctuated at intervals by rest-stations or way-stations: small formal shrines or temples set perpendicularly to the route and designed to accommodate a portable boat shrine on a square stone pedestal. They, too, were called ‘tent shrines of the god’ (seh-netjer). The physical demands of reverently carrying a heavy wooden boat shrine may perhaps have dictated the intervals between way-stations if not the actual practice itself. At Karnak one such route ran from the front of the temple westwards towards the river, ending in a stone quay above a basin at the head of a canal. In the Nineteenth Dynasty, this was shortened by the building on its line of the Great Hypostyle Hall and the Second Pylon, which became the new front to the temple. A second processional route was laid out in the Eighteenth Dynasty to run southwards from the then temple front (Figure 6.2, p. 251 and Photograph 6.1, p. 249). It was given a particularly handsome and impressive appearance. By the time of Horemheb it consisted of four pylons separating as many courts, with obelisks, flagpoles and colossal royal statues in front of the pylon towers, and a way-station and royal jubilee hall built into the courtyard sides. Beyond the last pylon (no. 10 in the Karnak series) the route continued for a further 350 m, lined with ram-headed sphinxes of the reign of Horemheb and flanked with two way-stations, until it reached a separate temple, belonging to the goddess Mut who, in the New Kingdom, was held to be Amun’s consort. A third avenue, lined subsequent to the New Kingdom with reused stone rams of Amenhetep III’s reign, ran on an almost parallel course from the temple of Khonsu, who, as the son of Amun and Mut, completed the Theban divine family. The present building dates to the Twentieth Dynasty. This avenue is thought also to have ended in a quay above a basin connected to the Nile.38 Close by lay the beginning of another processional route that ran southwards for a distance of 3 km, finally ending in front of the temple of Luxor. The sphinxes that now line this route date only to the Thirtieth Dynasty, but a source from Hatshepsut’s reign shows that the route must have been marked in some way in the New Kingdom.

The festivals of Thebes were many, and the larger ones involved the temples in considerable extra expenditure in ‘offerings’, which, by means of the ‘Reversion of Offerings’, were distributed as extra rations to the temple personnel and others involved in the festivals. As examples we can quote a damaged text of Tuthmosis III from his Festival Hall at Karnak that listed 54 feast days each year,39 which compares with the 60 listed at Medinet Habu in the time of Rameses III.40 For the quantities of offerings, the Calendar of Feasts and Offerings at Medinet Habu gives us as a minimum basis for some of the regular monthly feasts 84 loaves of bread and 15 jars of beer, but rising steeply for more favoured feasts to 3,694 loaves, 410 cakes and 905 jars of beer in the case of the Festival of the god Seker.

The processions of images of the divine family of Thebes and of other sanctified beings (including statues of kings of olden times) setting forth from the huge brightly painted temples, and making their slow progress along formally arranged avenues with carefully stage-managed halts at intermediate stations, and the occasional excitement of a ‘miracle’: all this brought to the city as a whole spectacle and munificence which regularly reinforced the physical and economic dominance of the temples. And for the greatest of the festivals the king came to Thebes in person to be at the centre, and to absorb some of the power that the occasion generated.

This most important of festivals was the Festival of Opet.41 It happened every year, in the second month of the season of Inundation. In the mid-Eighteenth Dynasty it lasted for 11 days. By the end of the reign of Rameses III in the Twentieth it had been lengthened to 27 days. At that time at Medinet Habu the festival was celebrated by the distribution of 11,341 loaves, 85 cakes and 385 jars of beer. The core of the festival was an unusually long procession of images. The route lay between Karnak itself and the temple of Luxor (Figure 6.8, p. 264). In the time of Hatshepsut the outward journey was made by land, using the newly built southward extension of courts and pylons at Karnak, pausing at six way-stations on the way, whilst the return journey was by river. By the late Eighteenth Dynasty both the outward and return journeys were being made by river. Each of the deities travelled in a separate barge, towed by smaller boats and by gangs of men on the bank, who could include high court officials, hauling on ropes. It was one of the occasions when the public could present pleas to the gods before their portable barques, and before colossal ka-statues of the king (see below for the meaning of ka). Detailed scenes of the processions, depicting also the soldiers, dancers and musicians who followed the progress of the barges from the bank, were carved on the walls of Luxor temple, the destination of the festival.

The present Luxor temple is largely the work of Amenhetep III and Rameses II. In facing towards Karnak rather than towards the adjacent river it proclaims its dependence upon Karnak. Indeed, the temple seems to have existed primarily to create a suitably monumental setting for the rites in which the annual Opet festival culminated (Figure 6.9).42 These rites addressed the fundamental problem which sublime authority inevitably creates: how to reconcile the humanity of the current ruler with the divinity of his office.



Figure 6.9Luxor temple: centre of the mystic relationship between king and the god Amun, and focus of the Opet festival. The cross-hatched part at the rear is the earliest, and remained the sacred precinct in which the union between king and god took place each year. ‘*’: the triple shrine in the outer court, originally a way-station from the time of Queen Hatshepsut, contained more ka-statues of kings, and was a place for prayers and petitions by the people, hoping for an oracular response. The temple served as a place of coronation for at least one king, Horemheb. For a more detailed plan with labelled parts see L. Bell, in Shafer, Temples, 149, Fig. 56.



We have already examined the process by which divinity was first infused into a mortal child destined to become king. It was explained in a rather literal way, as brought about by a sexual union between his mother and the god Amun who had temporarily assumed the form of his father. One set of scenes illustrating this occurs in the inner part of Luxor temple (Figure 6.7, p. 261). However, the nature of that divine essence was also separately identified: it was the royal ka. All persons had a ka, fashioned at their birth from the invisible continuum of life-force and destined to exist forever. But, just as living kings belonged to the restricted uppermost band of the social hierarchy, so the ka of the king was part of the divine essence shared by gods and by the royal ancestors. Each new royal ka, created at the moment of the future king’s conception (and depicted thus in the scenes of the king’s divine birth), represented the next encapsulation of divine power in the sequence that stretched back through the long line of ancestral kings to the period when the gods had ruled in person. The indestructible royal ka existed in parallel to the life of the living king, its earthly manifestation, and gave the king his legitimacy. It was, of course, only an idea, but it was given a greater semblance of reality through public performance. Luxor temple was where it was staged, its decoration giving great prominence to the king’s ka. The mighty procession of the Opet festival took the king to the temple. Leaving the crowds outside he entered and proceeded in the company of priests to the enclosed chambers at the back. There, in a charged incense-laden atmosphere and the mystic presence of the god Amun (and his ithyphallic manifestation Amun-Min), the king and his ka were merged, and the king’s person transformed. When the king reappeared, he did so miraculously transformed into a divine being, ‘Foremost of all the living Kas.’ His reappearance in public freshly transfigured was the real climax, the moment of cheering which implied that the miracle had worked and had been accepted as having worked. Luxor temple was, in the words of its original builder (Amenhetep III), ‘his place of justification, in which he is rejuvenated; the palace from which he sets out in joy at the moment of his Appearance, his transformations visible to all’.43 Luxor temple provided for the king the essential setting for the interplay between the hidden and revealed aspects of a divinity that other temples did for images of the gods.

The annual festival centred on the presence of the king in person. By the mid-Eighteenth Dynasty kings were no longer residing at Thebes. They lived for the most part in the north of Egypt, particularly in the palaces at Memphis. The royal participation every year in the Opet festival thus came to involve a state progress upstream that spread the public acclamation further, and grew into an institution in itself. The job of feeding the court during the many overnight stops there and back fell to the mayors of provincial towns, and by the late Eighteenth Dynasty this had become a burden that required a royal edict to correct (see p. 297).

The merging of the king with the god Amun and all his pageants had the important consequence of drawing a line between politics and myth. The royal succession could go badly wrong, some could even plot to kill the king and replace him with another (as happened with Rameses III). But behind visible reality lay an immensely weighty edifice of myth, festival and grand architectural setting that could absorb the petty vagaries of history and smooth out the irregularities. It guaranteed the continuity of proper rule that was so important an element in the Egyptians’ thinking. In particular, it could convert usurpers (or new blood, depending on one’s point of reference) into models of legitimacy and tradition. Horemheb is a prime example. The Eighteenth Dynasty ended with the royal line petering out in the aftermath of the Amarna Period. The throne passed to an army officer, the general Horemheb, who had risen to prominence in the reign of Tutankhamun. By lineage he apparently was not royal. He was part of the court at Memphis, and during this time saw to the completion of a handsome tomb for himself and his family in the court cemetery at Saqqara. His elevation to the kingship is recorded in formal texts. These go so far as to recognize the early part of his life when he was ‘supreme chief of the land’ and an adviser to the king. When, through the machinations of court politics, and the leverage that his leadership of the army bestowed, he became king himself, his coronation was carried out at Karnak and Luxor as part of the Festival of Opet of that year. As the texts describe it the whole coronation ceremony was integrated with the Opet festival so that the great Karnak–Luxor procession became a celebratory parade for the newly validated king.44





The Theban city of the dead


Karnak, Luxor and the city of Thebes proper lay on the east bank of the Nile. Across the river on the west bank the New Kingdom witnessed the large-scale development of a city of the dead. From the beginning of the Eighteenth Dynasty kings abandoned the building of pyramids in the Memphite area. They put their tombs at Thebes, and their successors continued to do so until the very end of the Twentieth Dynasty. But now the nature of the royal tomb was very different. The new-style burial place was a catacomb dug into the desert hills in the Valley of the Kings, its security dependent mainly upon the careful policing of the area. It lay quite separate from the all-important offering-cult that was now housed in a temple lying beside the alluvial plain. The change involved a fundamental revision of the symbolism of the royal tomb, affecting the relationship between king and supreme deity. In the new tombs the king’s body and statue cult were no longer subsumed into a gigantic image of the sun-cult, the pyramid. The only architectural gesture now made to the cult of the visible sun was an open court containing a platform and stairs built into the back of the new temples. Instead, the new temples proclaimed the centrality and supremacy of Amun.

Although we are accustomed to speak of these temples as being royal mortuary temples, they were in reality temples dedicated to a specific form of the god Amun with whom the king became fused both in death, through the presence of his images within their own shrines, and in life during his visits to the temple.45 At Deir el-Bahari there was Amun ‘Holy of Holies’, at the Ramesseum (mortuary temple of Rameses II) Amun ‘within United-with-Thebes’ (the ancient name for the Ramesseum), and at Medinet Habu Amun ‘of United-with-Eternity’, the ancient name for Medinet Habu. Each of the mortuary temples was really an Amun temple in which the form of a particular king had taken up residence. This is very apparent from the architecture of the better-preserved ones. Those of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties (of Seti I, Rameses II and Rameses III) reserved the rear central chambers for the cult of Amun, centred not only on a permanent statue image but also on a portable boat shrine kept within a pillared hall with central pedestal. For the Eighteenth Dynasty only the temple of Hatshepsut preserves sufficient of its masonry, and here, behind the centre of the upper terrace, a rock-hewn sanctuary housed the image of Amun. The king who had commissioned the temple naturally had a prominent part in the temple cult, to the extent that, to judge from texts preserved at Medinet Habu, his spirit was thought to merge with that of the local form of Amun. The mortuary temples catered for other aspects of ideology, too. As just noted, the old cult of the visible sun was given an open court on the north side equipped with a stone platform reached by steps, a construction which the Egyptians rather oddly called a ‘Sunshade’ or ‘Shade of Ra’, and from the top of which solar hymns were declaimed. A room or suite of rooms to the south of the Amun sanctuary accommodated the cult of historical continuity, in the form of the king’s father and sometimes his ancestors as well. Yet another portable boat shrine stood here.

The network of Amun’s connections to the west bank of Thebes was expressed through more processions. Once a year, roughly five months before the Opet festival, the ‘Festival of the Valley’ took place.46 In this the images of Amun, Mut and Khonsu, the divine family of Thebes, were brought from Karnak and ferried over the river. Once across they continued their journey by either road or canal to Deir el-Bahari, site of the ancient mortuary temple and tomb of King Menthuhetep II of the Eleventh Dynasty (Figure 3.23, p. 157) and of the recent mortuary temple of Queen Hatshepsut. Deir el-Bahari lies almost exactly opposite Karnak so that the whole journey could have been accomplished along a single line. However, as the New Kingdom progressed the route was extended so that the portable barques with their statues could rest overnight in the mortuary temple of the reigning king. On the next day the procession returned to Karnak. Although it was a much shorter festival than that of Opet it was highly regarded and was the occasion for families with relatives or ancestors buried in the Theban hills to make their own journey to the family tomb, to have a meal there, and to stay overnight.

A lesser but more frequent connection between east and west banks was maintained at a small temple built (or rebuilt) at the southern end of the Theban necropolis in the time of Tuthmosis III, beside the space which later would be occupied by Rameses III’s mortuary temple of Medinet Habu.47 The shape of the temple was standard for its day, but its innocuous form disguised the fact that it was regarded as embodying yet another of the primaeval mounds on which creation had first taken place. It was ‘The Genuine Mound of the West’, a name which probably also conveyed the notion that original creation and the rebirth of the dead in the western desert cemetery were linked. Inscriptions from the Twenty-first Dynasty reveal that every 10 days (the normal length of a working ‘week’ in ancient Egypt) the image of Amun of Opet (Luxor) was brought across to visit this temple, and it is likely from inscriptions at Luxor itself that this custom extends back to at least the time of Rameses II.

When the routes of these processions – the festivals of Opet and of the Valley and the regular trip to Medinet Habu – are marked on a map they form a pattern: a processional perimeter to Thebes (Figure 6.8, p. 264). To see the Theban temples on east and west as parts of a master-scheme is not just modern fancy. Certain brief texts, particularly names specifying certain buildings or building parts, reveal a distinct parallelism in Egyptian thinking between the mortuary temples on the west and Karnak and Luxor on the east, a parallelism that the processions of boat shrines articulated.48 The master-scheme, the unitary overview of the sacred places of Thebes, is summed up in the fact that all of them belonged to the ‘Estate of Amun’. Its realization on the ground, however, also reveals the limits of New Kingdom area planning. There was no attempt to build on the legacy of the Middle Kingdom by extending the overall planning of a settlement to the premeditated arrangement of a huge complex of temples and tombs. Individual Theban temples impress us with their carefully symmetrical layouts. But their particular locations seem to have depended largely on local factors of mythology or convenience, giving rise to an ad hoc landscape of temple architecture. This was where the processional avenues made their contribution, binding the disparate parts together and creating a semblance of unity.

Just as Karnak and Luxor provided an important ceremonial opportunity for the king, so also did the mortuary temples on the west bank. From the time of Horemheb onwards each contained a small palace situated near the front of the temple (Figure 6.6, p. 259 and Photograph 6.3).49 It offered limited but evidently adequate accommodation for the king and his entourage during his visits to Thebes. The best-known example, at Medinet Habu, has two entrances to the inner part of the palace and each is graced with a scene of the king making an entrance, in the one case ‘to see his father Amun in his feast at the beginning of Opet’ and in the other ‘to cause his father Amun to appear in the Feast of the Valley’.50 The mortuary temple palace was always on the south side, and where it faced into the temple forecourt or towards the avenue leading into the temple it possessed a formal balcony, the ‘Window of Appearance’ (Figure 6.10; for others, see Figures 1.2 and 8.8, pp. 28 and 338). This was the setting for a reward ceremony that, in view of the Theban festival programme, would have occurred no more than once or twice a year. A cushion was laid on the sill of the window itself, courtiers and high officials were led before it, and rewards and honours bestowed on them. This Theban reward ceremony was only a local version of a general gift-giving ceremony that later New Kingdom Pharaohs indulged in. The Edict of Horemheb describes in glowing terms how the army unit temporarily serving its ten-day period of guard duty in the palace was given special extra rations at a reward ceremony performed at the Window of Appearance, a pointer to the way that at least the outer parts of these great temples were not exclusively for ceremonies centred on the gods.51



Figure 6.10Theatrical setting for the ‘appearance’ of the king: the symbol-laden ornamental palace balcony, the ‘Window of Appearance’ of Pharaoh. This slightly restored version is from the first palace at Rameses III’s mortuary temple, Medinet Habu, western Thebes, after Hölscher, Mortuary Temple I, Ch. II. See Photograph 6.3, p. 272, for a photograph of the remains of the rear part of the palace.





Photograph 6.3Part of the small palace attached to the south side of the mortuary temple of Rameses III at Medinet Habu, western Thebes. The walls are partly restored.





Amenhetep III’s Sed-festivals


The Egyptians had a genius for adapting old styles to new requirements. New Kingdom Thebes was the product of a society that had changed significantly since the great age of pyramid building. But in the appeal to traditions the Egyptians found legitimacy for novelties.

As was discussed in the earlier chapters, some of the earliest intelligible monuments to kingship concerned the celebration of the earthly power and vigour of kings, the Sed-festival. In the New Kingdom, it was still as prestigious an occasion as ever; but typically, although they would never openly admit to it in formal texts, the Egyptians invented new forms of pageantry and adapted the symbolism to the changed environment. The best-known case is the set of three Sed-festivals celebrated by King Amenhetep III in the twenty-ninth to thirtieth, thirty-fourth and thirty-seventh years of his reign. The choice of these particular years was not wholly a personal matter. The Sed-festival had come to be (though it had not always been) a celebration of 30 years of reign in the first instance. But thereafter, kings were free to hold repeats at frequent intervals. Amenhetep III’s jubilees are of special interest because of the survival of the actual site where at least the first two were celebrated. It now bears the name Malkata, and lies on the west bank of Thebes, to the south of the line of mortuary temples and the Theban processional perimeter (Figures 6.8, p. 264, 6.11 and 6.12).52 In being a kind of festival showground created for great pageants of kingship it offers a vivid and somewhat unconventional example from archaeology of the profligacy in the use of resources characteristic of despotic states at the height of their powers.



Figure 6.11A setting for pageantry: Amenhetep III’s sacred lake, the Birket Habu, and adjacent palace town (Malkata) at western Thebes, and the probable site of the celebrations of the king’s first and second Sed-festivals. The map has been built up from a variety of sources, including aerial photographs, Google Earth images and notes and measurements made during a survey and excavation of the site for the University Museum of Pennsylvania in the 1970s. Letters in bold type refer to single or to groups of mounds of ancient spoil surrounding the Birket Habu. The distribution of hieratic labels is derived from Hayes, JNES 10 (1951), 84–5; Leahy, Malkata, 1–4. The fragmentary building remains of the town of the period in the area of Medinet Habu are mapped in C. Robichon and A. Varille, Le temple du scribe royal Amenhotep, fils de Hapou I, Cairo, IFAO, 1936, Pls V, IX; Hölscher, Medinet Habu I, passim.





Figure 6.12A more detailed plan of the buildings of Malkata, using material contained in Lacovara, Royal City. The stamped mud brick records, on the right, the name Nebmaatra (prenomen of Amenhetep III) and, beside it on the left, the name of his wife, Tiy. Drawing by A. Boyce.



The classic Sed-festival was, as pointed out in Chapter 2, itself an amalgamation of two separate events, the Sed-festival proper and the ceremony of territorial claim. Early royal funerary architecture, best exemplified by the Step Pyramid at Saqqara, created a setting for both festivals in which one crucial part was a large arena where the king would run a sacred course (Figure 2.22, p. 103). At Malkata this part was transformed into a water ceremony. A huge artificial basin, now known as the Birket Habu, was dug where the floodplain met the desert, designed in the shape of a modern letter ‘T’. This was the common shape for small tanks and pools containing pure water. By the end of the king’s reign the Malkata basin had been enlarged to the extent that the main part measured 2 × 1 km. The earth dug out from this stupendous hole in the ground was partly spread out to make an artificial terrace on which the king’s mortuary temple and part of the adjacent palace stood, and was partly heaped up into rows of artificial hills. Remnants of this early example of landscaping still survive. A contemporary Theban tomb, belonging to a high court official called Kheruef, has left a brief and very stylized description of this principal event from the king’s first jubilee:

The glorious appearance of the king at the great double doors in his palace, ‘The House of Rejoicing’; ushering in the officials, the king’s friends, the chamberlain, the men of the gateway, the king’s acquaintances, the crew of the barge, the castellans, and the king’s dignitaries. Rewards were given out in the form of ‘Gold of Praise’, and ducks and fish of gold, and they received ribbons of green linen, each person being made to stand according to his rank. They were fed with food as part of the king’s breakfast: bread, beer, oxen and fowl. They were directed to the lake of His Majesty to row in the king’s barge. They grasped the towropes of the Evening Barge and the prow rope of the Morning Barge, and they towed the barges at the great place. They stopped at the steps of the throne.

It was His Majesty who did this in accordance with the writings of old. (Yet) past generations of people since the time of the ancestors had never celebrated such jubilee-rites.53



The Evening and Morning Barges carried divine statues, and were so called because they were supposed to be imitations of the heavenly barges in which the sun god made his daily journey. Elaborate water processions had become part of the tradition of celebration at Thebes (using the River Nile), and now provided the model for the Sed-festival. The last piece of the text catches the Egyptian approach well: it was novel, an invention of the day, yet in accord with people’s feeling for tradition.

The ability to invent with sound historical taste is illustrated by another of Kheruef’s scenes of Amenhetep’s Sed-festivals. In this the king is shown ceremonially raising into an upright position a carved pole called a Djed-pillar.54 The pillar had the form of a hieroglyph that wrote a word which meant something like ‘stability’, and the act of raising it belonged to the range of symbols and ceremonies which encouraged orderliness in society. More specifically, by this time it was regarded as a symbol of resurrection and was thus associated with Osiris, god of the dead. Amenhetep III’s master of ceremonies evidently felt it to be entirely fitting to add the Djed-pillar ceremony to the jubilee festival, although historically there was probably no connection. This kind of interchangeability of ideas and forms made it relatively easy to invent new combinations by stirring the pot of tradition. Scenes of the festival in Amenhetep’s own temples (as distinct from those in Kheruef’s tomb), however, appear to be more traditional.55

The texts mention a palace. Another scene in Kheruef’s tomb shows king and queen emerging from it.56 This first appearance at the palace door on jubilee-day, clad in the special jubilee costume, was another vital moment imbued with great significance. It was also truly traditional, since at the Step Pyramid this moment of first emergence from the palace seems to be commemorated. It was not the regular royal palace, however. Malkata was a site specially developed for this festival. So beside the ceremonial lake a special palace was built, of mud brick, its walls brightly painted with scenes and colourful designs. The food and drink for the celebrations were delivered to it in pottery amphorae whose tall mud stoppers bore the impressions of wooden stamps that recorded the occasion. The festival day arrived, the amphorae were opened by having their tops expertly knocked off in one piece, the celebrations took place, and then the palace was closed for the last time. Within a short time work resumed on the lake, to enlarge it in time for the next jubilee. The palace stood in the way, so it was demolished and its rubble, mixed up with all the broken amphorae, was carried across to the desert and dumped there. This mixture of bricks, painted wall plaster and broken empties was partially excavated in 1973 (Figure 6.11, p. 274, marks the place, Site K).

For the next jubilee, four years later, a new ceremonial palace was built, again of mud-brick. This one was left standing. The ruins, still with hundreds of fragments of leftover amphorae from the king’s jubilee meal, were excavated in 1916. The plan of the building resembles a temple, complete with a small hypostyle hall and group of sanctuaries, and this likeness was made explicit by stamped bricks used in the construction which refer to ‘The Temple of Amun in the House of Rejoicing’. This last element in the name, it will be recalled, occurred in the Kheruef text quoted above. On such an august occasion the distinction between king and god, and the architecture that went with each, became quite arbitrary, just as at Luxor temple, which was built primarily as a setting for an annual royal ceremony. It also emphasizes how, even in the ancient Sed-festival rites that had no historical connection with either Thebes or its gods, Amun had been inserted to play the dominant role.

The royal family, the court, the servants who fed them and the workers who kept them supplied with whatever was necessary – including glass vessels and glazed trinkets – were housed for the duration of the celebration in a large central complex of palaces, villas and houses. The main palace contained the king’s bedchamber and bathroom behind a formal arrangement of halls that included several suites for individual members of the royal family. Much of this building was painted with scenes from nature. Not far away a natural elevation of the desert formed the base of a brick dais facing a courtyard where perhaps the king could receive the more important visitors to his feast.

A pageant on water, distribution of gifts and a special meal, the erection of festival buildings and the assembling of dignitaries and foreign envoys and representatives: here are the ingredients for the archetypal state jamboree. Nor was it necessary to wait for a king blessed with longevity to reach his thirtieth year. The festivals of Opet and of the Valley were almost as grand.

The integration of king and temple cult of Amun enveloped the person of the king in an elaborate cocoon of mystery and pageant. It successfully blurred the difficulty that people might have in reconciling the divine and earthly aspects of a ruler who was also the head of a series of powerful institutions. For a brief time, however, it looked as though this compromise was only an intermediate stage in the evolution of a charismatic monarchy that sought the same level of adulation, but now directly focused on the king without the obscuring veil of mystery. This brief time was the reign of King Akhenaten, late in the Eighteenth Dynasty (Chapter 8). Although Akhenaten’s twin visions of a monarchy worshipped for itself, and of a rationale that was so simple and direct as to release the king from the shrouds of mystery, failed to convince his contemporaries and died with him, it offered a glimpse of a future that is still with us. Akhenaten’s kingship provides an unintended caricature of all modern leaders who indulge in the trappings of charismatic display. The Egyptians themselves did not like what they saw. It evidently offended their sense of good taste. After his death, they returned to intellectual compromise and wrapped again the nakedness of monarchy in the shrouds of transcendental imaginings.





Secular powers


Akhenaten’s reign of 17 years without the support of the traditional temple establishments and all the colourful shows that they could provide, and the failure of this new style after his death which can by no means be described as a vengeful triumph of the priesthood, brings into focus two further institutions within New Kingdom society: the palace and the army.

In terms of bricks and mortar ‘palace’ is a useful designation for any distinctive building in which a king or even a non-royal person stayed, even if for a short time. It has come to be used, for example, for the residences of local governors or mayors, for example, at Tell Basta in the Middle Kingdom (Figure 5.24, p. 240). Egyptian kings travelled inside their country frequently and extensively.57 If the journey was not on a regular route temporary accommodation could be in a tented encampment, as was used by Akhenaten on his first prospecting visit to Amarna.58 But for scheduled journeys where something was constructed in order to provide accommodation, even for an overnight stop only, the building would, of necessity, have had a certain degree of formality (with a throne room, for example) that attracts the modern word ‘palace’ when the remains are excavated. There were probably at any one time in ancient Egypt a very large number of ‘palaces’, ranging from overnight lodges or rest houses, which could be quite small, to great sprawling complexes at major cities, which a Pharaoh might have thought of as ‘home’ (Malkata, Figures 6.11, 6.12, pp. 274 and 276, might count as one, although only used for jubilee-festival seasons). When one adds to this the fact that from their unique position kings can build palaces stamped with an individuality lying outside the norms of the architecture of the day, reflecting considerations that may amount to whimsy, it is hardly surprising to find that the excavated New Kingdom palaces fit less into the kind of standard pattern that one can recognize in temples and tombs.

Most journeys within Egypt used the river extensively. The small overnight palaces on royal routes were therefore sometimes called (perhaps often metaphorically) ‘The mooring-places of Pharaoh’. The term ‘rest house’ perhaps renders the sense best into English. River travel did not necessarily cramp the king’s style: one model letter commanding preparations for the king’s arrival at the riverine rest houses shows that a force of chariotry was expected to be with him.59 Provisioning the rest houses exposed an administrative problem: how to cater for the occasional and not necessarily regular excesses of a brief royal passage. A partial solution lay in allocating to them farmland so that a permanent income maintained a small staff and its surplus could be stored in granaries ready for the direct feeding of the king’s party and presumably for use in barter to purchase the extras which the farm did not produce itself. A group of ‘mooring-places of Pharaoh’ in Middle Egypt are known from the Wilbour Papyrus, a massive document on land rents.60 One lay near the harim-palace of Medinet el-Ghurab (Gurob), another was at the city of Hardai on the Nile. This one owned 401 arouras of land (about 110 hectares). It is hard to imagine, however, that such a simple device solved the problem. Some kings were more extravagant than others, or might travel with a harim of excessive demands (remembering that the harim was a semi-independent institution with its own officials). The model letter of command to a local official in charge of some royal rest houses is notable for the range of its list of demanded commodities. Being a model letter we can suspect an element of vocabulary practice, but New Kingdom Pharaohs were not modest in their tastes. This is the sort of point at which the only solution for the hard-pressed official in charge was to go out and to commandeer extra supplies from other institutions and risk the heavy penalties laid down in royal decrees intended to protect individual institutions (such as the Nauri Decree, described in the next chapter, p. 298).

A good compromise was to make the mayor of the local town responsible. An excessive use of this device was corrected in the Horemheb Edict (see Chapter 7, p. 297). Ancient Egyptian mayors are an interesting group. In earlier periods, they had been all-powerful locally, commonly holding the office of ‘Superintendent of staff/Chief priest’ in the town’s temple as well. To some extent they lay outside the regular bureaucratic systems, and did not possess a hierarchy of their own officials. Their power must have lain in the respect and influence they commanded by virtue of local landownership and family ties and a network of patronage and obligation. Although they had no bureaucracy of their own theirs was normally the responsibility for seeing that local taxes were collected and delivered to the vizier, the king’s chief representative. They presumably acted as a buffer between the external demands of the state and the wellbeing of the local community of which they were the symbolic head. For making up a shortfall in supplies for a sudden royal arrival who better to lean on but the local mayor? Another example of mayoral responsibility for keeping the palace in food will be cited shortly.

What did these royal rest houses look like? A fair guide is probably to be found in the small palaces attached to the west bank mortuary temples at Thebes, adding in a magazine and some kitchens and small houses for servants and caretakers (Photograph 6.3, p. 272, Figures 6.6, p. 259, and 6.10, p. 271). The model letter just cited refers several times to the existence of a special window at the ‘mooring-place’, which we should probably take as a ‘Window of Appearance’. The fact that this was a standard feature of the west bank mortuary-temple palaces strengthens the case for using them as a model for this type of provincial royal rest house.

One example of a rest house, used apparently as a hunting-lodge, has actually been excavated. It dates to the later Eighteenth Dynasty and lay close to the Great Sphinx at Giza (Figure 6.13). Why here? By the New Kingdom the Great Sphinx – originally a statue of Khafra, the king who built the second pyramid at Giza – had been re-identified as a statue of the sun god Horemakhet (‘Horus on the Horizon’), reflecting a habit of seeing conspicuous features of the desert landscape as images of Horus (and of Hathor also). Kings and private individuals honoured it with memorials large and small. Some of the stelae were set into the brick wall which was constructed around the edge of the newly cleared pit in the sand which had largely buried the body of the Sphinx. Amenhetep II built a special little brick temple not far from it. The site had an added attraction, too. The large stela in Amenhetep II’s temple records how, when still a prince, he had exercised his chariot over the nearby desert. His son, the later Tuthmosis IV, went hunting for game, including lions, over the same ground. Just to the south of the Sphinx and incorporating the ruins of the ancient Valley Temple of Khafra, a small palace was built. Part of it resembles one of the larger houses atAmarna (Figure 8.12, p. 350); another (to the west) contained an inscribed stone door frame bearing the cartouches of Tutankhamun later usurped by Rameses II. Several wine-jar stoppers were recovered. The entire site was surrounded by a mud-brick enclosure wall with external buttresses, creating a royal park, a place for hunting and for contemplation.61



Figure 6.13Honouring and reinterpreting the past: New Kingdom activity at the Sphinx at Giza, which had become identified with the rising sun, Horemakhet (‘Horus on the Horizon’). Kings built a small palace beside it, whilst the Sphinx itself attracted royal and private memorials. After Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 470, Fig. 19.2; also U. Hölscher, Das Grabdenkmal des Königs Chephren, Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1912, Blatt XV; Selim Hassan, The Great Sphinx and Its Secrets, Cairo, Government Press, 1953; H. Ricke, Der Harmachistempel des Chefren in Giseh, Wiesbaden, Steiner, 1970. The inset stela shows, at the top, the Sphinx, a standing statue between its paws and two of the nearby pyramids behind it. The Sphinx is entitled: ‘Horemakhet, the great god, lord of the desert.’ Below are figures of two men, the creators of the stela, ‘The excellent scribe, Mentuher’ and (behind him) ‘The scribe Kamutnakhtu, justified.’ It was found in sand filling the trench on the north side of the Sphinx. After Selim Hassan, The Sphinx. Its History in the Light of Recent Excavations, Cairo, Government Press, 1949, Fig. 12, pp. 58–60.



The archaeology of New Kingdom palaces is best illustrated at Akhenaten’s new city of Amarna (Chapter 8), although the archaeological remains show that it is not so easy to be sure what we mean by the term ‘palace’. Outside Amarna the excavated evidence is less rich than one might have hoped. We know from texts that large residential palaces existed at Memphis and, from the reign of Rameses II onwards, at Per-Rameses (near the modern town of Qantir) in the eastern delta. So far the Per-Rameses palaces are represented by lengths of massive brick wall and the disembodied remains of a glazed throne dais.62 Memphis has fared a little better. A fine reception hall belonging to King Merenptah, with the proportions and dignity of a temple, were excavated early in the twentieth century.63 The clearest picture we have of the extent of a real residential palace outside Amarna comes from Malkata (Figure 6.12, p. 276), put up to accommodate Amenhetep III’s huge entourage when it moved up to Thebes for his jubilee festivals.

One motive in the siting of some palaces seems to have been to create a retreat, away from the pressures of the full court and its administrators. One such retreat palace, or rather set of two palaces with accompanying villages, was built by the early Eighteenth Dynasty kings in the desert at Deir el-Ballas, 22 km north of Thebes.64 Another is the palace at Medinet el-Ghurab, on the desert edge close to the entrance to the Fayum.65 Built by Tuthmosis III it remained in use through the Amarna Period and beyond. It is a particularly interesting palace because it housed the senior royal women, with their own officials and servants and staff of weavers. It was a harim-palace where the occupants could live a secluded private life, and also bring up some of the royal children. At least one important Ramesside prince was buried there.66 The atmosphere of personal scheming and political intrigue that such a place could engender need not be left only to the imagination. The greatest Pharaoh of the Twentieth Dynasty, Rameses III, vanquisher of foreign hosts, including the ‘Sea Peoples’, fell victim to a plot hatched in one of them. We know this from a surviving summary of verdicts from the trial of the conspirators.67 A total of 31 men were implicated, together with six of their wives. All except four were executed or allowed to take their own life. The plot centred, however, on the women of the harim, and one named Teye, whose son the conspirators evidently hoped to make king. Although the son was amongst those found guilty, the harim women themselves seem to have been left alone. Who the male conspirators were is revealing: 11 were officials of the harim itself, 12 were officials or courtiers with other titles, only five were military men, and there was one priest. One of the soldiers, a captain of bowmen of Nubia, was involved because his sister who was in the harim had written to him urging him to start an uprising. The study of history encourages us to look for explanations for change in terms of competing ideas, thus in the realm of ‘politics’. But here, as must often have been (and still is) the case, the motive for attempted change was personal jealousy.

Provisioning the royal household involved not only getting supplies to a travelling pocket of gross consumption but also supporting permanent communities at the larger palaces that served as home bases. One of these was at Memphis. We have an important set of documents from the administration of the Memphis palace bread supply in the time of Seti I.68 States one heading: ‘Receiving wheat from the granary of Pharaoh in Memphis, in order to make it into loaves in the bakery which is under the authority of the mayor of Memphis, Neferhetep, to be sent over to the storehouse of Pharaoh.’ There follow lists of daily amounts of between 100 and 190 sacks (about 7,300 and 13,000 l). A complementary list picks up the trail: ‘Receiving the bread of the bakery which is under the authority of the mayor of Memphis, Neferhetep, at the storehouse of Pharaoh.’ The quantities, received every few days, were usually between 2,000 and 5,000 small loaves. Note the way that the mayor of Memphis had been made responsible for the difficult part – the running of the actual bakehouse, a labour-intensive place where the system of keeping tabs on the flow of commodities was very vulnerable as grain was turned into flour and then made into loaves. This was separately documented in these papyri. We learn that 3.5 sacks of flour make 168 standard loaves, or 602 small loaves, with separate notations for weight and for losses of weight during the baking process. A sack of flour seems to be the product of about two sacks of grain, but no one is allowed to take an average ration for granted. Measurement took place at every step and the discrepancies were noted. Milling was traditionally a woman’s job, and there is one brief entry illustrating this: on one day three women, representing a group of 26, collected 10.5 sacks of grain and turned it into 7.5 sacks of flour. The rate of issue of wheat would have amounted to some 50,000 sacks each year, which would have required a granary about one-quarter of the size of that at the Ramesseum, although we also have to allow for a separate and substantial amount of cereal used for brewing beer. But since the wheat was for immediate baking we must also accept the existence of a substantial dependent population, running into many hundreds, if not the low thousands. This is understandable if we understand the term ‘palace’ to have embraced a community, with its own offices and accommodation, far larger than the formal buildings used personally by the royal family.

The palace was much more than just architecture and provisions. Decisions of state and matters of dynastic succession must have been far more prominent in the minds of those who lived there, and what they concluded and did provides historians with the raw material for their profession. The harim conspiracy of Rameses III’s time is a case in point. The area that most consistently illustrates the political realism with which business at court was conducted is foreign affairs. The New Kingdom saw a great change in Egypt’s international position. Conquest and empire moved to the forefront of real policies as well as of ideology. The result was an empire that took in much of northern Sudan and, to the north-east, Palestine and part of Syria. The reality of significant conquest boosted the portrayal of the king as mighty conqueror, something done with much vigour and lack of embarrassment on temple walls and in many other contexts (Figure 6.14). Success in battle, however, also led to deadly political gamesmanship with powerful enemies even further afield, whom Pharaoh could never hope to conquer. A study of New Kingdom foreign relations becomes the most important window open to us for observing the existence, at the highest level, of political acumen coping pragmatically with difficult real situations far removed from the cosmic tramplings of kings as depicted simultaneously in Egyptian art.



Figure 6.14Imperial images. Above. God’s blessing for Pharaoh’s conquests. Rameses II smites a Semitic victim, whilst god, in the form of Atum Lord of Tju (= Tjeku, a local place), offers him a sickle-shaped sword to legitimize the act. From a temple at Tell el-Retaba, eastern delta (marked on the map in Figure 1.10, p. 43). After W.M.F. Petrie, Hyksos and Israelite Cities, London, BSAE, 1906, Pls XXIX and XXX. Below. Pharaoh Akhenaten tramples his enemies, within the security of his palace. Right. A section of painted pavement from the Great Palace at Amarna, depicting two themes: a rectangular pool surrounded by vegetation (B) and a central path (A) of bound foreign captives alternating with groups of three bows, symbolic of the king’s enemies in general. After W.M.F. Petrie, Tell el Amarna, London, Methuen, 1894, Pl. II. Left. Outline plan of part of the Great Palace showing the context of the painted pavement, and how the painted pathway continued. As the king strode from hall to hall he crushed his enemies underfoot. After Pendlebury, COA III, Pl. XIIIA, and comments on p. 40. F. Weatherhead, JEA 78 (1992), 182, Fig. 1; Weatherhead, Palace Paintings, 10–28, restores the layout of the pathways a little differently. For the location of this part of the Great Palace, see Figure 8.5, no. 8 (p. 332).



The prime source is a cache of clay tablets from a government office in the centre of Akhenaten’s capital, Amarna (Figure 8.5, p. 332, marks the site), written in cuneiform script employing local forms of the Akkadian language.69 The bulk of the tablets are letters from western Asiatic courts, and copies of letters sent from the Egyptian court in return. In political terms the letters fall into two main groups which immediately delimit the real sphere of Egyptian power abroad. One is correspondence between Egypt and other states of great-power status where the mutual mode of address is ‘brother’. These are the states of Babylonia, Assyria, Mitanni, Hatti and Alashiya (either Cyprus or a kingdom in southern Anatolia). The content is mainly personal, but might include a political element, as with the king of Alashiya’s advice not to align with the kings of Hatti and Babylon (EA 35). With the letters went exchanges of presents, a practice taken very seriously and about which kings were most sensitive in balancing what they gave against what they received. Arranged diplomatic marriages were another delicate area.

The second group of letters concerns the city-states of Palestine and Syria, their princes and their resident Egyptian officials. They address Pharaoh as ‘my lord’. Those closer to Egypt had little prospect of an improved alternative, but the Syrian princes were in a position to make choices of major importance for themselves. Their aims have been summarized as follows: preservation of their own local autonomy; extension of their own rule over neighbours; maintenance towards the Egyptians of a show of loyalty to secure men and money; and either opposition or submission to the Hittite king according to circumstances.70 Their letters tend to have the form of a long introductory protestation of absolute loyalty couched in obsequious language:

This is the message of a slave to his master after he had heard what the kind messenger of the king [said] to his servant upon arriving here, and [felt] the sweet fragrance that came out of the mouth of Your Majesty towards his servant.





Thus Abimilki, Prince of Tyre (EA 147). In such cases the direct political message tends to be reserved for a brief final sentence or two, although some writers, notably Rib-addi of Byblos, could sustain loquacious pleas for support for much of their letters. A constant element is denunciation of a neighbouring prince on grounds of disloyalty to the king of Egypt. Since the accusations at times extended to the murder of one prince by another (e.g. EA 89, also 73, 75, 81, 140), these were not necessarily to be dismissed as inventions.

The obvious conclusion to be drawn from this material is that, although no trace has survived of anything like an objective comment on an international situation, behind the façade of total military supremacy Egypt’s foreign relations were politically based, required careful interpretation and judgement, and involved discussion of situations in terms of human motives. For this we may assume that the Egyptians were well equipped. In the first place, they tended to write letters to their superiors in a not dissimilar exaggerated style. Secondly, the giving of judgements in Egypt (something which was not confined to a class of professional judges but was probably a basic attribute of holding a significant office), although it might well involve reference back to documentary archives, was essentially a matter of resolving conflicting testimonies and assessing human motives. People who could pronounce judgement in a convoluted case of disputed land ownership going back over several generations had the right frame of mind for reading between the lines of diplomatic letters.

The letters, however, had another and more insidious dimension. They created a mental world of their own, into which all the correspondents were drawn. For the king of Egypt, more or less at the end of the letter-writing line in geographical terms, it was a world of maybe 50 members, each one a ruler or occasionally another member of a ruler’s family. The members rarely if ever met. They wrote to each other with long intervals in the correspondence, but there were enough of them to sustain at the Egyptian court (and doubtless in many courts elsewhere) a permanent office and secretariat to deal with them. As they read letters and dictated replies they must have formed in their minds shadowy images of one another which were frequently wrong in detail, but which captured the essence of the situation: that they were all players on a political stage and had a broadly similar motivation. Although they usually wrote to gain a specific end, their letters also represented moves in a game where the stakes were measured in prestige and dignity. In this artificially constructed world of long-distance communication a king might blush or rage at thoughts of what had been said about him in a distant court that he would never see and could not punish, thoughts conjured up by the words of a letter of clay and the tales of the envoy who brought it. The Egyptian battle scenes on temple walls reduced international conflict to a level of absolute simplicity. Backed by the gods Pharaoh smote helpless and impotent foes with impunity. The letters, however, drew the same Pharaoh into a world of international vanity in which the price of acceptance as a star player was exposure to competition. Here he was no longer a god.





The multicultural court


At first sight, the consequences at home of participation in the rounds of warfare and diplomacy in the Near East were slight. New Kingdom palaces as they have survived seem to be quintessentially Egyptian, with their halls of columns shaped like papyrus stems and their paintings of marsh life beside the Nile or of Pharaoh in his chariot. If we wish to imagine them with people, the scenes of court life of the time direct us to a refined and elegant Egyptianness of style. Other kinds of evidence, however, although generally less obvious, point towards a more complex picture. They suggest that in possessions, dress, language and other aspects of culture, court life actually followed a more international style and was perhaps not quite as one might at first imagine it to have been.

In Chapter 1 we saw how, in the New Kingdom especially, Egypt became home to numerous people of foreign origin who, from the evidence at our disposal, seem easily to vanish from our gaze through the adoption of Egyptian culture. Amongst the exiles were foreign princesses accepted in marriage for reasons of diplomacy. Tuthmosis IV had married a daughter (her name not preserved) of the king of Mitanni (Artatama). Amenhetep III had done the same, twice over, marrying first Gilukhepa, daughter of Shuttarna II, and then her niece Tadukhepa, daughter of Tushratta, both successive kings of the same Mitanni. There are also records of marriages to two daughters of Babylonian kings, and to the daughter of the ruler of an important state (Arzawa) in south-east Anatolia. Akhenaten followed with marriage to another Babylonian princess. Rameses II married two daughters of the Hittite king, and one each of the kings of Babylon and of a client state in Syria, Zulapi.71

For their subsequent lives in Egypt we must rely primarily upon circumstantial evidence. The marriages simultaneously brought to the Egyptian court costly dowries and attendants. A tribute list of Tuthmosis III mentions for his twenty-fourth year the ‘daughter of a prince together with her ornaments of gold and lapis lazuli of her land, and the retainers belonging to her, male and female slaves, 30 of them’. When Gilukhepa arrived as Amenhetep III’s latest bride she brought with her 317 ladies-in-waiting. As for the dowries, we are fortunate in possessing, on two large clay tablets, a detailed itemized list of what was sent by Tadukhepa’s father to accompany his daughter when she set out some years later to be a further bride to Amenhetep III. It is a treasure-list of the kind that historical romances imagine: earrings, finger rings, ornamental dress-pins and necklaces of gold set with precious stones, bunches of grapes and pomegranates of gold, combs of silver, drinking-horns from aurochs overlaid with gold, a plaque depicting ‘Deluge Monsters’ in gold and silver, multi-coloured textiles, boxes of special woods also overlaid with gold and silver. With the princess came two principal ladies-in-waiting and at least 270 female and 30 male attendants, and the gifts included jewellery for them as well, a useful reminder that the court was relatively densely populated with people of whom rich attire was expected.72

If we try to imagine what the dowry would have looked like, it would be a collection of treasures of rich materials and of stunning craftsmanship that, had it survived to fill museum cases, would probably have been more at home in the national museums of Syria or Iraq, or perhaps Turkey. Partly because it might not have been appropriate to include such material amongst the furnishings of tombs, and partly through past successes by tomb robbers, almost nothing of this kind has actually survived from Egypt. But the implication is that somewhere in the storerooms of Egypt’s several palaces there would have been wooden chests of these rich exotica, and doubtless individual pieces were to be found scattered through the living-quarters and worn by their owners on suitable occasions; worn not necessarily with the white linen that was the traditional dress of the Egyptians, but with garments and textile wraps of bright colours such as those in specified Near Eastern styles, using red and blue-purple, which were amongst Tushratta’s wedding gifts.73

The cultural mix at court extended beyond clothing and jewellery. Some of the Amarna cuneiform clay tablets were not letters but carried literary texts, derived not from Egypt but from the Near East. One (EA 356; Figure 6.15) contained part of the myth of Adapa and the South Wind, Adapa being a Mesopotamian culture hero from the city of Eridu and son of the god Ea. In the tale, whilst on a fishing trip in the sea, he breaks the wing of the South Wind but, with his father’s advice, visits heaven and is offered the chance of redemption. When read in translation the whole style and cultural associations of the story seem very un-Egyptian.74 Details of script and language show that the writer came from the Mesopotamian heartland, from Babylonia; but, together with two other Amarna literary tablets, it is exceptional in having red dots added at intervals along the lines of writing. This appears to be a distinctively Egyptian practice that helped to give expression when reading aloud. Moreover, the language and style of writing of these literary tablets differ from those used by the scribes who wrote the cuneiform letters that form the bulk of the Amarna collection. This implies that the literary texts were not scribal practice pieces but were read aloud to an understanding audience for the sake of their cultural interest. Is this what the Babylonian princesses of Amenhetep III and Akhenaten listened to?



Figure 6.15A different view of the outside world: a source of myth and literature. Top left. Amarna tablet EA 356, verso, contains part of the myth of Adapa and the South Wind, the lines of cuneiform script pointed with red dots in Egyptian style. Height 17.5 cm. Top right. Amarna tablet EA 368, verso, a fragment of a vocabulary which transcribes ancient Egyptian words into the cuneiform script in the left column and gives their equivalent meaning in Akkadian in the right. Height 6.5 cm. After Izreʾel, Tablets, Pls XXII, XL. Below and right. Fragments of a papyrus roll containing, in the Egyptian hieratic script, the story of the appeasement of the angry sea by the goddess Astarte. After A.H. Gardiner, ‘The Astarte Papyrus.’ In Glanville, Studies Griffith, Pl. 9, opp. p. 76.



Study of the finer points of the language and writing of these tablets has also suggested that scribes (dare we call them ‘scholars’?) from other faraway centres left their mark on the Egyptian court-school at Amarna: from the Hittite capital of Hattusas (modern Boghazköy), where Akkadian was studied by people whose native language was a form of Indo-European, and probably from Ugarit in Syria. Two more of the Amarna tablets are parts of an epic that tells of an expedition of Sargon, king of Akkad, to Anatolia, in which Hurrian influence has been detected.

The evidence adds up to the likelihood that a scribal ‘school’ (an international centre of learning in the making?) was run in or near the ‘Records Office’ in the Central City at Amarna, and that it was for the benefit not only of Egyptians but of students from the Near East as well. There are practice pieces for learning the trade of letter-writing but also aids to a more confident knowledge of cultural background (such as a list of names of Near Eastern gods, EA 374). One of the pieces of evidence is part of a vocabulary tablet (EA 368; Figure 6.15). On the left on one side is a column of Egyptian words written out in the cuneiform syllabary, which incidentally gives us a more reliable guide to how the words were pronounced than is normally to be derived from hieroglyphs. In the right-hand column cuneiform signs have been used to write the Akkadian equivalents. The last seven lines preserve the entries: ‘The house, The door, The bolt, The door-posts, The chair, The bed, (Offering)-table’. These are not words that one would need often, if at all, in writing diplomatic letters. They look more like words of everyday speech. Moreover, the form of the list points to it having been for an Akkadian native speaker who was learning colloquial Egyptian. It seems to be the ancient equivalent of a page from a phrase book.

This tablet was not found anywhere near the ‘Records Office’. It was found in a private house (house no. O49.23) some way from the centre of the city. Does this mean that an Akkadian speaker from somewhere in the Near East – Babylon itself perhaps? – actually stayed in this house for a while? And if so, was he there as the guest of an Egyptian family or was the house available for rent? Although the New Kingdom is generally better documented than other periods, we simply do not know enough to be able to answer such questions. It is not unique in this respect. Another of the tablets (EA 359) is a fragment of the epic of Sargon of Akkad mentioned above, which was found in house no. O47.2. A third tablet (EA 379), a fragment of a sign list which might, therefore, have been useful to someone learning Akkadian, was found in house no. N47.3. In this case the learner could have been an Egyptian.

The cosmopolitan pooling of literary knowledge and imagination shows up, too, on the Egyptian side. The clearest example survives only as small fragments of what had once been a long papyrus, written in a clear hand shortly after the end of the Amarna Period, in the vernacular idiom of the day (Late Egyptian) though the place where it was found is not known (Figure 6.15). The setting is one familiar from other Egyptian tales: a disturbance to the essentially domestic life of the gods and goddesses, who here include the creator god Ptah and the great company of gods, the Ennead. What makes the tale distinctive is that the disturbance in their lives is caused by the Sea (yamm), who is described as ruler of the earth and sky, and has the power to cover the earth and the mountains unless his demands for tribute are met. An intermediary is sought, namely the goddess Astarte (of Near Eastern origin), who is given the role of ‘daughter of Ptah’ and is summoned by the (Egyptian) goddess Renut who sends birds to awaken her. The ending is lost.75

Although our predominant image of Egypt is of an oasis-like country fed by the Nile but isolated by the desert, where the Nile delta meets the Mediterranean actually represents a minimum 300 km of coastline. Although journeys to the Near East by sea were dangerous (sometimes owing to piracy), so, too, were journeys by land. Even at the times of greatest Egyptian military assertion, northern Sinai and parts of Palestine were home to Bedouin peoples who were not part of the world of treaties, trade, agricultural towns and local government to which both Egypt and much of the Near East belonged. Particularly from the New Kingdom onwards, a proportion of the Egyptian scribal class would have taken the sea route and thus have had experience of sea travel. It seems fitting that the entry of the sea into the range of tales that, for most Egyptians, probably defined their mythology also gave a prominent part to the goddess Astarte. She, along with Baal and a few other Near Eastern divinities, was adopted into the Egyptian pantheon in the New Kingdom. By this time the Egyptians had started to replace their traditional term for the sea, ‘the great green’, with an imported Semitic word, yamm, and it is as Yamm that the Sea, now personified as a god, appears in the story. That same personification was present in the mythology of the Near East. He appears, as Prince Yamm, in fragments of a mythological tale preserved on clay tablets found at the port city of Ugarit, and is vanquished after a lengthy contest with the god Baal, son of El, the head of the pantheon.76

Given that the Amarna tablets reveal at least a limited circulation of Near Eastern literature at the Egyptian court it is easy to understand how the story of the Astarte Papyrus could have been composed and written down in good Egyptian by a scribe who could seamlessly weave into his tale elements from both cultural worlds. From this perspective, it seems less surprising that the kings of Mitanni should send on a temporary goodwill visit, on two separate occasions, a statue of Shaushka of Nineveh (the Hurrian version of the goddess Ishtar, of whom Astarte of Palestine was another regional form) to the court of Amenhetep III, perhaps to bless the marriages of the Mitannian princesses to the king. Once arrived in Egypt, the goddess ‘dwelt there and they honoured her’ until it was time to send her back.77

Most people reading this book will have some liking for ancient Egypt and will attempt to imagine it as it is defined by its most familiar sources. But for the king and his courtiers at this time, Egyptian traditions were all too familiar. What evidently took their fancy, in promoting a cultivated if perhaps superficial style of living, were the tastes of the wide world of western Asia (the Near East). In their daily lives, they were prepared to sacrifice (what we might see as) cultural integrity just as easily as they were prepared to ignore traditional strictures about keeping foreign peoples at bay.





Army and temple


The empire brought to Egypt an enhanced militarism. In earlier periods, civil wars had been fought and territories conquered, particularly in Nubia. A striking level of specialist military architecture for the defence of towns had been developed (Chapter 5). But all the evidence suggests that the fighting was done by militias raised for a specific campaign, sometimes stiffened by Nubian desert warriors (often Medjay people). Battlefield weaponry remained strangely crude – clubs and flint spears even in the Middle Kingdom. All this changed in the New Kingdom. Faced with the need to battle against the well-equipped armies of western Asia the Egyptians borrowed technology and tactics, and seem for the first time to have established a standing army of long-serving soldiers and officers.78 Armies have a clear and straightforward purpose and much of what can be said about them takes the form of a catalogue of weapons, a listing of ranks and units, and a chronicle of particular fights. The army of the New Kingdom was no exception. From our point of view, a more interesting concern is this: all institutions have a place in the state, are part of the system by which power is wielded at home. Where did the Egyptian army fit into the government of the New Kingdom?

Because of the nature of the Egyptian administration – basically an extended cluster of centres of activity potentially in rivalry with one another – it is by no means clear that members of one ‘profession’ felt themselves to be part of a group with a common interest and thus, potentially at least, possessed of political power. Even the staff of temples were probably no exception; the army, however, may well have been. We can call the New Kingdom army professional not merely on the grounds of general business-like appearance. It took in young recruits and put them into training camps, and campaigns and garrison duty were fairly regular. Army units were stationed within Egypt. The Horemheb Edict, for example, speaks of two corps of the army, one in the south and one in the north. Its soldiers had the chance to be in the palace to guard the king personally. The Edict also reaffirms a custom of employing as the king’s bodyguard a group of soldiers from the provinces that was changed every ten days (the Egyptian ‘week’), the changeover marked by the distribution of special extra rations at the Window of Appearance.79 For veterans there is evidence from the Eighteenth Dynasty as well as from the late Twentieth that they were settled with grants of land. By the very nature of its life the New Kingdom army was a body of men, an institution, with its own sense of identity arising from its separateness from normal life. This separateness was heightened as the New Kingdom progressed by the increasing practice of recruiting or impressing into service foreigners, from Libya and from the countries of the eastern Mediterranean. They, too, enjoyed grants of land in Egypt (Figure 1.5, p. 33). Many of them would also have been in a position of close proximity to the king, sufficiently so to observe what he was like as a real person. Egypt was giving itself its own army of occupation, and with it another foretaste of the future.

In considering the role of the army – institutionalized armed force – we have to ask ourselves a very basic question: who really were the kings of Egypt? Where did they come from? The Egyptians themselves put up a great and very effective screen around this question. The elaborate array of ceremony, myth, insignia and sycophantic language that surrounded kings from coronation to death and beyond represented in total an overwhelming intellectual and behavioural assault on society to the effect that the reigning king’s position was unquestionable and unassailable. Granted that within the confines of the court the question of which royal male would succeed next offered opportunities for scheming, for long periods the royal succession remained within a single family, a dynasty. Even when dynasties changed the newcomer might seek legitimacy by marrying a woman from the ousted royal house. But dynasties did change. The origins of the newcomers, except when foreign, are almost invariably hard for us to trace simply from a general lack of evidence. Sometimes they seem to have been already prominent at court, sometimes they arose from the provinces. What we have to accept is that they saw the office of king for what it really was: a goal for an ambitious man to grasp at a time when the great screen of divine kingship was temporarily lowered and made it seem practicable. Usurpers and founders of new lines were not summoned from a state of innocence by priests or by mysterious voices or supernatural signs. They responded to ambition. Before the New Kingdom there appears not to have been a professional standing army. But if militarism was less a factor in previous periods, so also was people’s experience of it. It simply means that intimidation could be achieved by less. The Eleventh Dynasty, and the historical prominence of Thebes, arose from victory in a civil war. The background to the change from the Eleventh to the Twelfth is not very clear, but the successful usurper, Amenemhat I, himself fell victim to assassination. And if we go back to the very beginning of Egyptian history the sources show that kingship arose from a period of internal warfare, which reappeared at the end of the Second Dynasty. The screen of divine kingship maintained kings and dynasties in power for long periods of political stability, but ultimately kingship was the outcome of force.

The New Kingdom developed from the defeat of foreign armies. The portrayal of kingship responded to the new militarism in society with a greatly reinforced image of military leadership. Some kings developed a taste for the battlefield and for annual campaigns. But whereas in the past armed force could be mustered in the service of ambition, now the armed force was there all the time, dispersed through the provinces both at home and abroad. It became the source of ambition itself. This came to maturity at the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty. In the Amarna Period, so we have to imagine, the changes brought about by Akhenaten alienated many people (amongst them those with an interest in traditional knowledge which centred on temples) whose view of the world gave prominence to the god Amun, whose very existence Akhenaten tried to destroy. But in the aftermath the group whose representative became king – in the person of the general, Horemheb – was the army. In succession to him the throne passed to a military family from the eastern delta who founded the Ramesside line of kings (the Nineteenth Dynasty).

Before they became kings, Horemheb and Rameses I carried a title that seems to mean ‘heir apparent’.80 By whom was it bestowed? It implies prior agreement as to how the succession would proceed and, furthermore, that amongst the ranks of senior figures who are known to us only by names and titles were some who could form an authoritative council that could make such a decision. Were they mainly civilians (senior members of temple staff, treasurers and so on) who recognized where real power lay and whose job it was to bestow legitimacy on it, or was there something like a military council? One of the specified duties of the vizier was to receive an ‘army council’ prior to giving it instructions.81 Was this the body, presided over by the vizier, that chose Horemheb and then Rameses I? Our inability to penetrate the workings of the state severely limits what we can write about the political history of ancient Egypt.

Yet militarism was evidently not characteristic of educated Egyptian society as a whole. Outside the stylized portrayals of kingly victories, the celebration of valorous deeds on the battlefield is conspicuous by its absence both in literature and in the art of private tombs. These provided space for a man to record his successes, but refined taste none the less excluded combat and bloodshed. Literature and art left warriors voiceless. In a fragmentary tale about the capture of the Palestinian city of Joppa by ‘the strong arm of Pharaoh’, the capture is actually done by a stratagem that enabled Egyptian soldiers to be smuggled inside.82 As far as we can tell, no Egyptian equivalent to the Iliad was written down to stir the blood of listeners at home. Moreover, the army and the empire in the end depended on the civil administration, from whose ranks also came politically powerful individuals. At school, through the texts that served as models for copying, young scribes were taught a disdain for all professions other than their own. This extended to military careers, and scorn was poured on the soldier and on the chariot officer and on service abroad. These texts evince no positive side other than selfishness – being a scribe ‘saves you from toil, it protects you from all manner of labour’83 – but simply in preferring power through orderly administration to glory through action and adventure people who had accepted this ethos must have been a source of counter-arguments to those of the military. The creation of colonies in Nubia modelled on Egyptian temple-towns of the New Kingdom extended Egyptian-style administration over one complete sector of the empire, leaving western Asia to provide the main scope for military shows, though even here, as the Amarna letters imply, identifying the enemy was itself a task for home-based officials.

We can see the shadowy outline of two opposed interest groups in the New Kingdom: army and civil scribes, the latter with well-placed representatives amongst the courtiers. The harim conspiracy in the time of Rameses III involved many of these, and the leaders had sought (though with limited success) the support of the army (though not of temple personnel). This conspiracy was ‘political’ in the narrow sense that those involved plotted and acted in accord with a pragmatic evaluation of risks and rewards.

Where does this leave the temples? At what might be termed the entry level, one model text reveals that young men could be conscripted into the staff of a temple by the vizier, whose order could then be countermanded so that they were sent elsewhere to be soldiers, revealing the absence of a sense of ‘calling’ in the former case and how, in the eyes of other officials, temple personnel were just another department of labour.84 In the case of the most important office, that of High Priest of Amun at Karnak, we can follow its fortunes through most of the New Kingdom. For the Eighteenth Dynasty and the Nineteenth into the reign of Rameses II each high priest was a royal appointment drawn from the ranks of officialdom (two, Ptahmes and Paser, had been viziers) or from people with a background of temple service, though not necessarily at Karnak or even Thebes. The later Nineteenth and the Twentieth Dynasties were, however, largely spanned by two families (with a marriage connection) who managed to monopolize the office and many lesser ones in the Amun cult at Karnak, forming veritable dynasties of priests. Their power base, however, was civilian: the dignity of high office, the family connections, the patronage at their disposal. In the last resort they themselves were only tolerated. They fail the ultimate test: families of priests from civil backgrounds (the key point) did not provide future kings. The break between the two families coincided with civil unrest connected with the dynastic dispute that led to the coming of the Twentieth Dynasty (at the centre of which was the Chancellor Bay, probably an Asiatic at court who appears in a cuneiform letter found at Ugarit as the ‘Chief of the Bodyguards of the Great King of the Land of Egypt’).85 For a time in the early Twentieth Dynasty the office of high priest was held by one Bakenkhonsu, son of a man Amenemope, who had been in charge of a militia which the estate of Amun at Thebes by now maintained.86 But the full extent of the dependence of civilian power on the military came only at the end. The penultimate high priest of the second family, Amenhetep, was actually ejected from his office for eight or nine months during a veritable civil war in Upper Egypt in which the viceroy of Kush at the head of a Nubian army was involved. This man established himself at Thebes and, for a short time, put himself in charge of the grain deliveries to the Estate of Amun (an act which seems to have stabilized previously erratic grain prices). When the dynasty ended the office of high priest was taken over by a military commander, Herihor, who is likely to have been of Libyan origin. The ensuing three centuries was a time of private armies. The Thebaid became a semi-autonomous province governed by the high priest of Amun who was both commander of an army and frequently a prince of the reigning house in the north of Egypt. Here we see the same fusion of authority that comes from serving gods and wielding power over others as was embodied in kingship.87

It was a triumph not so much of either army or priesthood but of political realism. Herein lies an important lesson. Awe of the gods was not a basis of power in itself. Its images were an illusion unless they articulated the political determination of people who, either by birthright or ambition, felt the urge to rule. They would not have put it so directly themselves. For one thing, there was no ready vocabulary of politics and realism. But if they accepted the language of deference they also bent the images in their direction and projected themselves into their centre. A powerful civilian priesthood was tolerated by the real men of power only so long as it did not get in their way.





The information society and the illusions of pageantry


Much was going on in the country (even if the population was a relatively modest 3,000,000) and in the occupied territory of Nubia and the vassal states of Palestine. The Egyptian interest in writing allowed the possibility for those at court to follow what was happening through the collation of documents. Individual examples of documentation that have survived illustrate a culture of committing a great deal of information to writing. We have already encountered examples of daily events (the Semna Despatches, pp. 27, 236–7; a letter about temporary Bedouin immigration, p. 27), personal details of individuals (a letter giving the background to a missing slave, p. 34; the late Middle Kingdom prison register, pp. 182–3), reported speech used as evidence in trials (see Chapter 7), as well as lists of people conscripted for duties and records of income and expenditure within a host of institutions. Amongst the duties of the vizier was to maintain a regular daily routine of consultation with his officials over the state of the country and its resources and, by means of messengers, to keep in close contact with the leading officials of the provinces. From this information, he gave the king a daily morning briefing.88 If the system was working well the king should have had a good idea, not only of how his building schemes were progressing, but also of the origin of any threats. If he had read and taken to heart the advice put into the mouth of King Amenemhat I (who had been assassinated) at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty, he would have known to be particularly watchful over those who were closest to him.89

I began the chapter by saying that one can argue that early societies actually needed the symbols and ceremonies of a political power merged with transcendental thinking centred on gods as a means of maintaining political cohesion. This is the argument of functional necessity. In the modern world, however, this pattern of behaviour as it survives does not fully coincide with the exercise of power. Although my own country, Britain, retains a monarchy that is the head of the state religion, pageantry and ceremony are not fully a symbolic articulation of political power. Much of this resides with people around whom pomp is subdued, whilst at the same time the glamour and the extravagant formalized behaviour, including the crowd adulation at staged ‘appearances’ (music festivals and sporting events), has spread, perhaps largely transferred itself, to celebrities who are outside the political process. Circus and power overlap but each has an independent existence. Things seem to have changed a great deal since antiquity. But have they really?

The audience at which the pomp of Pharaohs was directed commenced with the court, spread to lesser officials, and probably included by the New Kingdom at least token groups of the people at large. But the notion of collective power was hardly born. The audience was for the most part politically neutral. People complained of unjustified tax demands and demonstrated when rations failed to arrive, but they did not form political parties or revolutionary mobs. The pageantry was not buying off a real threat. Those who most represented a threat to the king were individuals closest to him, on the ‘inside’ of the pomp, who probably helped to organize it and were thus least impressed by it.

We are right to look for essential communications on ideas of rule within court pageantry, couched in the understood terms of the day, for the terms themselves may have had little existence independent of the celebration itself and the preparations for it. Could we claim, for example, that the Sed-festival existed independently of its celebration (or anticipated celebration)? The means of communication was itself ideology. Pageantry and ceremonial were a reciprocal therapy, an ‘in-touch’ form of expression which all concerned found satisfying to indulge in, including the theoreticians – presumably based in temples – who devised the meaning, and for whom, without the performance, there would have been no meaning. Not only was the audience embraced by it, so also were the key performers. Modern society, in making pageantry and ceremonial more democratic and offering it as well to celebrities of sport and entertainment, usefully reveals that pomp and adulation serve a collective social need that is independent of political power. In the ancient world the merging of roles tends to obscure this, but it must still have been true. Who ruled, who rose in favour and who fell, what wars were fought and taxes raised, what new edicts were issued: the exercise of real power, behind the screens, was in fact largely irrelevant to the pomp and the ceremonial.





Notes

1K.A. Kitchen, JEA 60 (1974), 168–74; E. Frood, Biographical Texts from Ramessid Egypt, Atlanta, GA, Society of Biblical Literature, 2007, 336–9; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions III, 348–53; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) III, 252–4.

2G. Legrain, BIFAO 13 (1917), 1–76 is still a valuable documentary source on the transport of sacred boat shrines in the New Kingdom and later.

3B.J. Kemp, ‘Fortified towns in Nubia.’ In Ucko et al., Man, Settlement, 651–6.

4J. Jacquet and H. Wall-Gordon, MDAIK 16 (1958), 161–75; R. Anthes, Mit Rahineh 1956, Philadelphia, PA, The University Museum, 1965, 72–5, Pls 24–5.

5See note 31. Another example, at the gate of the temple of Soleb in Nubia, is documented in Kush 9 (1961), 186; Schiff Giorgini et al., Soleb V, Pl. 312.

6B.J. Kemp, N. Moeller, K. Spence and A. Gascoigne, CAJ 14 (October 2004), 259–88, pp. 271–6; Kemp, Anatomy2, 351–5, Fig. 122.

7Esssentially the Amarna Letters: Moran, Amarna Letters. The treaty between Rameses II and the Hittite King Hattusili III uses the gods as guarantors (a different set for each kingdom), but is otherwise a pragmatic document in which both parties are clearly of equal standing: K.A. Kitchen and P.J.N. Lawrence, Treaty, Law and Covenant in the Ancient Near East, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 2012, Vol. 1, 573–94; Vol. 2, 57–60.

8For example the temple of Khnum at Elephantine, which owned lands somewhere in the north of Egypt; and the temple of Seti I at Abydos, which owned a range of productive resources in Nubia, as the Nauri Decree reveals. For the former, see Peden, Ramesses IV, 69–72, 109–16 (Turin Indictment Papyrus); for the latter, see Davies, Historical Inscriptions, 277–308; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 45–58; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 38–50.

9K. Baer, JARCE 1 (1962), 25–45 provides a good introductory discussion of sources and interpretations relevant to landholding in ancient Egypt. Fundamental for the economy is Muhs, Economy; and Warburton, State and Economy. Pages 165–9 deal with the Wilbour Papyrus, the main source for landholdings.

10Gardiner and Faulkner, Wilbour; O’Connor, ‘Geography of settlement’, 681–5; Adams, ‘Textual window’; Muhs, Economy, 106–7, 118–19; J.P. Emanuel, JAEI 5 (2013), 14–27.

11A.H. Gardiner, JEA 27 (1941), 37–56; J.J. Janssen, Grain Transport in the Ramesside Period. Papyrus Baldwin (BM EA 10061) and Papyrus Amiens, London, BM, 2004.

12Urk, IV, 1019–21; discussed in Haring, Divine Households, 145–7; Kruchten, Horemheb, 92–3.

13Schott, Kanais, 143–59; Lichtheim, Literature II, 52–7; Davies, Historical Inscriptions, 205–20; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 65–70; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 56–60; Eyre, ‘Work in the New Kingdom’, 182.

14W. Helck, JARCE 6 (1967), 135–51; Wente, Letters, 37–9; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions VI, 517–22; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) VI, 384–7. The galena mines have been located, and a small and very crudely built shrine excavated (Figure 3.2, p. 114): G. Castel, J.-F. Gout and G. Soukiassian, ASAE 70 (1984–5), 99–105; G. Castel and G. Soukiassian, BIFAO 85 (1985), 285–93; Régen and Soukiassian, Gebel el-Zeit, 1–7, 78.

15This version of the problem of cultural translation has received much attention. Haring Divine Households, 396, for example, interprets the evidence to conclude that New Kingdom temples ran on a more independent footing. The matter is discussed in Papazian, Domain, 33–5; Warburton, State and Economy, 168–9; J.J. Janssen, ‘The role of the temple in the Egyptian economy during the New Kingdom.’ In E. Lipiński, ed., State and Temple Economy in the Ancient Near East II, Leuven, Department Orientalistiek, 1979, 505–15.

16Janssen, Commodity Prices, 455–9; Černy, Community; D. Valbelle, ‘Les ouvriers de la tomb’: Deir-el-Médineh à l’époque Ramesside, Cairo, IFAO, 1985; Häggman, Deir el-Medina; M. Bierbrier, The Tomb-builders of the Pharaohs, London, BM, 1982; Muhs, Economy, 119–23.

17Häggman, Deir el-Medina, 135–46.

18A.H. Gardiner, JEA 27 (1941), 22–37 and especially 23.

19McDowell, Village Life, 231–8; W.F. Edgerton, JNES 10 (1951), 144; Vernus, Affairs, 50–69; S. Häggman, Deir el-Medina, 87–9, 160–84.

20Peet, Tomb-robberies, 12, n. 1; Janssen, Village Varia, 11; Häggman, Deir el-Medina, 121–2.

21Nelson and Hölscher, Work, 46–51. A good illustration of how the ‘reversion of offerings’ worked and temple wealth circulated is provided by texts connected with a cult of Amenhetep III at Memphis, see R.G. Morkot, JNES 49 (1990), 323–37. It appears amidst the ration disputes at Deir el-Medina, Vernus, Affairs, 63–4.

22J.J. Janssen, Late Ramesside Letters and Communications, London, BM, 1991, 44–6 illustrates a case where lands from the endowment for the cult of Amenhetep III and Queen Tiy, although they had kept their identity to the end of the New Kingdom, had somewhere along the way been added to the estates of the temple of Mut, and one portion was in the process of being transferred again to an estate of the God’s Wife of Amun. In general, Muhs, Economy, 109–11.

23Breasted, Ancient Records III, 113, para. 274; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 332.15–333.2; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 162–74 (p. 172 for the ship and its ‘traders’).

24Janssen, Ship’s Logs, esp. 101–2; see also Chapter 7 below.

25Lichtheim, Literature I, 215–22.

26H. Brunner, Die Geburt des Gottkönigs, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 1964. The most easily accessible set of scenes is that of Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahari, E. Naville, The Temple of Deir el Bahari II, London, EEF, [1896], Pls 47–55. The Amenhetep III texts are translated in Murnane, Texts, Atlanta, 1995, 22–7.

27Hieroglyphic transcription: Urk. IV, 1713–21 (573).

28E. Naville, The Temple of Deir el Bahari III, London, EEF, [1898], Pl. LXI.

29P. Leiden I.350. A.H. Gardiner, ZÄS 42 (1905), 12–42, esp. 20–2. Evidence that the Middle Kingdom temple of Amun had been built on a natural rise in the floodplain, thus a ‘mound’, is presented by Charloux and Mensam, Karnak, 43–71; and by A. Graham, ‘Islands in the Nile. A geoarchaeological approach to settlement location in the Egyptian Nile Valley and the case of Karnak.’ In Bietak et al., Cities, 125–43, esp. 138, Fig. 14.

30Charloux and Mensam, Karnak; L. Gabolde, ‘Les temples primitifs d’Amon-Rê à Karnak, leur emplacement et leurs vestiges; une hypothèse.’ In H. Guksch and D. Polz, eds, Stationen: Beiträge zur Kulturgeschichte Ägyptens, Rainer Stadelmann gewidmet, Mainz, von Zabern, 1998, 181–96; J.-F. Carlotti, E. Czerny and L. Gabolde, CdK 13 (2010), 111–93.

31C.F. Nims, ‘The Eastern Temple at Karnak.’ In [G. Haeny] ed., Aufsätze zum 70. Geburtstag von Herbert Ricke, Wiesbaden, Steiner, 1971, 107–11; L. Habachi, Features of the Deification of Ramesses II, Glückstadt, Augustin, 1969, 20; Blyth, Karnak, 88–9, 102–3, 160. Note 5 for this chapter cites a parallel location at the temple of Soleb in Nubia.

32Urk. IV, 1550.18.

33The various parts of Karnak are described in Blyth, Karnak; P. Barguet, Le temple d’Amon-Re à Karnak: essai d’exégèse, Cairo, IFAO, 1962.

34M. Gitton, BIFAO 74 (1974), 63–73; C.C. Van Siclen III, BIFAO, 86 (1986), 353–9D, on a likely early Eighteenth Dynasty palace towards the northern end of the Karnak complex; D.B. Redford, JARCE 10 (1973), 87–90; Smith and Redford, Project I, Ch. 9; Blyth, Karnak, 62–6.

35P. Lacau and H. Chevrier, Une chapelle d’Hatshepsout à Karnak I, Cairo, IFAO, 1977, 92–153; J. Yoyotte, Kêmi 18 (1968), 85–91; Gitton, BIFAO 74 (1974), 63–73. One Deir el-Medina text is fairly explicit in identifying the voice of the god as that of a scribe reading aloud from one of two prepared texts which the god’s statue had somehow chosen, McDowell, Jurisdiction, 110.

36Urk. IV, 157–62.

37Urk. IV, 837.3; see G. Björkman, Kings at Karnak: a Study of the Treatment of the Monuments of Royal Predecessors in the Early New Kingdom, Uppsala, Uppsala University, 1971, 86–7.

38F. Laroche-Traunecker, CdK 7 (1982), 313–38, esp. p. 315.

39A.H. Gardiner, JEA 38 (1952), 20–3; B. Cumming, Egyptian Historical Records of the Later Eighteenth Dynasty I, Warminster, A&P, 1982, 12.

40Nelson and Hölscher, Work, 24–5.

41W. Wolf, Das schöne Fest von Opet; die Festzugsdarstellung im grossen Säulengange des Tempels von Luksor, Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1931; The Epigraphic Survey, Reliefs and Inscriptions at Luxor Temple 1. The Festival Procession of Opet in the Colonnade Hall, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1994; Wilkinson, Temples, 95–8.

42L. Bell, JNES 44 (1985), 251–94; L. Bell, ‘The New Kingdom “divine” temple: the example of Luxor.’ In Shafer, Temples, 127–84.

43L. Bell, JNES 44 (1985), 254.

44Murnane, Texts, 230–4; R. Hari, Horemheb et la reine Moutnedjemet ou la fin d’une dynastie, Geneva, La Sirène, 1964, 208–16.

45H.H. Nelson, JNES 1 (1942), 127–55 documents these aspects in some detail.

46G. Foucart, BIFAO 24 (1924), 1–209; S. Schott, Das schöne Fest vom Wustentale; Festbräuche einer Totenstadt, Wiesbaden, Steiner, 1953; K.A. Kitchen, Pharaoh Triumphant: the Life and Times of Ramesses II, King of Egypt, Warminster, A&P, 1982, 169; Wilkinson, Temples, 95–6, 178–9.

47Murnane, Guide, 76–7; Lexikon III, 1256–8; Haring, Divine Households, 280, n. 3.

48R. Stadelmann, MDAIK 34 (1978), 171–80.

49The second palace at Medinet Habu, built over the foundations of the first, was probably built in the late Twentieth/early Twenty-first Dynasty to act as the residence for whoever was in charge of the temple and the community which surrounded it; see below, p. 363, and Figure 8.17, and B. Kemp, CAJ 14 (2004), 272–5, 284–5, n. 1; Kemp, Anatomy2, 351–5, Fig. 122.

50Murnane, Guide, 70.

51Kruchten, Horemheb, 162–77, 199–200; J.-M. Kruchten, ‘Rétribution de l’armée d’après le décret d’Horemheb.’ In L’égyptologie en 1979: axes prioritaires de recherches II, Paris, Centre national de la Recherche scientifique, 1982, 144–8; Murnane, Texts, 239–40. At the end of the Twentieth Dynasty food was distributed in the ‘great court’ of Rameses III’s temple at Medinet Habu; see Haring, Divine Households, 279.

52Stevenson Smith, Art and Architecture, Ch. 15; W.C. Hayes, JNES 10 (1951), 35–56, 82–111, 156–83, 231–42; B.J. Kemp and D.B. O’Connor, International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 3 (1974), 101–36; Waseda University, Architectural Research Mission for the Study of Ancient Egyptian Architecture, Studies on the Palace of Malqata. Investigations at the Palace of Malqata 1985–1988, Tokyo, Chuo Koron Bijutsu, 1993. It has been suggested that earthworks comparable to those around the Birket Habu but on the east bank of the Nile represent the remains of another great artificial lake of the same period, e.g. Darnell and Manassa, Tutankhamun’s Armies, 22, and n. 53. Although the purpose might have been similar, it does not follow that it was the work of Amenhetep III.

53Epigraphic Survey, Kheruef, Pl. 28, p. 43. It is interesting to note that the earliest depiction of a Sed-festival element – the king seated on a high throne beneath a tent – occurs on one of the boats in the Hierakonpolis Painted Tomb, see Figure 2.8, p. 77. However, we cannot be sure that a Sed-festival is meant. In depictions of the Early Dynastic Period and at the Step Pyramid boat imagery is absent.

54Epigraphic Survey, Kheruef, Pls 56, 57, pp. 59–61.

55The most important comparative source would have been the king’s mortuary temple, of which little now survives. The Sed-festival fragments are published in G. Haeny, Untersuchungen im Totentempel Amenophis’ III, Wiesbaden, Steiner, 1981, Taf. 40–2. The Soleb temple scenes of Amenhetep III’s Sed-festival also contain no reflection of the Kheruef scenes, although they, too, are fragmentary. They did give extensive space to showing the king processing around a walled enclosure pierced by many named gateways and knocking on each door with a mace: Schiff Giorgini et al., Soleb V, Pls 39–60.

56Epigraphic Survey, Kheruef, Pls 42, 43, pp. 49–51.

57For the written sources in the New Kingdom, F. Hagen, ‘On some movements of the royal court in New Kingdom Egypt.’ In van Dijk, Mouthful of Dust, 155–81.

58Murnane, Texts, 83.

59Caminos, Miscellanies, 198–201.

60Gardiner and Faulkner, Wilbour, II, 18; Helck, Materialien, II, 235=1017.

61Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 468–84.

62M. Bietak and I. Forstner-Müller, ‘The topography of New Kingdom Avaris and Per-Ramesses.’ In Collier and Snape, Ramesside Studies, 23–50: 40–2; W.C. Hayes, Glazed Tiles from a Palace of Ramesses II at Ḳantīr, New York, MMA, 1937.

63A convenient plan is A. Badawy, A History of Egyptian Architecture: the Empire (the New Kingdom), Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA, UCP, 1968, 53, fig. 29; see also D.G. Jeffreys, The Survey of Memphis I, London, EES, 1985, 15, 19–20, fig. 63.

64Stevenson Smith, Art and Architecture, 159–61; P. Lacovara, NARCE 113 (Winter 1980), 3–11; 129 (Spring 1985), 17–29; P. Lacovara, ‘The Hearst Excavations at Deir el-Ballas: the Eighteenth Dynasty town.’ In W.K. Simpson and W.M. Davis, eds, Studies in Ancient Egypt, the Aegean and the Sudan: Essays in Honor of Dows Dunham, Boston, MA, MFA, 1981, 120–4; P. Lacovara, Deir el-Ballas: Preliminary Report on the Deir el-Ballas Expedition, 1980–1986, Winona Lake, IN, Eisenbrauns, 1990; Lacovara, Royal City, 6–16, 94–112.

65B.J. Kemp, ZÄS 105 (1978), 122–33; I. Shaw, ‘Seeking the Ramesside Royal Harem: new fieldwork at Medinet el-Gurob.’ In Collier and Snape, Ramesside Studies, 453–63.

66D. Polz, MDAIK 42 (1986), 145–66; S. Ikram and A. Dodson, The Mummy in Ancient Egypt: Equipping the Dead for Eternity, London, T&H, 1998, 216, 225.

67A. de Buck, JEA 23 (1937), 152–64; also Pritchard, Texts, 214–6; Peden, Historical Inscriptions, 195–210; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions V, 350–60; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) V, 297–302; Vernus, Affairs, 108–20.

68W. Spiegelberg, Rechnungen aus der Zeit Setis I., Strassburg, Trübner, 1896; Helck, Materialien IV, 633–41; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 243–81; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 207–30; A. Spalinger, BIFAO 86 (1986), 307–52.

69Moran, Amarna Letters provides a complete translation. Each letter is given a number with the prefix EA. For discussions of the mentality of those who wrote them and the extent to which they grasped a broader political dimension, see R. Cohen and R. Westbrook, eds, Amarna Diplomacy: the Beginnings of International Relations, Baltimore, MD, and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000. The rationale of ancient imperialism is not so easy to reconstruct, as is evident from the exchange of views by B. Kemp and S.T. Smith in CAJ 7 (1997), 123–37, 301–7.

70K.A. Kitchen, Suppiluliuma and the Amarna Pharaohs, Liverpool, Liverpool University Press, 1962, 14.

71A.R. Schulman, JNES 38 (1979), 177–93.

72Moran, Amarna Letters, 51–23 (EA 22), 72–84 (EA 25).

73Moran, Amarna Letters, EA 22. The coloured and decorated tunics from Tutankhamun’s tomb are perhaps examples, which could have been made abroad or made in Egypt by weavers working to patterns which had become international. See G.M. Crowfoot and N. de G. Davies, JEA 27 (1941), 113–30; G.M. Vogelsang-Eastwood, Pharaonic Egyptian Clothing, Leiden, New York and Cologne, Brill, 1993, Pl. 40; G.M. Vogelsang-Eastwood, Tutankhamun’s Wardrobe: Garments from the Tomb of Tutankhamun, Rotterdam, Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn, 1999, 81, fig. 5.1.

74This less familiar aspect of the Amarna ‘letters’ is covered in depth by Izreʾel, Tablets; S. Izreʾel, Adapa and the South Wind: Language Has the Power of Life and Death, Winona Lake, IN, Eisenbrauns, 2001.

75A.H. Gardiner, ‘The Astarte Papyrus.’ In Glanville, Studies Griffith, 74–85; Pritchard, Texts, 17–18; P. Collombert and L. Coulon, BIFAO 100 (2000), 193–229. For a probable early Ramesside magico-medical text which utilizes Ugaritic motifs: H.-W. Fischer-Elfert, ‘Sāmānu on the Nile: the transfer of a Near Eastern demon and magico-medical concept into New Kingdom Egypt.’ In Collier and Snape, Ramesside Studies, 189–98.

76Pritchard, Texts, 129–31.

77EA 23: Moran, Amarna Letters, 61–2.

78I. Shaw, Egyptian Warfare and Weapons, Princes Risborough, Shire Publications, 1991; I. Shaw, ‘Egyptians, Hyksos and military hardware: causes, effects or catalysts?’ In A.J. Shortland, ed., The Social Context of Technological Change: Egypt and the Near East, 1650–1550 bc, Oxford, Oxbow, 2001, 59–71; A.R. Schulman, Military Rank, Title and Organization in the Egyptian New Kingdom, Berlin, Hessling, 1964; Y. Yadin, The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands in the Light of Archaeological Discovery, London, W&N, 1963.

79Kruchten, Horemheb, 82–95, 164–77.

80A.R. Schulman, JARCE 4 (1965), 55–68.

81Van den Boorn, Duties, 218–28; James, Pharaoh’s People, 66.

82Pritchard, Texts, 22–3.

83Caminos, Miscellanies, 51, 317.

84P. Bologna 1094.5.2–5.5 = Caminos, Miscellanies, 16–17. Cf. also P. Bologna 1086.22–3 = Wente, Letters, 125.

85M. Bierbrier, ‘Bye-bye Bay.’ In Collier and Snape, Ramesside Studies, 19–21; A. Dodson, ‘Fade to grey: The Chancellor Bay, Éminence Grise of the Late Nineteenth Dynasty.’ In ibid., 145–58.

86Lexikon I, 688; II, 1244.

87The end of the Twentieth Dynasty is still much debated: K. Jansen-Winkeln, ZÄS 119 (1992), 22–37; D. Polz, SAK 25 (1998), 257–93; A. Thijs, SAK 31 (2003), 289–306; A. Thijs, ZÄS 132 (2005), 73–91; S.R.W. Gregory, Herihor in Art and Iconography: Kingship and the Gods in the Ritual Landscape of Late New Kingdom Thebes, London, Golden House, 2014; J. Palmer, Birmingham Egyptology Journal 2 (2014), 1–22; S. Häggman, Deir el-Medina, 200 ff.

88Van den Boorn, Duties, 55.

89Lichtheim, Literature I, 136–7; Parkinson, Voices, 49–51; Simpson, Literature, 167–9. A fragment of the text was found copied on to a potsherd in a house at Amarna, see Chapter 8, note 64.





7

The birth of economic man



It is possible to compile a ‘Who’s Who’ of ancient Egypt for certain periods. The New Kingdom is one of them. One fact to emerge is that no one who was prominent and successful claimed to be so on a basis independent of the state. Everyone was an ‘official’. You could rise from a humble background to be the most powerful man in the land next to the king, but only because the king recognized your merits, one of them being loyalty. We will find no self-made men of trade or of manufacture, no merchants or moneylenders, no one who boasted of ‘profit’. At least, that is what the inscriptions, the ideal autobiographies carved in tombs, tell us. As a consequence, on the basis of the formal written and pictorial evidence, we can conclude that the effective part of Egyptian society consisted only of institutions.

As always, however, we must be on our guard against confusing myth with structure. It is equally true to say that ancient Egypt possessed no politicians, in the sense that that word is used now, that is, to refer to people who make it their business to articulate and to struggle for the interests of one particular group. But the Egyptians were not politically innocent. Within the framework of the loyal hierarchy of officialdom ambitious individuals pushed themselves forwards and plotted to undermine those who stood in their way. The politics of self-interest most definitely existed, contained within the single system of administration. It was a later world, more given to abstract thought and less internally cohesive, that provided the political schemer with the ‘cause’ and the special-interest group, and thus the opportunity to reveal politics as an independent subject and calling.

Economics offers a roughly similar picture. No one thought ‘economics’ or pursued it as an independent goal, yet should we conclude that the Egyptians were economically naive? The matter is clouded by the existence of a body of broad theory which encompasses both ancient and ‘primitive’ societies, and which tends to claim just this economic innocence. Characteristic of this approach is a careful and self-conscious distancing of the historian from the modern economic world. It urges us not to take for granted, for example, the basic experience of valuing our transactions in terms of profit and loss. The reason given is that the economic systems of the ancient past were significantly different from those of the present. We can construct models of how they worked only from the ancient sources themselves, from a judicious use of ethnographic literature, and from certain points of reference that seem to be generally valid for economies in early complex societies. We must be alert, according to this view, to the dangers of implanting into the past the motivations and the means of the economies that we ourselves are familiar with. This is a valuable, indeed essential discipline, yet if left here it runs the risk of unnecessarily isolating the past and impoverishing the discussion. In particular, it depicts ancient systems as static entities devoid of mechanisms of adjustment to changing circumstances.1

Furthermore, if the contrast between present and past is so crucial, it is important to have an informed basis of just what does constitute ‘the present’. Herein lies another source of weakness. In discussions of this kind the economic systems of the present are made synonymous with ‘market economies’, the product of mercantilist thinking and practice of recent centuries that had its beginnings in the West. This is a false basis from which to begin. At the level of individual states the modern world contains no examples, nor has it ever, of an economic system based fully on market forces. Even for those politicians who most desire this, it remains an unattainable goal. All macroeconomic systems represent a balance, a compromise, an uneasy truce between two forces: the urge of the state to provide itself with a secure base for its own existence and its plans, and the fragmented pressure of private demand.

At one end of the spectrum we have those states that, for reasons of ideology (or sometimes the exigencies of war), institute a wholly administered economy. The former Soviet-bloc countries offered the most obvious examples for a good part of the twentieth century. They used modern means to achieve something now familiar from studying ancient systems: ‘redistribution’ (a word which, in archaeology, has come to mean widespread centralized collection of produce which is subsequently disbursed on a similarly large scale). Within systems of this kind economic transactions are intended to achieve egalitarian social goals and are thus ‘embedded’ within a political ideology which aims to engineer a particular set of social and economic relationships (socialism in these cases). For such a system to work as its creators intend it must be sufficiently sensitive in its prediction of personal demands and circumstances, and flexible in its response with the supply of goods and services so that all people are content. All modern systems fail to meet the immensity of the task, and where failure occurs a market solution arises, although the modern world misleadingly renames a normal market response within a controlled economy a ‘black market’ and takes steps to suppress it. The ‘black market’ simply fills the interstices within a megalithic system.

Then there are those states dedicated to market freedom. This philosophy is in its application, however, invariably restricted. It flourishes most obviously in the manufacturing and retailing of consumer products. Modern states of this kind nevertheless retain huge administered sectors: civil service, armed forces, defence procurement, farm price support, unemployment benefit, social insurance schemes and control of the banking system within which the free market operates. Modern market-sector states are large employers and (through welfare schemes) supporters of people, and large purchasers of many things, including money, yet are themselves not commercial organizations ruled by the maximization of profit and minimization of loss (even though, through ‘outsourcing’ and ‘privatization’, they try to achieve this at arm’s length). At anything other than the local scale the self-regulating, price-fixing market responsive wholly to supply and demand is an illusion. Modern market mechanisms remain embedded within and draw for part of their performance on the administered state sector, not least the state’s almost invariable control of the banking system, levels of taxation and supply of money, a sector which is in turn embedded within broader notional considerations such as ‘national interest’, ‘party political agendas’, ‘social and moral responsibility’, and so on. The threshold that ‘privatization’ dares not cross is the issuing of currency free from regulation, so that ‘forgery’ or ‘counterfeiting’ become simply a market opportunity. Free-market economics applies to the manufacture of cane furniture but not to the printing of paper money. The severity of the penalties for the latter is an indication of the extent to which a notional free market in commodities is in the end controlled by governments and is not therefore free. It is this threshold that, more than any other, separates the modern from the ancient world. And from this perspective ancient economies based on commodities came closer to the ideal of the free market than do modern economies based on money, the viability of which depends much upon manipulation and confidence (a particular kind of belief). More will be said on this at the end of this chapter.

We should also be attentive to the difference in the modern world between economics and economic policy or management. Often the word ‘economics’ is used in a general sense to mean ‘the study of mankind in the ordinary business of life’ (the definition offered by a leading economist of the time, Alfred Marshall, in 1920). At a modern professional level, however, economics is a rigorous subject of study, akin to the sciences and much dependent upon mathematics. When economists turn their attention to how the economies of whole societies should be managed, however, the subject takes on a more familiar character. Rival interpretations emerge which depend much upon belief and are exchanged in a style of argument that is essentially sectarian. Myths proliferate.2

What has this to do with the study of the ancient past? All modern macroeconomic systems, despite huge differences in philosophy and practice, represent different mixes of the same two basic ingredients: state ambition on the one hand, and private demand for more than an egalitarian share-out of the state’s resources on the other. Whether we focus on states devoted to free enterprise that may wish to withdraw from final economic control, or those with an entirely contrary philosophy, we find in reality that they merely shift the boundaries between the two zones. We are thus entitled to ask of past systems: do they, too, represent a mix of their own within a universal and inescapable macroeconomic structure created when the first states emerged, allowing for the possibility that, like the modern ‘black market’, some aspects may appear in a different guise?

No doubt attaches itself to one side of the ancient mix: that directed by institutional administration, of the redistributive kind. This is not the case, however, with the other side: the satisfaction of individual demand, where the emphasis in modern studies is often to minimize its economic power. If, as is sometimes argued for ancient states such as Egypt, we regard the administered economy as overwhelmingly dominant, we have to accept that one of two conditions was present: either the system itself was able constantly to assess every individual’s real needs and satisfy them, or the needs of very large sections of the population remained not so much static as passive, offering a mirror image of fluctuations within the state system, that is, when the state had less to give out, people resigned themselves to receiving less. For the first condition, had it ever existed it would have to be regarded as one of the lost arts of antiquity, since it would represent a level of economic management that eludes the grasp of all modern governments. For the second, however, we have to consider both the nature of ancient demand and the extent to which ancient systems were static.





The state sector: its power and its failings


The administered, redistributive side to the Egyptian economy is too well known to require much explanation. Several papyri or groups of papyri document specific instances in considerable detail for the various periods, and to these major sources we can add a host of minor ones. Chapters 4 and 6 covered some of the relevant ground. We can utilize archaeological evidence, including huge granaries, witnesses to the scale of the state’s maintenance of buffer stocks of grain, which evened out fluctuations in supply brought about by varying harvest yields over the years. To illustrate their magnitude, in the last chapter attention was directed towards one particular example: at the Ramesseum (Figure 6.6, p. 259 and Photograph 6.2 p. 260). Their passive economic weight should not be underestimated. Economic performance is a cyclic affair, and in the modern world state control of key sectors acts to bridge the gap between the inevitable peaks and troughs. We understand far too little of pure economic interactions in the ancient world to be able to model the changing economic climate which we must recognize was a major and ever-present factor, but in the case of Egypt we can be sure of one cyclic element: that of the volume of Nile waters. The annual inundation, the key to agriculture, not only varied from year to year, but was also subject to broader climatic cycles which, over a period of time, would have had inexorable consequences for the agrarian economy. The intervention of the state (palace and temples) would have had a powerful cushioning effect.

It was not a monolithic system. As we have seen, alongside the palace and its various centres of administrative authority there was a complex network of quasi-autonomous institutions where the focus of attention was the cult of statues of gods, kings and revered individuals. All these institutions were, to varying degrees, collectors of revenue, storing part and distributing part as rations or wages. The number of people who benefited seems sometimes to have been deliberately multiplied through the phyle system, which shared out temple duties (and benefits) on a part-time basis. As we have seen, it was the Middle Kingdom that seems to have progressed furthest down this particular road.

An important general point arises here. It is legitimate to regard ancient societies as ‘systems’. Their component parts and lines of interaction can be identified and laid out diagrammatically like a modern management flow-chart. It is a valuable perspective, but it carries a semantic pitfall. We may identify systems in the workings of ancient societies, but they need not have been at all systematic, for the latter word implies a prominent degree of reason and interest in consistency. The workings of the Egyptian administration at its various periods are reasonably apparent, but they seem not to be the product of an abstract concept of administration applied across a broad spectrum of activities. Far from it. The system ran in channels of authority. Within any one channel, the procedures could be remarkably effective (though not efficient) in achieving a given target of the kind: quarry, transport and erect a colossus of a particular size. This is where bureaucratic talents flourished. But we will look in vain for evidence of conscious integration of the individual parts into a general scheme of management. The working of the Egyptian administration is another example of self-organization, of a system evolving its coherence through innumerable local adjustments to circumstances, the ‘checks and balances’ process which prevents societies, for most of the time, from straying far from a common path.

One document from the New Kingdom brings out very clearly how ancient government consisted of an accumulation of individual institutional arrangements of very restricted scope. This is the Edict of Horemheb (c. 1320 BC).3 When the Edict was issued the Amarna Period had just ended and the military leader Horemheb had become king. It might be anticipated that this would be a time of reorganization throughout the country, and of the reassertion of royal power of a traditional form. But the first part of the Edict is a collection of individual royal decrees directed against specific cases of wrongful or excessive collection of revenues by various groups of persons responsible to the king. They give the distinct impression of being responses to individual petitions of complaint rather than of being the result of a considered exercise in overhauling the administration generally. In so doing they imply that there was no codified system of revenue collection as we might understand it. In its place there was a range of individual practices sanctified by tradition. One group of officials did this, another did that. In one case the tradition was of recent memory. A separately mentioned authority in the Edict is the royal harim which had its own revenue-raising powers. Every year the king and some of his household travelled upstream to Thebes for the Festival of Opet. The job of feeding them en route had been passed on, in the time of Tuthmosis III, to the mayors of local towns. The officials of the queen and of the royal harim had turned this into a predatory affair which the Edict now tried to correct. It is tempting to imagine an irascible queen making up for the boredom of a long journey away from the comforts of her own palace by preying on hapless provincial mayors, and of thereby creating a little administrative tradition. But to think in this way is to reveal an uncomfortable truth about academic scholarship: it takes on life only when it breathes in the vapours of historical fiction.

Because ancient Egypt was for long periods successful as a complex society we have to accept none the less that some kind of overall economic balancing act prevailed. Part of the process lay in what was, in effect, a massive delegation of short-term management through foundations that served cults, where the nominal owner was actually imaginary yet the object of respect. We have already, in the last chapter, commented on the symbiotic relationship between temples and palaces. Their status as centres embedded within the overall ideology of the state and their internal bureaucracies gave them the authority and means to function effectively but not divisively. In the longer term, however, they were subject to a process of piecemeal adjustment in which older and less prestigious foundations lost their benefactions to newer foundations. The notion that cults were founded for eternity was a myth that did not hinder state interference. In revenue and expenditure terms the sum of their activities plus a general level of royal expenditure on court life, on large and thus long-term building programmes, and on the military, represented a general ‘budget’ or balance-sheet for the country. Complaints from below of insufficient resources would have signalled to senior officials a degree of imbalance, which they could then have sought to correct. This is how self-organization works: through local re-adjustments of the profiles of component elements in a system which has not been forced into inflexibility; in other words, through feedback.

The basic level of royal expenditure was maintained partly through the income of lands and other productive resources directly owned, partly through revenue-raising powers bestowed on particular officials of particular institutions, and partly through a country-wide tax levy. From time to time this was recalculated, presumably in response to perceived shortfalls in revenue.4 The one detailed record we have of a general tax levied on provincial towns and districts for the benefit of the king (through his vizier) is the taxation scene in the tomb of Rekhmira at Thebes (Figure 7.1).5 This source implies, however, that the amounts raised in this way were modest. Yet particular circumstances regularly created extra if short-lived demands. The procedure then was simply to pass them down the administrative channels. Ideally such a demand would be accompanied by an order to release some of the state’s buffer stocks from the magazines of a convenient institution to cover the demand. In practice, however, this did not always work. An ad hoc solution was expected, and this could be found either by a peremptory local demand on whomsoever was vulnerable, or by raiding the resources of another area of administration.



Figure 7.1Paying in kind: local taxation in a cashless economy, illustrated by a portion of the revenue scene from the tomb of the vizier Rekhmira (no. 100 at Thebes), mid-Eighteenth Dynasty. Not all commodities can be identified. Top. (A) Taxes delivered by the ‘mayor of (the town) of Huwet-weret-Amenemhat’ (somewhere to the south of Abydos). (1): four heaps of barley; (2): cakes; (3): rope; (4): dôm-nuts; (5): cakes; (6): spices (?); (7): carob beans; (8): honey (?); (9): sacks; (10): reed mats; (11): grass mats; (12): 6 goats; (13): 5 calves; (14): 4 head of cattle; (15): 2 head of long-horned cattle; (16): 500 pigeons; (17): 2 gold, 1 silver ring-ingots. Bottom. (B) ‘The recorder of the town of Wahsut’ (Abydos South; see Figure 5.14, p. 222), and (C) ‘The scribe of the recorder of the town of Wahsut’. (1): 2 lengths of linen cloth in a chest; (2): honey; (3): 1 head of cattle; (4): 3 gold ring-ingots. (5): 1 linen garment; (6): 1 head of cattle; (D) ‘The recorder of Abydos’; (7): 1 length of cloth and 1 garment in a chest; (8): honey; (9): 1 head of cattle; (10): 2 gold, 1 silver ring-ingots. After Davies, Rekh-mi-rē ʾ, Pl. XXXIV; P.E. Newberry, The Life of Rekhmara, London, 1900, Constable, Pl. VI.



The ill-feeling generated by the tangle of individual systems of revenue collection, by which institutions and groups of officials quite literally lived off the land, is illustrated by a second document from the New Kingdom, the Nauri Decree of Seti I.6 It belongs to the reign of one of the ‘great’ kings, so lifting it above the charge that it reveals a good system going wrong under a bad king. One of the principal projects of Seti I was the building of a sumptuously decorated and equipped temple for Amun and Osiris at Abydos. As was customary he donated sufficient land and other sources of income to make the temple a permanently wealthy institution. Some of the land lay far away in the conquered territories of Sudan (the southern part of Nubia, called Kush). The purpose of the decree was to protect the new donations from other official institutions whose agents might arrive at some distant farm or cattle station and demand payment of a tax. For such officials, the punishments were fierce: heavy fines, beatings and mutilations. Every year, too, a flotilla of ships set off from the Nubian lands on the long journey downstream not only to replenish the huge storerooms attached to the temple with the year’s Nubian harvest, but also to bring exotic trade goods purchased through barter by ‘traders’ employed by the temple. On its long journey downstream, the flotilla passed Egyptian fortresses whose real job it was to protect Egyptian life and property. One must have lain near Nauri, a lonely, isolated place:

As for any commander of the (local) fortress, and scribe of the fortress, any inspector belonging to the fortress who shall board a boat belonging to the Temple and shall take gold, [ivory, ebony?], leopard and other animal skins, giraffes’ tails, giraffes’ hides, etc., any goods of Kush which are brought as revenue to the Temple, punishment shall be meted out to him in the form of one hundred blows, and he shall be fined on behalf of the Temple in terms of the value of the goods at the rate of eighty to one.7



The remoteness and isolation of Nauri does not, in itself, make the decree an exception. The full text makes it clear that the Nauri version was only one copy of a decree that applied to the open farmlands of Nubia where Egyptian colonial towns had been built and a full Egyptian-style administration functioned. Nor is the decree itself unique for its period. Others are known across several reigns, including one of Rameses III from Elephantine and others from the Ramesside period from Karnak, Armant, Hermopolis and Kanais (Wadi Mia).8 Indeed, the tradition of decrees to protect individual institutions from the exactions of others goes back to the Old Kingdom.9

Government in ancient Egypt was by royal decree, the system of administration was the sum of those decrees, and the resulting overlaps and confusions of responsibility were tackled by fresh decrees in response to specific complaints. The Edict of Horemheb attempted to do this across a broad range of conflicts of interest. This cycle of decision, then petition of complaint and finally redress was a basic part of bureaucratic life, to the extent that collections of model letters used in the training of scribes often contained a model letter or petition of complaint.10 The universal picture of the rapacious tax-collector and the suffering peasant is joined in ancient Egypt by the picture of the predatory official victimizing his colleague.

The state sector of the Egyptian economy existed to satisfy institutional demands, and must have had very limited flexibility. For it also to have satisfied most private demand, that demand must have been of low intensity. We need to look next, therefore, at the real pattern of private demand.





The power of private demand


When we turn to the record of archaeology, especially that from cemeteries, it is very clear that during the latter part of the Predynastic Period Egyptian society entered that crucial stage of social and psychological development which is still with us: conspicuous consumption (in which greed and pride quickly overtake the satisfaction of what is needed to survive). The creation of large and striking private tombs and the accumulation of burial goods affected the whole of Egypt geographically, and created an aspiration that penetrated deeply into society. Conspicuous consumption is not incompatible with the redistributive economy. Social obligation brings the two together: the king rewards his great men, many of them having provincial connections. They in turn pass on bounty to poorer relatives and dependants. Wealth ‘trickles down’, to borrow a phrase used (in a wishful way) by modern enthusiasts of free-market economics (the effective working of which does not require social obligation). Everyone is satisfied (or unable to articulate their dissatisfaction in economic terms), and in death takes their place in a cemetery which likewise reflects the social and economic order: local leaders in centrally placed handsome tombs surrounded by myriad smaller tombs of lesser folk (Naga el-Deir and Beni Hasan providing fine examples from the Old and Middle Kingdoms, respectively).11 We can, if we are sufficiently selective, make Egypt into a model of the redistributive economy.

At a political level (i.e. in the wish to exercise power), however, the Old Kingdom shows that the ideal of consensus is an illusion. Provincial governors (nomarchs) appeared, and when, at the end of the Sixth Dynasty, occasion allowed, the more ambitious amongst them strove by any means to carve out larger territories for themselves, leading in some cases to civil war.12 The politics of self-interest were well and truly alive. Indeed, the processes of state formation and periodic re-formation derived their energies from them. The sense of social obligation was not necessarily lost, the classic example being Ankhtify the nomarch of Hierakonpolis who, having taken over the neighbouring nome of Edfu early in the First Intermediate Period, found himself distributing famine relief over a huge territory. Ankhtify, having seized lands, was, for a short time, in effect ruling a miniature state.13 He and others like him at the time had rediscovered the path of state formation, although now with the knowledge – the traditions of the Old Kingdom – of what a state should look like. Although we cannot, as yet, sufficiently isolate the range of factors at work, this release of energy at the local level seems to be marked in Upper Egypt by an expansion of towns at the end of the Old Kingdom and the early First Intermediate Period.14

Famine relief is a special case of obligation. Would Ankhtify have also headed an administration capable of satisfying normal demands? We lack the archaeological evidence from contemporary cemeteries in his own area that would enable us to see for ourselves how people in his territory fared. Further north, however, in Middle Egypt we have a particularly well-documented cemetery record for this and the preceding periods. This is the work of the archaeologist Guy Brunton in the Qau/Badari/Matmar/Mostagedda (El-Mostageda, see Figure 0.1, p. 13) areas in the 1930s.15 In the First Intermediate Period this belonged to the frontier zone between the warring dynasties of Herakleopolis and Thebes, although the role of the local nome administrator is nowhere made clear in the surviving sources. The period (which Brunton termed the ‘vii–viiith dyn.’) is particularly well represented by burials. Their grave goods show no sign of general impoverishment. Brunton addressed himself particularly to this point:

In the cemeteries at Qau and Badari the tombs with the most objects are precisely those of the vii–viiith dyn. period. Here we find the greatest profusion of beads and amulets; no diminution in the number of alabaster vases, and all the alabaster head-rests; the greatest number of mirrors of any period; and the least number of simple shallow graves. The workmanship of the glaze amulets may show great delicacy; the carnelian legs are the best of their kind; and the animal-backed seal-amulets are cut with skill and care.16



Brunton then showed that more gold beads and amulets occurred in this period as well. It is unreasonable to argue that this was mostly material robbed from earlier graves because much of it is in styles peculiar to the period. Nor were these graves clustered around large centrally placed tombs of leaders and providers. They occur in a series of small cemeteries spread out along the edge of the desert as if representing the burials of a wide scatter of villages. It strains credulity to suppose that these people were passive recipients of a state redistributive system, which was, by its nature, of limited flexibility.

The anonymous people of Qau and Badari accumulated possessions during a time of change that, in its magnitude, was unusual in the course of Pharaonic history. But although ancient economies were not open to the volatility of modern times it is a mistake to think of them as static. Overall between, say, 2100 and 1500 bc, the boundaries of state power ebbed and flowed in two cycles of great magnitude (the first two ‘Intermediate Periods’). And at the best of times, when famines and civil war were no more, the state system still had to adjust to change, particularly demands made by ambitious kings. New temples (even new cities, as with Amarna and Per-Rameses), new fleets of ships, the re-equipping of the army for fresh campaigns: these could create sudden demands both for the redirection of existing resources and for additional revenue. Any economic system that we propose for ancient Egypt has to be able to account for the apparently successful adjustments which local communities made to changes of different magnitudes within a relatively crude state system of economic direction.

As modern societies have found, ‘consuming’ is good for economic growth. The act of consumption often though not inevitably involves destruction: the food is eaten and then burnt off as energy, the car is driven but is later crushed. Both need to be constantly replaced and this is good for farmers and car makers. Consumerism ought to work just as well, however, if the goods once purchased were placed directly into a hole in the ground. What one needs is a set of beliefs to make it seem worthwhile. Providing for the eternal existence of the dead is just such a set of beliefs. Whether burial goods in ancient Egypt were purpose-made and purchased for that end alone, whether a person set things aside during life, left it to heirs to select from what was available or when friends and the kindly disposed contributed items of their own as gifts, the effect was the same: theoretically a bottomless hole into which a proportion of the country’s goods were cast, creating a constant demand for replacement – theoretically, because tomb robbery constantly brought some of it back in a clandestine recycling. In the case of the most favoured officials the royal resources might well assist in providing the labour for cutting and decorating the tomb as well as a coffin and other things for the burial itself. This is claimed in inscriptions.17 But for the majority, the cost of burial was a private matter. Private responsibility for a good burial was enshrined within the law: ‘“Let the possessions be given to him who buries”, says the law of Pharaoh.’ So declares one New Kingdom party in a case of disputed inheritance. This document, with others, shows that the normal pattern of inheritance of property was subject to the proviso that the whole inheritance would go to whomsoever undertook to have the actual burial carried out.18 A potential heir would disinherit himself or herself by ignoring this. The practice and the kind of costs involved for non-officials are illustrated by the case of the man Huy (from Deir el-Medina), buried by his wife Iy. She apparently inherits from him since she orders a coffin and pays for it with a house originally belonging to her husband. In relative terms this was a heavy expense involving the sale of a house, although the hope of inheritance must have made the weight of obligation easier to bear.

A good burial, however, was only part of the economic pressure in private demand. A prospering official might seek to build a new house for himself. This is promised in New Kingdom school texts,19 but we also have a real letter on the subject written by a provincial mayor (possibly of Armant) of the Eighteenth Dynasty called Menthuhetep to a friendly and, as a deputy to a ‘chief of works’, a usefully placed official at Thebes, a ‘scribe’ called Ahmose. The subject matter is instructions on the early stages of building a new house for Menthuhetep, a house which, to judge from its dimensions, was to be an impressive one. Here we probably have a case of a provincial dignitary setting up a second house in a royal city, in this instance Thebes, and clearly paying for it himself. For at the end of the letter he adds: ‘have the price of the land for the house given to its owner, and make sure he is happy with it. See to it that when I come he doesn’t have words with me.’20

Then there were the goods that daughters and sons needed to acquire to create the joint properties which formed the basis of a marriage contract; there were outlays to be made at shrines, possible gifts or bribes for advancement, and the general competitive display of wealth engendered by the existence of an ostentatious and lavish court. Apart from the property and goods which the excavation of settlements and cemeteries reveals, other sources tell us that officials maintained fleets of Nile boats (Figure 7.2) and, in the New Kingdom, horses and chariots as well. People were surrounded by reasons (or rather temptations) to accumulate wealth, which might arise quite suddenly. The effects of a relatively free play of competitive acquisition unconnected with burial customs will be illustrated in the next chapter by the spread of private house sizes at Amarna.



Figure 7.2Affluence: Chancellor Meketra’s river fleet. Silhouettes of the wooden boat models from his tomb at Thebes, early Twelfth Dynasty, after Winlock, Models, Figs 70–82.



It is occasionally possible to find in ancient texts a degree of reservation on acquisitiveness: ‘A cup of water quenches thirst, a mouthful of herbs fortifies the heart’ is the ascetic advice of the sage to the vizier Kagemni.21 At the other extreme, however, were those who made the best of whatever chances for enrichment came their way. The late New Kingdom provides some spectacular documentation (in the form of an archive of papyri dealing with investigations and trials) concerning the promise of instant enrichment through theft.22 Nothing was sacred: temple grain supplies were siphoned off, tombs were robbed, temple equipment and fittings were plundered. Although tomb robbery attracted people of mainly lowly status, less arduous forms of theft and dishonesty drew in officials as well, including temple personnel. Indeed, the scale of the thefts often required official participation. Apart from depicting the seamier side to the crumbling fabric of late New Kingdom society and also the processes of law when they were eventually invoked, the papyri illustrate in a highly coloured way motives and means in the contemporary economy. They dramatize the existence of a crude urge for self-enrichment, which in more orderly circumstances would have been sublimated by participation in the marketplace, selling goods, renting or leasing land, making loans bearing interest, all of them practices explicitly documented. They also reveal the fate of the stolen goods as they re-enter the economy of the living, and in so doing add usefully to our restricted knowledge of the economic behaviour of the time.

The thieves generally, even when of lowly status, were town or village dwellers and householders, many apparently living in the medium-sized town of Maiunehes which lay in and around the mortuary temple of Rameses III (Medinet Habu, Figure 8.17, p. 362). Much of what they stole they simply kept as part of their household property. Apart from gold and silver the lists of recovered goods include a fair quantity of linen pieces and garments, vases of oil, coffin trimmings and pieces of wood. Copper and bronze in any form was much favoured. A set of bronze carrying-rings that had been prized off a wooden chest was the haul from temple theft (Papyrus B.M.10402). One list of recovered goods consists almost entirely of these metals. Sometimes the item is specified – ‘a wash-bowl of bronze equal to 20 deben’ – but mostly a figure of how many deben were involved is given, and the amounts could be quite small: ‘The lady Aref of the Necropolis, wife of the workman Hori: 1; the lady Takiri of the Necropolis: 1’ (Papyrus B.M.10053, Recto 2.18–19). One deben was only half the price of a pair of sandals.

In the end, however, material wealth was the means of purchase. The wife of one of the thieves confesses: ‘I took my husband’s share and put it aside in my storeroom, then I took one deben of silver from it and used it to buy grain’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 6.6–7). Another wife, smarter (or perhaps more honest), when asked how she bought servants if not by stolen silver, replied: ‘I bought them in exchange for garden produce’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 10.14–15). Though her words may sound naive she clearly hoped to be believed and was, in effect, basing her case on being able to grow cash crops on a significant scale, an important point in itself. An equally positive defence was given by another wife when asked to explain the origin of a quantity of silver: ‘I got it in exchange for barley in the year of the hyenas, when there was a famine’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 11.5–8). Here the claim is based on scarcity driving up the price of a basic commodity, a classic supply–demand relationship. A more elaborate case is provided by the confession of another priest and temple gardener Ker on the subject of stripping gold foil from the temple doors:

We went yet again to the door-jambs … and we brought away 5 kite of gold. We bought corn with it in Thebes and divided it up … Now after some days Peminu our superior quarrelled with us saying: ‘You have given me nothing.’ So we went again to the door-jambs and brought 5 kite of gold from them, and exchanged it for an ox and gave it to Peminu. (Papyrus B.M.10053, Verso 3.10–13)



We should note that Peminu preferred good farm livestock to a suspicious quantity of gold foil.

Many more examples can be quoted to illustrate the variety of purchases. ‘Charge concerning the shrine of cedar, both the image and the timber, which the scribe of the royal records Setekhmes stole. He sold it in Thebes and received its price’ (Papyrus B.M.10053, Verso 5.5). The overseer of the field of the temple of Amun, Akhenmenu, gives ‘1 deben of silver and 5 kite of gold in exchange for land’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 2.19). The scribe Amenhetep called Seret, of the temple of Amun, gives ‘2 deben (of silver) in exchange for land, for 40 deben of bronze, and for 10 khar of barley’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 2.22). The servant Shedbeg disposes of quite a list of commodities ‘in payment for the slave Degay’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 2.23–25). Another confesses: ‘I gave 5 kite of silver to the incense-roaster Penementenakht of the temple of Amun in exchange for 10 hin of honey’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 2a.1; cf. also lines 4–14). The confession of the herdsman Bukhaaf begins: ‘The lady Nesmut came to where I was and said to me: “Some men have found something that can be sold for bread. Let’s go so that you can eat it with them”’ (Papyrus B.M.10052, 1.8–10). We can recognize Theban slang here: ‘bread’ must mean ‘fine goods’, or something similar.

Sometimes the loot was needed to buy services, in the form of protection: ‘Now when we were arrested, the district scribe Khaemipet came to me … and I gave him the 4 kite of gold which had fallen to my lot’ (Papyrus B.M.10054). And in another case: ‘But the scribe of the royal records, Setekhmes, had overheard and threatened us saying: “I am going to report it to the chief priest of Amun.” So we brought 3 kite of gold and gave it to the scribe of the royal records, Setekhmes’ (Papyrus B.M.10053, Verso 3.13–14). Some disposals were probably to settle obligations or to gain favours:

Charge concerning the 4 boards of cedar belonging to the ‘Floor of Silver’ of King Usermaatra-Setepenra (Rameses II), the great god, which the scribe Sedi gave to the lady Teherer, wife of the god’s father Hori: he gave them to the carpenter Ahauty of the funerary chapel of Hui, and he made them into an inner coffin for her. (Papyrus B.M.10053, Verso 4.15–17)



Perhaps the most intriguing entry from the economic point of view is a list of gold and silver ‘recovered from the thieving workmen of the Necropolis, which they were found to have given to the traders of every establishment’ (Papyrus B.M.10068, Recto 4.1–18). Fourteen traders are listed, attached both to temples and to private households. It was the job of a ‘trader’ to maintain the supply–demand balance of an employer by trading surplus or unwanted commodities for whatever was required. These thieves, who would not have been in a position to have ‘traders’ in their own employ, were therefore latching on to a professional system for converting their loot into other commodities, doubtless for a commission. As urban dwellers in Maiunehes (where the necropolis workmen now lived) they had channels of communication with a wider world.

The rotten state of society at the end of the New Kingdom was cured, if only temporarily, by the imposition of military rule. The legal papyri of the time are not necessarily a guide to the state of affairs earlier in the period (though one cannot be wholly sure). They are relevant because they provide verbatim testimony to attitudes to material wealth and to the easy and natural recourse that people had to a free market in goods, slaves, livestock, food and even land. It would be foolish to claim that the opportunities for exchange, the markets themselves, were created by the dishonesty of the day. In more orderly times people still received windfalls – from inheritance, gifts from the state – and had a similar range of choices in what they did with them, hoarding them at home or exchanging them for other things. The late New Kingdom robberies released a surge of wealth into society from, as it were, the bottom. The Eighteenth Dynasty had done the same, from spoils of battle, but from the top and according to an administered system.

One discovery (at Amarna) does actually reveal that concentrations of liquid wealth were in circulation in this earlier time. In a small open space beside a public well in the North Suburb a pottery jar had been buried, containing 23 bars of gold and a quantity of silver fragments and roughly made rings, as well as a silver figurine of a Hittite god (Figure 7.3).23 The gold bars had been made by pouring melted-down gold into grooves scooped by the finger in sand. The total weight of the gold was 3,375.36 grams, equivalent in ancient terms to 37 deben. The total weight of the silver came to at least 1,085.85, or 12 deben. This represents a fair amount of wealth, though not a staggering sum. The most successful of the recorded late New Kingdom tomb robberies, in the tomb of the Seventeenth Dynasty King Sebekemsaf, netted the thieves 160 deben of gold (Papyrus Leopold-Amherst II, 1, 16–3.2). But some idea of its purchasing power can be obtained from the ratios of gold to silver (5:3 later becoming 2:1), and of silver to bronze (1:100).Thus the silver could have been used to purchase, say, 10 or 12 head of cattle. The archaeologist who made the Amarna find assumed that it was part of a thief’s loot, and in view of the odd place in which it was found this still seems credible, although there are other possibilities. Stock from a jeweller’s workshop has also been suggested.24 Yet we cannot be sure that the only remarkable thing about the find is simply that someone had failed to recover it. There is an uncanny parallel in a letter from a slightly later period (and unconnected with Amarna) in which the writer gives instructions as to where, in the pigsty beside the house, a mass of bronzework was buried and, alongside it, a pottery jar containing a hoard of gold and silver items.25 Secret burial around one’s house might not have been uncommon. Whatever the origin of the Amarna hoard, it illustrates easily convertible wealth poised on the point of re-entering the economy at a private level.



Figure 7.3Part of a hoard of gold and silver buried in a pottery jar in a suburb of Amarna. The silver is made up partly of finished items (including the Hittite figurine, no. 30/489), and partly of coils and irregular pieces, some cut from vessels; the gold is in crude bars. As the weight tables show, there is little to suggest that pieces of standard weight (proto-coins) were desired. Rather, with the coils, scraps and bars, pieces were cut off to meet a specific demand, their weight (and thus value) determined by weighing (as in Figures 7.6, p. 310, and 7.7, above, p. 313). After Frankfort and Pendlebury, COA II, 59–61, Pl. XLIII, and original record cards in the archives of the Egypt Exploration Society.



The satisfaction of private demand for finished goods required an availability of raw materials. Official inscriptions are often taken to imply that a royal monopoly existed on those raw materials that lay outside the Nile floodplain. Inscriptions at mines and quarries do, indeed, reveal a scale of operations that only a state could undertake (e.g. Figure 3.1, p. 113). But these need not have been the norm. Take ‘alabaster’ (for which geologists prefer the term ‘travertine’), for example. One prime source was the desert to the east of the Asyut-Minia area in Middle Egypt, the area that includes the Hatnub quarries.26 Hatnub was one target for large expeditions despatched by kings. It can, however, easily be visited by donkey in a single day (the journey time is about three hours in each direction). If a group of people took with them a supply of water and food for a few days, some baskets and simple tools, they could bring back a sizable load of small lumps of alabaster suitable for vase making, perhaps using pieces left behind by the major expeditions. Simple operations of this kind might leave few traces behind. A further indication that written sources are not a full guide to the procurement of raw materials is that certain substances are excluded altogether. We have no records of expeditions to quarry the soft rock that was the basis for the marl clays widely used in pottery manufacture, and the same is true for natron and for gypsum.27 There was no need for military-style expeditions. The work could be accomplished by small groups of hardy labourers camping and working in a primitive manner (such as at the Fayum gypsum quarries, Figure 7.4). By invoking a simple mode of supply we can easily explain the continued availability of raw materials during times of internal weakness. There was, for example, no shortage of small pieces of alabaster for the vase-makers of Middle Egypt in the First Intermediate Period, who produced a distinctive range of small elegant vessels that are common in the tombs of that period.



Figure 7.4Low-level exploitation of a mineral resource: the gypsum quarries of Umm el-Sawwan (north Fayum) of the early Old Kingdom. The seasonal encampment of about 200 circular stone shelters occupies the top of a ridge along the edge of an escarpment overlooking a broad surface outcrop of gypsum on the desert plain below. The gypsum was dug out, using crude flint picks, in part as lumps for the making of vessels, and in part as powder to be used (after heating) as mortar. The workshops for the vessels were in more sheltered places against the escarpment face. The flint picks were made on the spot, from flint nodules brought in from outside. Other types of flint tools were used in the vase making. The informal nature of the settlement should be contrasted with the planned Middle Kingdom workmen’s village at Qasr el-Sagha, Figure 5.18, p. 227. After G. Caton-Thompson and E.W. Gardner, The Desert Fayum, London, Royal Anthropological Institute, 1934, Pl. LVIII. The example of a flint pick is one in the collection of the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge.



In the Graeco-Roman Period natron was, with some other commodities, the subject of state monopoly. Monopoly is a word that is sometimes used for the Pharaonic period as well. Its earlier existence is, however, a matter of inference rather than of documentation, and does not accord with the general picture of people’s attitudes in Pharaonic Egypt. The political stability and cultural coherence of ancient Egypt over long periods of time are part of its abiding image. They must reflect a broad acceptance of the ideas and ideals that originated within the court. But beneath this bland law-abiding exterior lurked a predatory instinct directed towards property rather than persons. Institutionalized vigilance pursued elaborate schemes of checking, and threatened fearsome punishments. When it slipped, dishonesty quickly flourished. In this atmosphere, no monopoly could have relied upon a tacit acceptance of its validity. It, too, would have required enforcement by decrees and punishments. Within the corpus of administrative documents, we will look in vain for such references.

Even with foreign trade we should be cautious in using the term ‘monopoly’. It is not, for example, the natural interpretation to place on a scene of the Twelfth Dynasty in the tomb of the nomarch Khnumhetep III at Beni Hasan which shows the arrival of a small Palestinian group from Moab bringing a quantity of eye-paint (msdmt) with them (Figure 7.5).28 Although one of Khnumhetep’s titles, ‘administrator of the eastern desert’, suggests some formally recognized responsibility for the adjacent desert area, the general intention of the scene is clear enough. The Palestinian group represents just one part of the broad range of products of Khnumhetep’s ‘estate’, which included game hunted in the desert as well as agricultural produce from the Nile floodplain. Indeed, the Palestinians are introduced by a ‘chief of the huntsmen’. Here again we have a means of low-level satisfaction of local demand for products which were out of the direct reach of industrious valley dwellers: small trading groups from further afield making their way along the desert wadi systems to provincial points of contact within the Nile valley. One tomb scene does not make a pattern, but it does point to a possibility which can only be denied by having recourse to the dogmatic statement: ‘foreign trade was a royal monopoly’, a statement which can be given no direct support. The availability of raw materials and imported finished goods in ancient Egypt is potentially a further subject of discussion as to where the balance lay from period to period between state and the private domain.



Figure 7.5Produce of the eastern desert received by the nobleman appointed to control it, the nomarch of the Oryx Nome and ‘Overseer of the Eastern Deserts’ in the Twelfth Dynasty, Khnumhetep. The produce is mainly in the form of hunted game, but also (bottom register) includes a Palestinian trading party (said to number 37 persons) bringing eye pigment, who are introduced by an Egyptian official, ‘Chief huntsman, Khety’, a title which illuminates the status of the Palestinian group in Egyptian eyes. From tomb no. 3 at Beni Hasan, after P.E. Newberry, Beni Hasan I, London, EEF, 1893, Pls XXX and XXXI.





Economics without money


The methods of small-scale economic transaction are well known for the New Kingdom, particularly from the wealth of data from the workmen’s village of Deir el-Medina (Photograph 7.1).29 Acquiring and disposing of goods was done by barter, but not just by an impulsive gesture of the kind: I’ll swap you a pig for two pairs of sandals. Everything had a value, expressed in various units that coincided with quantities of certain commodities: weights of silver and bronze (often the deben and the kite), and units of capacity of grain and sesame oil (the khar and oipe for the former, the hin for the latter; Figure 7.6).30 Metals were themselves used in exchanges but not as coinage. The nearest step on the road to money is to be found in the stone weights which, when used in the pans of scale balances, checked the weights and thus the values of metals, precious and otherwise. One group of the thieves of Thebes scrupulously kept in a house a stone weight which they had used in dividing up the spoil from one tomb (Papyrus B.M.10052, 3.8–13; cf. also 5.20). Prices varied from occasion to occasion, and the ratios of commodity values changed (e.g. that of silver to bronze declined late in the New Kingdom at Thebes from 1:100 to 1:60, perhaps because of the flood of silver from the spate of robberies). In a typical transaction, a policeman buys an ox from a workman, and pays for it with a jar of fat worth 30 deben, two linen pieces worth 10 deben, scraps of bronze weighing (and thus worth) 5 deben, and 10 hin of vegetable oil worth 5 deben.31 The total is 50 deben (of bronze), and the little receipt calls the total ‘silver’, which word was used colloquially to mean something very close to the modern word ‘money’. This system of values also covered the price of labour and of raw materials. Stringing a wooden bed cost 1 khar of grain, actually making it cost about 5 khar, decorating it cost 1.5 khar, whilst the wood might cost 3 deben. With a khar of grain approximately equal to two deben, the total is about 18 deben. To buy a ready-made bed would cost between 12 and 25 deben, which is a rational reflection of the labour plus material costs.32



Photograph 7.1The setting of village life: part of the village of necropolis workmen and artists at Deir el-Medina, western Thebes, late New Kingdom. The photograph has been taken facing towards the north-west, down the central line of one house, no. III.NE. More houses continue beyond a transverse road, and in the background are terraces which originally supported tomb chapels. The walls are partly restored.





Figure 7.6Buying and selling by barter-exchange, illustrated by an example from Deir el-Medina, Twentieth Dynasty. On one side of the exchange is a coffin, notionally valued at 25.5 deben of bronze. The buyer has to make up a set of commodities of equal value, and does so partly with other items with notional values in bronze deben (two goats, a pig and two logs of wood, perhaps raw material for coffin making), and partly with actual bronze items or scraps where the deben value was obtained by direct weighing on scales (as in Figure 7.7, above, p. 313), using small stone or bronze weights sometimes carved in animal shapes. The example is from Ostracon Deir el-Medina 73, verso, from Janssen, Commodity Prices, 10.



Did the state play any role in the fixing of prices? We can be sure that it did not explicitly regulate them. There is no direct evidence for kings or other officials ever doing this, and the study of the prices themselves, although it throws up broad regularities, also reveals too many variations. Prices fixed themselves. However, from the very fact that, at least during periods of strong centralized administration, the institutions were heavily involved in paying wages and collecting, storing and releasing commodities held as buffer stocks, we can deduce that general levels were implicitly maintained. This is, however, a general framework within which all modern economic systems work no matter how active their ‘free’ market sector.

The fixing of prices for raw materials and other commodities, from grain to servant girls, takes us to the heart of the difficulties in coming to terms with ancient economies. It is tempting to draw a contrast between how this might have been done in ancient times and what is regarded as the modern solution to fixing prices: by means of a free market in which the relationship between supply and demand does it automatically. This modern process seems to attract an unnecessary degree of mystique. The rise of consumerism has so vastly increased the number of transactions in society that they come to reflect arithmetic regularities, something further enhanced by the speed with which information is transmitted. In the street-market selling home-made jams, bankrupt stock and second-hand books, however, the abstract constructions and regularities of modern economics begin to dissolve. Although a rare second-hand book sold at auction can illustrate, through competitive bidding, a fixing of price by demand greatly exceeding supply, seemingly unimportant books are priced at what the seller thinks intuitively is a general value, but which in individual cases the buyer may regard as an amazing bargain, although other buyers might not agree.

The very personal concept of ‘value’ – do I think that something is worth a particular price? – provides an overall limitation on all marketing, the supply and demand relationship acting within it with an intensity that varies with circumstances. It is a relationship that basically reflects a general human preference for buying cheaply, coupled with thresholds of resistance against prices which seem to be high as measured against an intuitive appreciation of the ‘value’ of a thing. How values are formed is ultimately a psychological question outside the scope of economics altogether, which exists as a modern discipline only because, given sufficient examples of any phenomenon, statistical regularities are bound to occur.

When we consider ancient societies, since the volume of trading must have been much smaller and speed of communication much less than in modern times, statistical regularities which appear to be ‘laws’ in economics, if they existed at all, are bound to have lain within wide margins of variation. A more irregular and unpredictable pattern of prices is what one should expect if prices were freely fixed. Such a pattern is not evidence against marketing and exchange of goods by people motivated towards coming out of a deal with a sense of having done well, given that, if they know each other already, friendship or obligation may have tempered the vigour with which they pursued their deal.

The price data from ancient Egypt are more or less neutral as a source of evidence on how they themselves were fixed. Thus in the case of the price of a pair of sandals: over nearly 150 years they remained within a range of 1 to 2 deben, occasionally 3.33 It is likely that ‘tradition’ played a part here, people becoming accustomed over the years always to paying roughly the same amount. This does not, however, exclude an underlying rationale. We can also say that, lacking modern machinery for mass production, the price of a pair of sandals reflected a floor price of subsistence for the sandal-maker. Prices were held at this level by the resistance of the buyer, who, if faced with a high price, could hobble far enough away on his worn-out sandals to buy from another sandal-maker at the usual price. ‘Tradition’ might itself represent an equilibrium of supply and demand.

A particularly interesting set of prices is that for grain (wheat and barley), a commodity generally prone to volatile price movements and thus the object of huge intervention schemes in modern ‘free-market’ economies. Intervention in the form of massive storage capacity creating buffer stocks was standard in ancient Egypt, too, both at the institutional level and within the economies of private estates whether in times of peace and plenty (e.g. the Amarna estates, Figures 8.12 and 8.13, pp. 350 and 351) or in times of famine and unrest (e.g. the nomarch Ankhtify, p. 300). This was a passive intervention that did not extend to official attempts to regulate prices. The New Kingdom price data show many prices of between 1 and 2 deben per khar, which presumably reflected a fair return for all those involved in farming, although the margin of difference was no small one where large consignments of grain were involved. But the buyer’s resistance threshold could be much lower, driven there by the prospect of hunger. In the economy of western Thebes in the late Twentieth Dynasty prices show great volatility, ranging from some near-normal to far higher levels, reaching, during the reigns of Rameses VII–IX, 8 and even 12 deben. This was not a case of general ‘inflation’ of the kind so familiar from the modern world, since other prices fail to display a similar trajectory, and there is no evidence for alterations in the units of measurement themselves. One clue is the famine reference quoted above: the woman who claimed to have sold barley for silver ‘in the year of the hyena, when there was a famine’. Unfortunately, the source fails to say what quantities were involved, but the way that she phrases her statement implies that a barley/silver exchange made during that famine was a distinctive transaction, and a high price is the natural interpretation. Actual prices from around this time (the first part of the reign of Rameses XI) show a common doubling of the traditional maximum price, thus 1 khar is equal to 4 deben. We can also look to the repeated complaints of food shortages by the Deir el-Medina community from the reign of Rameses III onwards to explain the fluctuations of the grain prices in later Ramesside times, though a cause-and-effect connection has to remain circumstantial.

The evidence we have been considering points inescapably to people being autonomous economic individuals; constrained within a system, of course, but none the less alert for opportunities. Another such person, living much earlier, towards the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty, was Hekanakht, a farmer from probably the northern part of Middle Egypt.34 Whilst away from home, probably performing duties at Thebes, he wrote letters back to his family. These display a strong urge to maximize family income by means of shrewd deals with neighbours and others, with no reference at all to an outside system or authority.

He was able to pay rent for his lands in advance, could, in addition, lend substantial amounts of grain and had at his disposal copper, oil, and cloth woven from the flax raised on his farm, all of which could be used to make purchases. He cultivated more than was needed for the immediate requirements of his household, and had substantial capital reserves.35





He also possessed a herd of 35 animals. Towards members of his household he displayed an obligation of a strict kind, issuing everyone including his mother with a monthly allowance, and so repeating on a tiny scale the precise system of ration distribution so familiar from administrative texts. But to the outside world the relationship was one of calculated gain. He displays the mentality of one who survives by shrewd personal dealing rather than of one whose fortunes depend upon his position within a system of social obligation and of administered support. He urges one of his household, for example, to retain one bull in a herd about to be sent out because a chance of a particularly good sale had arisen: ‘his price has increased by half’.36 His fortunes were, none the less, tied to the level of the Nile, so that a low inundation in one year considerably reduced his disposable income.

Egyptians like Hekanakht lived economics rather than thought it. Having no word that we can translate as ‘profit’ they could not strive for it as an abstract measure of success in trading or making things. But this did not hinder them from distinguishing a good from a bad price, and should not hinder us from crediting them with an adequate business sense.

The Deir el-Medina records of transaction are devoid of locale, as are, in general, the confessions of the Theban thieves. Some transactions must have arisen because buyer and seller, in the same village, knew each other. This might apply when manufacturing was involved. If you wanted to obtain a new footstool you presumably knew where a carpenter lived, and the transaction took place at a house, either his or yours depending on your relative status. But would informal and personal contacts suffice entirely to match demand with supply? Were there markets in which sellers spread their wares in recognized marketplaces? One of the accused women in the robbery papyri sets a telling scene: ‘Now I happened to be sitting hungry (begging?) under the sycomore-fig trees, and the men happened to be trading bronze as we were sitting hungry’ (Papyrus B.M.10403, 3.5–7). Where the sycomore-fig trees were in terms of the topography of western Thebes we do not know. But some markets at Thebes are stated to have been on the river bank.37 This we know also from tomb paintings. There are no texts to explain these pictures, no hieroglyphic comments filling spaces around the figures. Our understanding of them depends on correctly interpreting the mime that the artist has used to convey the meaning. One of them comes from the tomb of a Deir el-Medina sculptor named Ipy, who looked forward in the next world to the life of the scribal ideal (Figure 7.7, Below).38 The centre of the scene is a river boat bringing the annual grain harvest to the private granary, as well as bundles of papyrus and what are probably bundles of fodder. As the unloading takes place some of the sacks of grain, as well as the green-stuff, are sold. The buyers are simultaneously sellers: women who sit with a single basket of produce in front of them. In return for grain they sell fish, loaves and vegetables. Behind a seller of bread a shelter has been erected shading two jars of drink. From one protrudes a right-angled drinking tube of metal, of the kind used for imbibing beer (a preserved example includes a filter at the lower end).39 The logic of the picture is that this also is a saleable commodity, though in the form of not a complete jar of beer but a measured amount to be sucked out. The scene complements well the testimony of some of the robbery papyri: the role taken by many women in buying and selling for the household, including cash crops.



Figure 7.7Scenes of barter-exchange in New Kingdom tombs. Above. Traders in booths make deals with Syrians unloading their wares at the river bank, from the tomb of Kenamun (no. 162 at Thebes), after N. de G. Davies and R.O. Faulkner, JEA 33 (1947), Pl. VIII. Below. Workers unloading a grain barge use sacks of grain to buy fish and vegetables from village women, from the tomb of Ipy (no. 217 at Thebes), after Davies, Two Ramesside Tombs, Pl. XXX.



The second scene, although similar in design, depicts transactions at a significantly different level. It comes from the tomb of Kenamun, an Eighteenth Dynasty mayor of Thebes who was also in charge of the granaries of Karnak temple (Figure 7.7, Above).40 The subject is the arrival at Thebes of a fleet of sea-going ships from Syria and the Aegean. They unload their cargo and, in a further portion of the scene, present their goods to Kenamun himself. Herein lies the first ambiguity. Is Kenamun, who as mayor would have been a leading and wealthy citizen, receiving the goods for himself, acting out the line in the school text where the scribe’s ship ‘has returned from Syria laden with all manner of good things’?41 Or is he receiving goods destined for, say, the temple treasuries? As with Ipy’s painting, en route to their destination some of the goods are sold, presumably on the river bank. The buyers are, inevitably, sellers also, but no longer women with a single basket of foodstuff. Two of the three traders are men, and all three sit beneath shelters, offering a range of goods: sandals, lengths of cloth (some with fringes), bread and other food, and what may be bronze fish hooks. One transaction is shown: a Syrian proffers a stoppered jar (is it of wine or incense or another of the commodities which travelled in these ubiquitous amphorae?). The male traders hold little scale balances in their hands. These are occasionally found in excavation.42 One (perhaps their main) purpose was to weigh metal against stone weights of known values on the deben scale. The implication of their appearance in this scene is that metals were part of the transaction, with the foreigners perhaps carrying their own sets of weights as a safeguard against being cheated. The Egyptian traders look much more professional than the women in the tomb of Ipy. But who were they really? This is a crucial area of ambiguity. Were they ‘traders’ as the Egyptians used the word, that is, commercial agents for officials? Or were they trading for themselves? If we knew the answer, we would have an important piece of knowledge for the Egyptian economy of the period. For in the latter case they would have been, in effect, shopkeepers, living from buying and selling and thus from the profit between transactions. But even without this knowledge we must admit that these scenes do not illustrate ad hoc exchanges between neighbours in a village. They display the kind of purposeful behaviour on the part of the sellers which belongs to proper markets in which buyers are not necessarily from the same community at all, and thus not necessarily much influenced by social obligation: the very kind of mechanism that is required for an economic model which allows greater scope to private enterprise.

These New Kingdom scenes have a long history behind them, with important predecessors in several Old Kingdom tombs.43 Like their later counterparts, however, they are to be explained as much from how we perceive the general economic framework as from any specific details within the scenes themselves, which remain, on their own, ambiguous. There is one social change to notice: in the Old Kingdom scenes, the sellers are normally men. There is also one unusually explicit accompanying text: in a sale of cloth the statement is made: ‘xx cubits of cloth in exchange for 6 shat’. Although the exact nature of the shat at this time is not known, it must be a unit of absolute value similar to the New Kingdom units of bronze, grain, oil and so on.44

Deir el-Medina, the source for so much of our evidence about economic life and much else in ancient Egypt, was an atypical community, in two respects. Though a small village it was in contact with senior officials and wealthy clients and thus with affluent living, which rubbed off on the villagers’ own expectations; and its basic needs were supplied as rations by the state. This latter circumstance, however, only adds interest to the evidence for private enterprise on the part of the villagers: exchanging goods with each other and with outsiders, manufacturing beds, selling their specific skills as artists in the making of statues and coffins, hiring or lending donkeys for exorbitant interest or rental, and generally directing part of their lives towards accumulating wealth, part of which ended up in their well-appointed burials. The villagers show in their lives that the state, even when in the position of supplier of needs, could do so only in a rough-and-ready way, through regular grain rations and a few other perks, leaving the detail of individual demand to local and private transactions, in other words to a market. An example of where the boundary lay between public and private provision is the water supply for the village, which had no nearby natural source of its own (although an attempt, possibly unsuccessful, was finally made to dig a well not far from the village). A group of water-carriers was provided for the village. It was feasible for a man to carry water in a pottery amphora either on his shoulder or slung on a pole (tomb scenes depict both), but easier to use a donkey. So the water-carriers, who were poor men, regularly hired donkeys from the Deir el-Medina workmen themselves.45

The inhabitants of Deir el-Medina were limited in means, status and ambition, and no amount of evidence from here can fully describe the Egyptian economy. The crucial area of contact between state system and private need was the lives of officials, the group most exposed to competitive pressures. Although in receipt of rations and other rewards from the state, the households of these people were often organized, so it would seem, to bring in an income well in excess of subsistence. What did they do with the excess, men and women who were too busy or proud to haggle over the price of a donkey with a ragged neighbour, but who nevertheless had wealth stored in plenty in and around their houses? The answer is provided by a class of persons already encountered, tied up in dealings with the robbers of western Thebes. They are the men with the title shuty, a word best translated as ‘trader’.46 They appear always in the employ of someone else, either a temple or an official, and must have been commercial agents, to whom was delegated the job of buying what was needed in exchange for accumulated wealth. The employer overlap between temple and private household is itself revealing as to the essentially common nature of the economic basis of both. Both accumulated farm produce and manufactured goods (with linen cloth prominent in the case of households) from regular income but were not wholly self-sufficient and needed to purchase from suppliers of one kind or another. In the robbery papyrus referred to earlier (Papyrus B.M.10068, Recto 4.1–18) gold and silver had been recovered from 14 ‘traders of every establishment’. No fewer than seven of them (two of them brothers) belonged to the household of a high-ranking soldier, a chief of Hittite troops called Amen-nefer; two belonged to the daughter of another officer, a woman called Isis who was also a temple singer; two more belonged each to military officers; and the remaining three belonged to temples, and were responsible to a named priest.47 Elsewhere in this group of papyri a group of eight traders appears from the town of Mer-wer, at the entrance to the Fayum. This was where one of the principal harim-palaces for royal women was situated (at the archaeological site of Medinet el-Ghurab), and this could have provided a suitably safe outlet for stolen treasure.

The status of traders varied. They could be rich enough to own their own slave, or poor enough to be at the same time a slave to their employer. Their contacts enabled them to do business for themselves on the side: not only receiving stolen goods but also, in a satirical school text, lending grain to the poor peasant who is unable to discharge his debt even by offering his wife to them.48 The picture that is painted by a variety of texts is that the ‘trader’ – the commercial agent, the arranger of deals – was a ubiquitous figure of New Kingdom Egypt. To find the right markets they plied the Nile in boats: ‘The traders fare downstream and upstream, as busy as bees (lit. copper) carrying goods from town to town, and supplying wants.’49 Their journeys took them abroad. ‘Your ship has returned from Syria laden with all manner of good things,’ says a model text in which the writer daydreams about the good life of the successful official.50 This long-distance aspect to trading emphasizes the point made in connection with the tomb scenes of marketing: there can have been little if any sense of social obligation between trader and customer.

Internal mobility provides, in fact, a weighty argument against the view that personal economic transactions were so often cosy reciprocal exchanges between relations and neighbours as to form the only serious alternative to redistribution. Two aspects are particularly telling. One was the provincial origin (and continuing links) of some officials who based themselves in a royal city. When the mayor Menthuhetep moved into his new house at Thebes (p. 302), built on land purchased from a stranger, those with whom he came to do business would not have belonged to his own social nexus, and there would have been fewer grounds for the idea of ‘reciprocation’ to skew prices demanded and prices paid (although this might have developed in time). The other was the well-documented long-distance internal trading initiated by large institutions and conducted through their ‘traders’. The implication of a range of sources is that internal riverine movement of goods was a major factor in the life and economy of Egypt, probably at times overshadowing the local movement of produce at village level. The fact of ‘internal cosmopolitanism’ invalidates too great a reliance on case studies of modern peasant communities to provide the social and economic models for ancient Egypt. To do so is to accept too parochial a horizon and to ignore the power of the River Nile, not only to sustain life, but also to provide a channel of communication.

The status of the trader was a lowly one. Few who bore it were able to leave a permanent memorial to themselves and then only something very modest.51 For this reason we should not translate it as ‘merchant’. It is here that the ancient and modern worlds divide on economics. Trading was akin in status to making sandals. Rich people enjoyed the benefits of trading but did not pursue it as an occupation, whilst the idea that the activity could bring wealth and position on its own terms was unthinkable to all concerned. There were no merchant princes just as there were no princes of sandal-makers. Officials – ‘scribes’ – maintained the monopoly of power, prestige and wealth. It was not a conspiracy but part of the natural order.52

The economic system of ancient Egypt is tolerably clear, if we allow logic to create the framework in which textual and archaeological evidence can be set. The beginning of understanding is an acceptance that ancient Egypt was, by the standards of the ancient world, a rich country. In stable times it had wealth in plenty stored and in circulation, offering to all the prospect or the dream of a life far above subsistence level. This created the phenomenon of private demand: powerful and widely spread from the late Predynastic Period onwards. When the state was strong and well organized many people gained much from its redistributive mechanisms, which must, in these same times, have acted as a general control over the whole economy simply on account of their magnitude. But for those demands which could not be met by state hand-outs (and this would amount to virtually everything in times of weak government) recourse to markets provided the answer: both local face-to-face dealings sometimes skewed by social obligation, and wider-ranging exchanges involving employed intermediaries – ‘traders’. Social values obscured the reality of the process, leaving a blind spot over the concept of profit. But any ancient Egyptian who could feel the difference between a good price and a bad price was a representative of ‘economic man’.

Within the framework of macroeconomics, which embraces all states that have ever existed, a common goal of research is to identify the ways in which the two forces – institutional and private – satisfied their interests, both in terms of the means employed and the disguises in which they were clad. It is also misleading to view ancient economies as a stage in an evolutionary process. For there is sufficient variety of economic system in the modern world to make the choice of evolutionary line an arbitrary one. Rather they should be seen as further variations of a single theme, different solutions to a common problem: how do large communities, inevitably made up of competing interests, remain in existence for long?

There is an interesting twist to this question, which can help us to understand the resilience of ancient Egypt, its capacity to rebuild itself into a successful prosperous country after the reverses of civil war or invasion. Money in the modern world is not directly tied to specific commodities but is based in part upon faith. It mostly circulates endlessly, and the amounts increase as the years pass, although to some extent this is countered by depreciation in value. In the course of circulation, it tends to gravitate towards the more successful economies (which pay higher interest), exacerbating the gap between the richer and the poorer. Part of ancient Egypt’s wealth took the form of metals (gold, silver and bronze), just as is the case with modern states, whose gold reserves are one measure of economic health. Another and important part took the form of perishable commodities (primarily grain). Where the Egyptian economy was so different from ours was in the use (though not exclusively) of grain and other items as a major part of personal and institutional wealth and as a means of exchange. Perishable commodities have a short life. They cannot be banked for long and become savings. They cannot earn interest or be directed elsewhere as investments, but must be put into circulation after which they will vanish. They have storage costs, and the effort required to transport them for any distance encourages local consumption. People in ancient Egypt were indeed ‘consumers’ in a very literal way. If one adds to this the huge social prestige of having land to work and overflowing granaries, it was hard to be a miser. The rich individual and the rich institution were obliged by necessity and by social convention to spend locally, and in so doing to support the local community.

The system was not designed to do this out of altruism. It was a happy consequence because no serious alternative had yet been developed. It could have been a key factor in the success of the ancient Egyptian way of life, one of the marked characteristics of which was how the provincial regions continued to thrive. They were not impoverished at the expense of an over-large capital city. Local institutions – the nomarchs and their estates and later the large temples – were centres of commodity production, storage and consumption. The difficulties of getting a significant portion of this to flow out of the region are likely to have encouraged local prosperity.

In the face of modern capitalism’s tendency to create huge inequalities and to suffer chronic instabilities a radical view has been advanced which advocates a return to a somewhat artificial version of the ancient economic style which is intended to bring greater stability to the international currency system and to give better support to local communities.53 It draws upon a history of modern local experiments, often done in times of crisis, in creating local currencies tied to local goods and services which are designed to be spent rapidly and locally because they depreciate in value steadily, by having negative interest applied to them. Misers become losers. The proposal envisages the creation of a global reference currency tied to a standard basket of commodities and services selected because they are particularly important for international trade. As an example, one unit might equal one-tenth of a barrel of oil, one bushel of wheat, two pounds of copper or one-hundredth of an ounce of gold. The costs of storage would be borne directly by the currency as a sustainability or negative-interest fee, to discourage hoarding. Whether or not such ideas have a future on a significant scale, they possess a power to clarify. For the ancient Egyptian economy is actually an example of such a system at work, providing historical depth for the concept. By variations on it much of the world survived and developed for thousands of years.





Notes

1An important influence has been that of the economic historian Karl Polanyi; see Warburton, State and Economy; Zingarelli, Trade, 23–30. S. Quirke, ZÄS 118 (1991), 141–9 discusses the issues in terms of the more impenetrable society of the Middle Kingdom. See also Muhs, Economy, 1–12 for a somewhat different perspective on what the study of the ancient Egyptian economy should be about. The study by D. Warburton, JESHO, 43 (2000), 65–131, entitled ‘Before the IMF: the economic implications of unintentional structural adjustment in ancient Egypt’, should be required reading. Park and Greenberg, Finance places the ancient Egyptian economy alongside those of ancient Mesopotamia, classical Greece and Rome, early Judaeo-Christian finance and Islamic finances of the eastern Mediterranean as forming the ‘roots of western finance’.

2Hence the title of a textbook published by Cambridge University Press in 2010 (by Roger E. Backhouse, Professor of the History and Philosophy of Economics), The Puzzle of Modern Economics: Science or Ideology? Alfred Marshall’s quote is given on p. 100. David Graeber (an anthropologist), in Debt: the First 5,000 Years, 2nd edn, Brooklyn, NY, Melville House (2014), exposes the shaky foundations of economists’ understanding of how pre-modern economies worked. I thank Dave Devereux for lending me this book.

3Kruchten, Horemheb; Murnane, Texts, 235–40. It has also been pointed out that ‘The Duties of the Vizier’ text known from several New Kingdom tombs, whilst it has an internal logic of association which enables it to achieve its purpose of profiling the importance of the vizier, lacks the systematic presentation of the vizier’s duties that we ourselves tend to expect of such a text. See G.P.G.van den Boorn, Orientalia N.S. 51 (1982), 369–81.

4As illustrated in, for example, the autobiography of Weni, Lichtheim, Literature I, 21; and a decree of the time of Tutankhamun, Murnane, Texts, 215–16.

5Davies, Rekh-mi-rē ʾ, 32–6, 103–6, Pls XXIX–XXXV.

6F. Ll. Griffith, JEA 13 (1927), 193–206; Davies, Historical Inscriptions, 277–308; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 45–58; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 38–50; Muhs, Economy, 96–8, 108–9, 135.

7Davies, Historical Inscriptions, 30; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 56.12–57.2; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 48–9.

8Karnak: Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions IV, 263–6, no. 18; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) IV, 188–9; Elephantine: JEA 13 (1927), 207–8; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions V, 343–5, no. 138; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) V, 291–3; Armant: Mond and Myers, Temples of Armant, 161; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions II, 712–3, no. 261D; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) II, 469; Hermopolis: MDIAAK 8 (1939), 161–4; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 125–6, no. 67; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 106; Kanais (Wadi Mia): Schott, Kanais, 123–89; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions I, 67–70, no. 32C; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) I, 58–60; Muhs, Economy, 96–7.

9Papazian, Domain, 101–18.

10For example Caminos, Miscellanies, 17–20, 273–5, 280–93, 325–8, 454–64.

11Beni Hasan: J. Garstang, The Burial Customs of Ancient Egypt, London, Constable, 1907, esp. Pls III, IV; Naga ed-Deir: G.A. Reisner, A Provincial Cemetery of the Pyramid Age: Naga-ed-Der, Part III, Oxford, OUP and Berkeley, CA, UCP, 1932; D.B. O’Connor, World Archaeology 6 (1974), 22–3.

12Serious political intrigue amongst these locally powerful men is hinted at in the Sixth Dynasty letter from Elephantine published by P. Smither, JEA 28 (1942), 16–19; Wente, Letters, 58; Strudwick, Texts, 178–9.

13For Ankhtify see J. Vandier, Moʾalla: la tombe d’Ankhtifi et la tombe de Sébekhotep, Cairo, IFAO, 1950; W. Schenkel, Memphis, Herakleopolis, Theben, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 1965, 45–57. Similar claims by other men of the time are conveniently translated in Lichtheim, Literature I, 87–90.

14For the expansion of towns at this time see Moeller, Urbanism, 219–46. Although we have no remains of the town of Nefrusi in Middle Egypt to go with it, the huge private tomb of an unnamed local ruler at nearby Dara is suggestive of a moment of great local power, see Kemp, Anatomy2, 338, Fig. 116.

15Brunton, Qau I, II; Brunton, Mostagedda; G. Brunton, Matmar, London, Quaritch, 1948; D.B. O’Connor, World Archaeology 6 (1974), 24–7; J.S. Seidlmayer, Gräberfelder aus dem Übergang vom Alten zum Mittleren Reich: Studien zur Archäologie der Ersten Zwischenzeit, Heidelberg, Heidelberger Orientverlag, 1990.

16Brunton, Qau I, 76.

17Eyre, ‘Work in the Old Kingdom’, 20–5. He cites a case where the king provided a complete burial for a favourite dog. The written evidence for the New Kingdom is less (Eyre, ‘Work in the New Kingdom’, 198–9), although Akhenaten, on his Boundary Stelae, promised to provide tombs for some of his court in the ‘eastern mountain of Akhetaten’, Murnane, Texts, 78.

18J.J. Janssen and P.W. Pestman, JESHO 11 (1968), 137–70; Muhs, Economy, 101–2.

19Caminos, Miscellanies.

20P. B.M.10102: S.R.K. Glanville, JEA 14 (1928), 294–312; James, Pharaoh’s People, 172–5; Wente, Letters, 90–2.

21Lichtheim, Literature I, 60.

22Peet, Tomb-robberies; Vernus, Affairs, passim; and Zingarelli, Trade, 64–6 also quote from these papyri. All of the ensuing quotations, unless given separate references, are from Peet’s volume.

23Frankfort and Pendlebury, COA II, 59–61, Pl. XLIII. For the Hittite figurine, and a discussion of the circumstances of the find and its significance, see M. Bell, AJA 90 (1986), 145–51.

24James, Pharaoh’s People, 186, and Pl. 11 (top).

25Wente, Letters, 146, no. 196.

26I. Shaw, Hatnub: Quarrying Travertine in Ancient Egypt, London, EES, 2010.

27Nicholson and Shaw, Materials, 121–47. See also the suggestive diagram of the sources of raw materials needed for the basic Egyptian industry of faience manufacture in A.J. Shortland, Vitreous Materials at Amarna: the Production of Glass and Faience in 18th Dynasty Egypt, Oxford, Archaeopress, 2000, 145, fig. 5.15. Powdered gypsum, widely used as plaster and as a cement, is now known to have been dug from shallow surface deposits easily accessible from the Nile valley, J.A. Harrell, JAS: Reports 11 (2017), 536–45; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2016.12.031.

28S.H. Aufrère, ‘The deserts and the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Upper Egyptian nomes during the Middle Kingdom.’ In Friedman, Egypt and Nubia, 207–14.

29Janssen, Commodity Prices; James, Pharaoh’s People, Ch. 9; Eyre, ‘Work in the New Kingdom’, 168–80; Zingarelli, Trade, 53–64; Muhs, Economy, 120–3, 137–40.

30The word ‘copper’ is often used to refer to the commonest metal in use at the time although many analyses show that it was normally an alloy approximating to bronze. I have used the term ‘bronze’ here, although ‘copper alloy’ would be more correct.

31Janssen, Commodity Prices, 9.

32Janssen, Commodity Prices, 180–4.

33Janssen, Commodity Prices, 292–8.

34Allen, Heqanakht; T.G.H. James, The Hekanakhte Papers and other early Middle Kingdom Documents, New York, MMA, 1962; K. Baer, JAOS 83 (1963), 1–19; James, Pharaoh’s People, 113–14, 242–7; Wente, Letters, 58–63; Parkinson, Voices, 101–7; Ray, Reflections, 23–39. For a general approach see C.J. Eyre, JESHO 40 (1997), 367–90; Muhs, Economy, 76–7, 84–5, 89–90.

35K. Baer, JAOS 83 (1963), 12; see also Allen, Heqanakht, 170–1, who points out that one year of poor harvest had left Hekanakht with ‘ample assets coupled with a shortage of cash’.

36Document V, 25–9; K. Baer, JAOS 83 (1963), 19. Allen, Heqanakht, 19, 55 translates differently, the comment being in response to a third person’s complaint about possible loss of a bull, that if this happens ‘half of its price is on him and (half on) Heti’s son Nakht’.

37Deir el-Medina texts frequently refer to the ‘river bank’ (mryt) of western Thebes as a place where trading and other activities took place. Černy, Community, 94–7 supplies the basic references; also R. Ventura, Living in a City of the Dead: a Selection of Topographical and Administrative Terms in the Documents of the Theban Necropolis, Freiburg and Göttingen, V&R, 1986, 79–82; McDowell, Jurisdiction, 220–2; Zingarelli, Trade, 44–50.

38Davies, Two Ramesside Tombs, Pl. XXX; James, Pharaoh’s People, 250–2, Fig. 25; Zingarelli, Trade, 36–9.

39Freed, Pharaohs of the Sun, 239, no. 115.

40N. de G. Davies and R.O. Faulkner, JEA 33 (1947), 40–6; James, Pharaoh’s People, 253–6, Fig. 26; Zingarelli, Trade, 37–9.

41P. Anastasi IV, 3.10–3.11: Caminos, Miscellanies, 137–8; see also note 50.

42Freed, Pharaohs of the Sun, 252, no. 160.

43A. Moussa and H. Altenmüller, Das Grab des Nianchchnum und Chnumhotep, Mainz, von Zabern, 1977, 84–5, Taf. 24, Abb. 10; James, Pharaoh’s People, 254–8, Fig. 27; Eyre, ‘Work in the Old Kingdom’, 31–2; Zingarelli, Trade, 34–7; Muhs, Economy, 46–7; Strudwick, Texts, 409–10.

44Muhs, Economy, 37.

45J.J. Janssen, Donkeys at Deir el-Medîna, Leiden, NINO, 2005.

46Janssen, Ship’s Logs, 101–4; James, Pharaoh’s People, 247–8; Zingarelli, Trade, 71–81.

47Vernus, Affairs, 47–8, where the translation ‘broker’ rather than ‘trader’ is used.

48P. Lansing 6.9–7.1 = Caminos, Miscellanies, 390; see also Janssen, Ship’s Logs, 103.

49P. Lansing, 4.8–4.9 = Caminos, Miscellanies, 384.

50P. Anastasi IV, 3.10–3.11 = Caminos, Miscellanies, 137–8; also the trader returning from Syria in ibid., 16 = P. Bologna 1094, 5.5–5.6.

51An example is a stela from Saqqara (presumably the owner had lived at Memphis) which commemorated a man named Huy, who was ‘the chief of traders of the Mansion of the Aten’: Urk. IV, 2022.11–17; Murnane, Texts, 51–2, no. 24.

52The sculptor who made the famous bust of Nefertiti (his identity probably ‘the chief of works and sculptor, Thutmose’) lived in and worked from a housing complex that belonged to the upper echelon of Amarna society. His success presumably came from royal patronage. A ‘chief of weavers’ belonging to the Ramesseum, named Nefer-renpet, was owner of a small painted tomb at western Thebes, N. de G. Davies, Seven Private Tombs at Ḳurneh, London, EES, 1948, 49–50, Pl. XXXV. He, however, was an official of a major temple.

53B. Lietaer, The Future of Money: a New Way to Create Wealth, Work, and a Wiser World, London, Random House, 2001. One inspiration is the writings of Silvio Gessell (1862–1930) on whom even J.M. Keynes looked with favour (pp. 252–3).





8

Egypt in microcosm: the city of Amarna





The founder: Akhenaten, ‘the heretic king’


The human mind is generally a marvel of accommodation, compromise and scepticism. These characteristics enable people to live in communities. In a few individuals, however, this moderating psychological cushion is held in check and overridden by a passionate and uncontrollable fixation which tells them that the inventions of their minds are truths that others must accept. Most of these individuals pass through their lives unheeded. But in Akhenaten we have such a person in a position of great power – a king who seems to have rejected the principal field of speculative knowledge built up over centuries and, in its place, to have promoted the recognition of a single creator god, the Aten, visible as the disc or the orb of the sun.1 By what agitation of mind Akhenaten came to step outside the perspective of his time he nowhere makes explicit, although we can recognize the likelihood of a sudden acceptance of an idea, spontaneously generated or picked up from others, which he could not resist. Yet although he appears at first to be an uncompromising figure, the closer one looks the more one can see that his foray into absolutism in ideas was compromised by a level of inconsistency which seems greater by comparison with equivalent figures from later periods of history.

Egyptian thinking on the hidden aspects of the world offered a path of understanding, or rather a network of paths, sometimes branching, sometimes running in parallel and constantly tempting the imaginative thinker towards new cross-linkages. It was an open system of speculation. It allowed people to make their own connections. In a time before authoritarianism in knowledge had appeared (when false knowledge could be identified and condemned, and holding it bring persecution and death), it was open to change. The main, perhaps only, instrument of change lay in the work of serious-minded men who read and copied old texts, sometimes adding explanatory glosses, and who from time to time felt stimulated to compose fresh material. Their ideas arose not through ecstatic visions but, so it seems, within a normal working, scholarly atmosphere. They drew upon a large store of traditional images concerning the world of the gods. When new variants spontaneously emerged in their minds they accepted them as knowledge to be preserved and respected, and to be incorporated into the stock of themes by which their knowledge was ordered. The result was a body of ‘books’, written on rolls of papyrus, which explored the otherwise hidden workings of the cosmos. One of them, the ‘Coming forth by Day’, we know more commonly as the Book of the Dead. The contents of these books, which are partly pictorial, provided the source material for areas of painted decoration inside the tombs of the Valley of the Kings (Figure 2.16, Above, p. 92, is an example). One aim was to allow the king, in an afterlife, to participate in the triumphant voyage of the sun god through the dangerous regions of the Otherworld. In their day they stood at the peak of serious knowledge. Now, more that 3,000 years later, they well justify the term ‘weird knowledge’ which I used in the Introduction (p. 5), not least because the details defy rational explanation, although explanations based on intuition and the imagination of the modern commentator are not uncommon. Those who composed them saw the potential for further development; we cannot follow them because the ‘rules’ are lost.2

The names of those responsible for maintaining and adding to this stock of knowledge are not easy to identify. This was the proper work of men attached to temples. Educated Egyptians were, on the whole, more impressed with people who offered sensible advice on conduct and morals, or who were particularly noted for practical achievements. The way to fame and to becoming a household name generations later was to write an ‘instruction’, which had little to say on the world of the gods but provided a message that people generally could understand, or at least find arresting. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians still lived in so secure and confident a world of the mind that speculation on the hidden forces that kept the universe running was left to scholars following a path of free-thinking which always produced acceptable answers because of their innate respect for their own traditions. Respectful evolution was the process by which change occurred. Something might be new, but it was just what the ancestors would have approved of.

The fruits of their labours probably went over most people’s heads, although, in the course of their lives, many Egyptians (at least from the New Kingdom onwards) would have acquired a copy of at least one text that was a guide to the hidden dimension, the Book of the Dead. It is a text without narrative form, though with illustrations. Through a series of unconnected sections – ‘utterances’ – it provided the reader with statements of knowledge, the essence of which was contained in names: of animate beings (gods) and of objects which accompanied them (e.g. the parts of their boats). Knowing the names gave the reader power, and so the text was a means of personal empowerment over a realm which, although it could be accessed only through the imagination, underpinned the world of visual reality and daily experience.

The Book of the Dead did not preach. The centre of authority was not an external voice but the reader’s own, with his authority coming from the act of reading. The text embraced personal morality, but it was presented from the viewpoint of the reader who clears the way for a positive outcome of judgement after death by making his denials of bad conduct a statement of knowledge in itself. The emotional content seems to have been on a par with that of a modern textbook, although the nature of its knowledge was very different. The Book of the Dead was available for purchase or could be commissioned, the price reflecting the care that was bestowed on preparing it. It is hard to think that owners would not have read it and so become acquainted with what, to the Egyptians, was knowledge that was essential to a full existence, now and for eternity.

The Book of the Dead illustrates a fascination with names, of beings and of things. The same is true for a composition which appears on the walls of some of the tombs in the Valley of the Kings. Known as the Litany of Ra it invokes the sun god Ra under his 75 names, which are those of other gods.3 Thus he is the ‘body’ (the ultimate reality) of Atum, Shu, Tefnut, Geb and Nut – the deities who are the main elements of nature. In this developed form of word-game, involving the handling of the names of gods as units of knowledge, a balance and harmony of thought were sought in which the potential incompatibility of the historical multiplicity of divinities on the one hand, and the perceived unity of divine power on the other, was avoided. The idea of many gods was held within a mental shell of ultimate unity, whose essence was the power of the sun. Whatever it was that Akhenaten stood for was rapidly rejected after his death and he seems to have been widely regarded as a villain. But rejection did not extend to the Aten. A text in the Ramesseum, Rameses II’s mortuary temple at western Thebes (Figure 6.6, p. 259) and carved about a century after Akhenaten’s death, records that offerings are to be made to the sun god, Ra-Horus-of-the-Horizon (Ra-Horakhty).4 But here Ra-Horakhty is not a single ‘god’. He has component parts, to a total of 38, each of which is entitled to subdivisions of the offerings. These parts are a mixture of tangible things, such as the ‘eastern desert’ and ‘the western desert’, and elements identified through abstract thinking, such as the creator god Atum and ‘Hathor at the prow of the barque of Ra’. A sequence of six names amongst the group gives us: ‘Ra – his disc (Aten) – his body – his hand – the twin horizons – Maat in the barque of Ra’. Here we see the Aten’s nature in conventional thinking, one element amongst several of the sun god. Of such is the universe composed: not of atoms (as the Epicurians later came to suppose) but of elements (mostly imagined), each with a name, to whom (or to which) deference in the form of offerings is due. If we draw a distinction between philosophy/science on the one hand and religion on the other, we arbitrarily separate a continuous process of human striving towards understanding which has, at different times and amongst different cultures, identified any number of variations of what the constituent parts of the universe are, sometimes gods, sometimes not. In Akhenaten we have a rare example from pre-classical antiquity of a named individual creating an interpretation of his own.

Of the ‘gods’ of the Ramesseum list, only the sun (the Aten) and a few parts of the landscape (the horizon and the deserts) belong to the ‘real’, external world. Akhenaten promoted the Aten, so we must suppose, because it was the only demonstrable manifestation of transcendental power. Its image was a disk (sometimes carved in such deep relief as to suggest a sphere) from which many rays descended, each one ending in a hand (Figure 8.1). This aspect symbolized the animating power that descended in the form of sunlight. Yet he could not wholly discard the mental habit of buttressing a single name with alternatives. Like a king, the Aten was given a name written in a pair of cartouches, the wording of which was changed part of the way through his reign (of 17 years). The first version translates as: ‘The living-one, Ra-Horus of the Horizon (Ra-Horakhty), who rejoices on the horizon, in his name of “Shu who is the Aten”’. Shu was the name given to the element of the sunlit atmosphere. The revised version translates (with slight uncertainty) as: ‘The living-one, Ra, ruler of the two horizons, who rejoices on the horizon, in his name of sunlight that comes from the Aten’ (or possibly ‘Ra the father who has come as the Aten’). The repeated emphasis on the word ‘horizon’ is notable, the two horizons (east and west) being amongst the elements of which the sun god was composed. The change in writing the word ‘sunlight’ involved dropping the proper name Shu. Both versions of the cartouches seem to give pre-eminence to Ra, the Aten being his visible form.



Figure 8.1Two perceptions of the Aten: as a physical manifestation of life-giving power, revealed at sunrise; and as an abstract upholder of order and righteousness, the ‘prince of truth’. In the sunrise picture the Aten rises above the desert horizon, its rays penetrating the ‘House of the Aten’ as attendants prepare food offerings on offering-tables. On the open land, animals (who run between large flowers) and birds (ostriches) greet the sun. The sunrise picture is after Martin, Royal Tomb II, Pls 34, 35; the hieroglyphic text is in the entrance of the tomb of Ay (no. 25 at Amarna).



Akhenaten saw the Aten as the universal creator of all life, and celebrated this in hymns which have survived amongst the carvings in the rock tombs of some of his courtiers at Amarna.5 They offer a panorama of the world, its forms of life, its different peoples and the ways that they were sustained by waters which came from beneath the earth. Everything was made to live and kept in daily motion by the Aten (who also had the responsibility for maintaining order (maat)). The sentiments were not new. A well-known hymn on a papyrus in the Egyptian Musuem, Cairo, and dated to before Akhenaten’s reign, addresses the Theban god Amun in similar terms of universal power and solar imagery.6 Where Akhenaten’s hymn differs is in the absence of references both to Amun and to other gods which, in the older hymns, were seen as complementary aspects of Amun. In the Aten Akhenaten found a simple, unintellectual answer: the source of life was nothing but what he could see for himself, the disk of the sun. Mystery – the promise that there was always more to be discovered by delving into one’s imagination – had no place in his thinking and had no place in the new temples. The sun’s disk, devoid of human features apart from its many arms and hands, became the only divine image in Akhenaten’s new temples and in the decoration within his own tomb at Amarna. This latter, in particular, shows the extent of his dismissal of current knowledge. Here we can make a direct comparison with what his predecessors and successors accepted. In the case of his father, Amenhetep III, his large tomb in the Valley of the Kings (no. 22) confined most of its decoration to the burial chamber (as did Akhenaten’s). Its walls were covered with painted scenes and texts from the ‘Book of What Is in the Otherworld’ (Figure 2.16, Above, p. 92, illustrates a portion of this composition, in the tomb of Tuthmosis III).7 Akhenaten’s burial chamber bore scenes only of himself and his family offering to the Aten and, in one place, mourning the death of a woman of the royal family, probably his mother, Queen Tiy.8 The elaborate depictions of an imaginary universe populated by gods had no place. Knowledge was to be found only in what was directly comprehensible to the external senses. The great cosmic balancing act between chaos and order, with its nightly adventures surrounding the sun boat, which had transfixed Egyptian minds for centuries, now no longer mattered. The animated forces – good and bad – which acted as parts of a semi-mechanical universe were not needed. It was enough to be in awe of one omnipotent god.

Moral teaching was long established in Egypt, and tended to be separate from the world of the gods, where the prime interest was in how the universe functioned. There was, however, a link. This was maat, which can be translated ‘truth’, ‘justice’ or even ‘righteousness’ when applied to human conduct. It also embraced the stability and harmony of the universe. In a characteristic transformation of an abstract into something tangible the Egyptians had made Maat into a goddess, daughter of the sun god Ra. Maat, however, was a concept to be held in mind as a guide to behaviour, for commoners and kings alike. Maat did not intervene in lives although it acted as the standard against which one’s life would be judged after death in the presence of Osiris. The Aten took over the proprietorship of Maat, becoming ‘the prince of truth’ (although, in a nice example of inconsistency, her name could still be written in the old way, as a goddess, Figure 8.1, p. 323). The epithet ‘who lives on maat’, which once was a prerogative of the gods, was used by Akhenaten regularly to describe himself. ‘Who lives on truth’ is one of the set phrases of Akhenaten’s inscriptions, the words meaning that ‘truth’ was a substance which he consumed.9 From the way that some of Akhenaten’s officials, in their tomb inscriptions, praise the king for teaching them to distinguish maat from wrong-doing we might conclude that part of his vision was a moral cleansing of society and that he was the author of an ‘instruction’.10 Yet, as far as we can tell, Osiris and judgement of the dead had no place in the new order. Obedient listening to the king’s words and taking his exhortations to heart seem to have been enough. We have no sources, however, to reveal in what detail, or with what examples, Akhenaten expounded his teaching.

The implied destiny of the individual after death – of the royal family and of commoners alike – was the survival of an essential part of oneself but no longer facing imaginary dangers. This emerges from absences rather than from statements, however. Although Osiris is not to be found in funerary contexts of the period, he seems not to have faced iconoclastic attack. Even in his early Eighteenth Dynasty temple at Abydos the few images of Osiris to have been discovered seem not to have been damaged.11

In our own modern perceptions of the world, ancient Egyptian speculative thought has no place. It represents a colourful (weird if we are honest) example of how the pre-scientific mind sought knowledge that reached beyond common experience. Akhenaten can appear to us as a remarkable and somewhat tragic figure because he seems to have perceived the irrelevance of much of the thought of his day. By denying it he gave his contemporaries what was almost a blank sheet, a tabula rasa. But neither he nor anyone else who has left a record seems to have had a spread of knowledge of a different kind to put in its place, knowledge which satisfied the universal desire for a path of greater understanding which had depth and complexity and one which also fastened on the observable world of nature. Akhenaten seems to have been satisfied with the act of deletion and with the thought of a god alone keeping all in order. But the urge to find complexity cannot be denied of others. The idea that the material world, without its gods and demons, could be the platform for logical reflection on interrelated processes, leading to a picture of a more mechanical universe (as would come, in time, with Greek philosophy and, beyond that, the knowledge that we have now) did not arise. Instead, after Akhenaten the need for complexity returned but it was of the old kind, and continued to flourish and to develop new forms into the period of the Ptolemies. Then, through the Library at Alexandria, philosophical complexity of a whole new kind became available.

Because of the later history of intolerance, people are inclined to see Akhenaten as not only ignoring accumulated knowledge of the world of the gods but actively attempting to destroy its institutional foundations by attacking their temples. This is visible in the defacement of the name and images of the god Amun or Amun-Ra, whose form was human. But most of the old temples were largely left alone and may have continued to function. We cannot even be sure of what happened to the main temples of Amun at Karnak and Luxor and to their personnel (although redeployment to Aten temples would have been a straightforward matter). Continuing study of Karnak has located a likely site for the first of Akhenaten’s new constructions, the ‘Mansion of the Benben’, which featured Nefertiti extensively. It was a colonnaded courtyard added to the then front of Karnak temple (the Third Pylon recently completed by his father, Amenhetep III). It would have enhanced the monumental portal to the three existing pairs of standing granite obelisks. This suggests that, once the images and name of Amun had been removed, Karnak temple remained usable as a monumental setting for ceremonies.12 In our world consistency might well demand that existing temples, especially Karnak, be closed. But Egyptians of this time acquiesced in inconsistency of thought to a greater extent than we are generally comfortable with.

When Akhenaten’s family line eventually failed (probably a little less than 20 years after his death), kingship passed to men with military backgrounds, at first the general Horemheb and then the head of a family from the north-eastern delta, Rameses, who began the line of kings that we know as the Nineteenth Dynasty. They resumed the traditional patronage of temple cults, including that of Amun of Thebes, and, by extension, acceptance of the body of knowledge which defined the hidden aspects of existence (visible, for example, in the decoration of the mortuary temple of Rameses II at western Thebes, the Ramesseum, as in the example cited above, p. 321). No later stories or traditions concerning Akhenaten survive, although a later reference to him as ‘the enemy of [i.e. from] Akhetaten’ (the name of his city) and a characterization of his reign as ‘the rebellion’ suggest that they circulated.13 At the official level, after his death the uncomfortable simplicity of his ideas together with his eccentric style of rule and portrayal of kingship were rejected, the statues of himself and family members were smashed and his stone monuments were demolished. He became a non-person, although the Aten itself escaped opprobrium and was absorbed back into mainstream thinking as an aspect of Ra. That we know about Akhenaten at all arises from the sheer quantity of the sculpture of his reign which later generations reused in foundations for other buildings, and from his creation of a complete city on a desert site (Amarna) which lay abandoned down to modern times. Because Akhenaten had been a prolific builder his existence could not be obliterated. But this points to a question which we can never hope to answer: did Akhenaten represent a small and usually undemonstrative, but nevertheless enduring, tradition of scepticism, even of intellectual dissent? Were there always those who found, say, the Book of the Dead an unconvincing exposition? Did Akhenaten’s uniqueness lie simply in being king and thus able to bring an alternative vision into the public domain?

The lack of background sources cripples the historian. It has proved impossible to write a history of Akhenaten’s reign which does not embrace an element of historical fiction. It is as if one has to decide which actor would best play the part: an effete, limp-wristed dreamer, or a fearsome, despotic madman. If the idealism points to the former, his approach to his own position and the simple fact that he achieved what he did takes one to the opposite pole. For Akhenaten’s escape from the past had its limits. It was not his intention to diminish the power of Pharaoh. Between the simple vision of a life-giving sun on the one hand, and humanity and nature on the other, stood the king and his family as prime intermediaries. Here, too, came innovation. Akhenaten showed himself ruling at the head of a group of three. The next in order of precedence was his principal queen, Nefertiti (her name also written in a cartouche). The third was their eldest daughter, Meritaten, who in some of the royal buildings is the only person named (though without use of a cartouche) other than her father, and seems to have had the role of administering the household. Together with other daughters (to a maximum of six) they were portrayed in a variety of styles, ranging from the relatively conventional to one intended to subvert the Egyptians’ conceptions of good form (Figure 8.2).



Figure 8.2An official picture of the royal family relaxing at home. The picture was itself, however, an object of private veneration. It came probably from a chapel in the grounds of a private house. Limestone, height 32 cm. Akhenaten sits on the left, holding the eldest daughter Meritaten (who, married to Smenkhkara, became queen after her father’s death). Nefertiti sits opposite, with the second daughter Meketaten (soon to die) on her lap, and cradling the third daughter Ankhsenpa-aten (later the wife of Tutankhamun) in her arms. Berlin Museum 14145.



The remains of temples which he built at Karnak very early in his reign show that the most extreme departures from convention were developed at this time. For Akhenaten they amount to a list of distortions: long, forward-leaning neck, pendulous jaw, narrowed eyes, swollen belly and hips. The king always wears a crown, but when the characteristics are transferred to female members of his family they also include a rear elongation of the skull. This strange physique is most impressively seen in colossal statues where the viewer stands below, easily overwhelmed by the sheer weirdness of the overall effect (Photograph 8.1). It is less successfully translated into two-dimensional carvings on flat surfaces.



Photograph 8.1Sandstone statue of Akhenaten from his early building programme at Karnak. He wears the standard headdress of kings and above this a tall set of four plumes (mostly broken away) which, when seen from the side, resolve themselves into a single stylized feather. The statue is now in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, with the catalogue number JE 49528. Height 1.85 m.



Many people have seen in the distortions to his body a faithful attempt to portray the effects of a serious disease from which the king suffered. A more plausible alternative, however, is that we are seeing a bold attempt to define kingship as a force possessed of characteristics that place it outside the normal plane of human experience. There was little tradition in Egypt of using sculpture to convey an intellectual sensation more complex than that the life-force that animated, in varying degrees, gods, kings and ordinary humans was materialized in the form of the ideal, youthful, physically taught human body. What normally distinguished the statue of a god from that of a king or of a high official was the name written somewhere on the statue, and items of dress and insignia. They were to be experienced, however, in the same straightforward and unprovocative way. Akhenaten’s self-images were experimental and surreal, made against an unsuitable cultural background. And it is a central point in assessing his intentions that this attempt to portray the mystery of superior force through surreal art rather than through word-game was confined to himself and his family. The shape of the Aten held no mystery. The divine force that passes understanding was revealed to mankind primarily through the Aten’s earthly agents: the king and his queen. Hence the standard cartouche group: a large pair for the Aten, a smaller pair for Akhenaten and one for Nefertiti, the cartouche design itself defining beings who possessed the special authority of rulership. As we will see, however, the Aten was not shut off from the concerns and approaches of ordinary people.

The colossal statues of the king stood making their statement through their form. In some examples of two-dimensional art – palace paintings, wall reliefs and stelae – the royal family group was portrayed in scenes of relaxed informality, adopting postures of languor but also of mutual affection. Highly placed officials set up such images in their houses (Figure 8.2, p. 326). It is part of the puzzle of his reign to ask, how did Akhenaten and at least the senior figures on whom he depended regard each other? He expected deference in the age-old manner, yet at the same time promoted images which, at least to us, subverted it. According to the testimony of their prayers in their tombs his courtiers and officials loved and honoured him, and felt gratitude for the favours by which he had promoted them to their positions. This need not be empty flattery. History provides many examples of leaders with the power to attract slavish devotion. A simple generalization might not be appropriate.

Akhenaten’s first major initiative in establishing the new vision of the state was carried out at Karnak, at the centre of the cult of Amun. This took the form of several named constructions (one of them the ‘Mansion of the Benben’, mentioned earlier, p. 324) decorated with statues and wall scenes in the startling new style, with the whole operation being brought to a climax by a royal Sed-festival years before its traditional time. Thousands of small (52 cm long = 1 cubit) stone building blocks (commonly called talatat blocks) have been recovered from these early constructions, as well as pieces of colossal statues of the king. These are mostly in the most extreme artistic style of his reign, and, as already noted, show that it was developed at the beginning. The creation of Akhetaten was thus the further development of a scheme to which much thought and many resources had already been devoted.





The foundation: Akhetaten, ‘Horizon of the Aten’


In the fifth year of his reign Akhenaten moved to establish a perfect home for the Aten, where it could be worshipped on clean ground uncontaminated by previous divine or human ownership. He gave it the name Akhetaten, ‘The Horizon of the Aten’. Its location was roughly halfway between Memphis and Thebes: initially an unoccupied stretch of desert on the east side of the Nile, which was expanded a year later to include a broad tract of farmland, with its villages, across the river on the west side (Figure 8.3). Its essential human component, the king and his family, would worship in temples and occupy palaces set on the riverine edge of the desert, and be buried in tombs almost lost within steep-sided desert valleys even further to the east (beyond the cliff edge which defined the local horizon). Around the king and his family would gather officials and a supporting population that would eventually form a whole city. Modern terminology has given to the remains on the east side of the river, which include the city, the name Amarna (an abbreviation of Tell el-Amarna; a hybrid name invented by early European visitors).



Figure 8.3Map of the Nile valley at Amarna showing the extent of Akhetaten, as defined by the Boundary Stelae (each of which is identified by a capital letter). The tomb of Petosiris near stela A, although of a much later period, is marked as being a well-known local landmark.



Akhenaten recorded his intentions on two series of tablets (the Boundary Stelae) carved at intervals in cliffs on both sides of the Nile, the first set (only on the east side) dated to the king’s fifth year, the second set (on both east and west sides) to his sixth (Figure 8.4).14 The latter contain an oath of the king:

My oath of truth, which it is my desire to pronounce, and of which I will not say: ‘It is false’, for ever and ever: Akhetaten extends from the southern tablet as far as the northern tablet, measured between tablet and tablet in the eastern mountain, likewise from the south-west tablet to the north-west tablet in the western mountain of Akhetaten. The area within these four tablets is Akhetaten itself; it belongs to Aten my father: mountains, deserts, meadows, islands, high ground and low ground, water, villages, men, animals and all things which the Aten my father shall bring into existence eternally and forever. I will not neglect this oath which I have made to the Aten my father eternally and forever.15





Figure 8.4Akhenaten’s new city, Akhetaten, ‘Horizon of the Aten.’ Above. Reconstruction of the Eighteenth Dynasty landscape showing the extent of cultivated land on the west side of the river which lay between the Boundary Stelae. Below. Reconstruction of the original appearance of one of the Boundary Stelae, ‘N’. The stela, 3.9 m high, is flanked by statues. Each set depicts Akhenaten and Nefertiti holding in front of them a narrow vertical tablet inscribed with the names of the Aten and of themselves. They are accompanied by their two eldest daughters, Meritaten and Meketaten. Much of the stela and parts of the statues still survive.



On two of the tablets a second similar oath was repeated after another two years. One passage in the tablets has sometimes created the impression that Akhenaten swore never himself to leave the confines of the city. This, however, is a misunderstanding. The relevant passages, in stating that he will not go beyond the boundaries, mean that he will not extend the limits of Akhetaten beyond them. Another of the passages contains the very clear provision for his death when outside the city: ‘If I die in any town of the north, south, west, or east, in the multitude of years, I will be brought and my burial be made in Akhetaten.’16 This could mean that Akhenaten (and Nefertiti and Meritaten about whom the same is said) followed the age-old practice of travelling through the country, from palace to palace, to exert royal authority.17 The statement is also the ultimate sign of Akhenaten’s sincerity and his break with the past: the promise to site tombs for himself and for his family in the eastern hills, a new Valley of the Kings, with its security dependent upon the permanence of the new city. His courtiers were expected to site their decorated rock tombs in the hillsides facing towards the city and the Nile.

Why choose this particular location? Although he does not phrase it in quite this way in the Boundary Stelae, the chosen place had to satisfy certain criteria. The general tenor of imagery at Amarna (developing a long-established theme) was that the moment of sunrise above a clearly defined desert horizon was the beginning of the daily cycle of life and was to be appreciated with awe (Figure 8.1, p. 323). An Upper Egyptian location, on the east side of the valley, was thus to be assumed, even though the ancient centre of the cult of the sun, at Heliopolis, was in the north and lacked the dramatic setting of nearby desert cliffs. (This did not prevent the name Akhetaten from being applied in the Amarna Period to a location at Memphis and possibly also to Heliopolis itself, showing that it was not a name unique for one place). That it was to be a place of first usage, where the Aten could be discovered on land which had known no previous claims to ownership, immediately limited the options. On making a journey between Memphis and Thebes Akhenaten would have found few satisfactory locations. He would have seen many desert amphitheatres on the east where the sun rose above a clear horizon line, but most of them were already places of human settlement and homes to local gods. The choice of Amarna was probably the result of a process of elimination, which left him with the feeling (expressed in the Boundary Stelae) that the Aten had led him there.

The nature of Amarna has gradually been revealed by excavations and surveys which began at the end of the nineteenth century, continued with breaks until 1936 and resumed in 1977. The city itself covered only a very small part of Akhetaten, as defined by the Boundary Stelae. Nevertheless, apart from the information it gives us about Akhenaten’s concepts, the city is a major source for the study of ancient urbanism and of the lives of its inhabitants. Few archaeological sites of this size exist in the pre-classical world where the ground plan is as clear or as well documented, where large samples of material culture have been excavated and where a significant sample of buried human remains from the people who lived in the city has been retrieved for study. Although the circumstances of its founding are unique, it forms an apt basis for considering certain aspects of ancient Egyptian society, and for illustrating the impact which kingship could have on it. Modern visitors might be struck by the absence of clearly visible monuments, however. Starting in the reign of Horemheb all architectural stonework, from entire temples to the doorframes of houses, was systematically removed for re-use elsewhere. Many of the blocks were taken across the river to El-Ashmunein (Hermopolis), where hundreds have been recovered and more can be seen incorporated in the standing masonry of later temples.18 By contrast, the greater part of the city, extending to portions of palaces, was built from sun-dried mud brick, and these buildings, once their door frames and columns had been removed, were left to decay by natural processes.

The Amarna Boundary Stelae do not actually mention a city. In the initial vision of the first set of stelae, the place Akhetaten was a tract of clean and empty land dedicated to the sun god. But it required human participation for it to function properly. In the first rank stood the royal family. The first set of stelae provides a list of constructions essential to the royal family’s presence:19 a ‘house’ and a ‘mansion’ of the Aten (the two main Aten temples that have survived); a ‘Shade of Ra’ for Nefertiti (her sun temple, the archaeological site of Kom el-Nana); a ‘House of Rejoicing’, which is here probably a poetic reference to the Great Palace (at this time it seems to have referred to a place where the king was and had been used, for example, for part or all of Malkata; see pp. 272, 273); and ‘apartments’ for Pharaoh and for the ‘Great King’s Wife’ (Nefertiti). There are also provisions for tombs, both of the royal family and of cult personnel who turn out to have been Akhenaten’s courtiers and senior officials. The king was both the leader of the daily adoration of the Aten and the centre of government for Egypt and for a substantial empire. There was an inescapable need for a court, for an administration, and for a population who would serve them and supply their wants. Akhetaten, presented as an idealistic vision, developed into a city as we understand the term, with large housing areas that also acted as centres of manufacture, served by an inland port (a length of the river bank) although, in Akhenaten’s eyes, these aspects did not merit specification in the announced blueprint.

It is doubtful whether Amarna was laid out in anything other than a simple, pragmatic way without reference to an overarching design concept.20 What appeared on the ground was a confluence of planning and self-organization, and a retreat from the urge to create a layout in accordance with a geometric scheme which peaked in the Middle Kingdom. The boundary to Akhetaten on this side of the river was the curving line of cliffs in which the stelae were carved. Nothing was built along it, nor was a perimeter wall constructed on the desert plain below nor, from the way the city developed, does it seem that an edge of any kind was marked. The lack of a city wall, with gates, suggests that Akhenaten carried through his plan in the confidence that his rule was not going to be opposed. The main act of foundation seems to have been a long, straight line which came to serve as a thoroughfare and which positioned the main royal buildings (Figure 8.5). Its northern half now runs approximately parallel to the course of the river, and ancient depictions of the Amarna landscape suggest that the river has not changed its course significantly.21 The northern end of the line was fixed where the desert begins to rise steeply as the cliffs approach the river. This choice necessitated angling the line towards the river. The southernmost building to follow this line is the enclosure at Kom el-Nana (the sun temple of Nefertiti), 6.5 km from the northern starting-point. The southern part of the line (south of the Small Aten Temple), however, was quickly lost beneath the largest of the housing zones, to which the street plan paid no heed.22 The map suggests that this southern stretch of the line became inconveniently distant from the river, the main housing area following the curve of the river bank more closely. North of the Small Aten Temple the line seems to have been maintained as a continuous road linking the royal buildings and providing a route on which Akhenaten and his family, accompanied by a bodyguard, could process in their chariots (Figure 8.6). In modern times it has been called ‘Royal Road’, with a length of c. 4 km (much of it now lost beneath modern fields).



Figure 8.5Diagram of the principal structural element at Amarna, the royal processional route, ‘Royal Road’ (a modern name). On the left is a reconstruction of the plan of the stone portion of the Great Palace based on surviving foundations. Numbered elements in the Central City: (1) King’s House; (2) ‘Bureau of Correspondence of Pharaoh’ (records office); (3) bakery, part of the large central provisioning depot; (4) administrative base for Panehsy, ‘first servant of the Aten’; (5) stables and barracks for police; (6) scribal village; (7) bridge linking the Great Palace with the King’s House; (8) private apartments for the king, with garden and painted pavements (Figure 6.14, p. 281); (9) hall of 544 brick columns from the time of Smenkhkara. Despite our detailed knowledge of the foundations of the Great Palace, some of the key identifications remain conjectures, including those of the Window of Appearance and the throne room.





Figure 8.6The royal chariot drive. Upper register. Akhenaten and Nefertiti in a chariot leave the main Aten temple (the ‘House of the Aten’, represented as a pylon entrance with flagpoles). They head towards a fortified building set between what look like fences, probably the North Riverside Palace (Figure 8.5, p. 332), flanked by a running bodyguard headed by the ‘Chief of Police of Akhetaten, Mahu.’ Lower register. The royal couple drive along a road marked by what looks like the same fence interrupted by small buildings; a row of doorways apparently reached by paths appears above. Mahu and his bodyguard are prominent. From the tomb of Mahu (no. 9), after Davies, Rock Tombs IV, Pls XX–XXII. The landscape of the scene has been the subject of different interpretations. Are the small buildings that the royal family pass located in the city or in the eastern desert, where they have been interpreted as the rock tombs or even the Boundary Stelae? See the discussion in Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers I, 416–21.



It must have been self-evident that a large population would also move to Amarna, estimated (on inevitably insecure grounds) to have been in the low tens of thousands (20,000 is a convenient figure to keep in mind; see below, p. 361). Mostly they lived in two large housing areas (the North Suburb and Main City, both of which are modern terms), lying north and south respectively of the main concentration of royal buildings, the Central City. A third area of housing (the North City) lay separately at the northern end of Royal Road. The Middle Kingdom had seen the growth of a tradition in Egypt of simple grid planning, applied to the streets and houses of settlements up to the scale of full-size towns. But in the New Kingdom the idea of total planning lost its attraction. In Amarna, outside the corridor of royal buildings, planningpetered out altogether. Instead of a grand unitary design we find a few broad but far from straight streets running more or less parallel to the Nile to join the suburbs to the centre, while narrower ‘streets’ (sometimes no more than irregular access spaces) cross at right angles.

The key concept to hold in mind is that of self-organization, which was mentioned in Chapter 5 as being the counterpoint to the geometric planning of settlements (Figure 8.7, p. 336).23 When groups of people interact without strong constraints imposed from outside, they tend to find a level of co-operation which recognizes (though never perfectly) personal and small-group differences. They negotiate amongst themselves, and a degree of order stabilizes itself. The result, in the modern world, is to be seen in informal settlements (squatter townships, favelas), usually outside the scope of government planning and control. At Amarna we see the same process at work but carried out with the participation of the higher reaches ofsociety, the official class. We have to imagine a large number of the future inhabitants of Amarna – whole families of poorer people, together with representatives of the richer ones – arriving over a short period of time at a largely empty and unmarked stretch of desert beside the river and hastening to lay claim to a patch of ground which they would soon cover with the dwellings they could afford. There were clearly some constraints and preferences. Most people would have belonged, by various ties, to the household of a senior official and would naturally locate their dwelling in close proximity, thus creating fuzzily defined ‘villages’. Their co-operation, perhaps aided by the provision of a builder and building materials, manifests itself in shared walls and spaces.24 The senior officials themselves spaced their plots of land in part to give themselves ‘territory’, and in part to reflect ties of common interest with others of a similar rank, which we cannot reconstruct. Their houses are isolated or clustered to varying degrees. Proximity to the Central City or to Royal Road seems to have held little if any attraction. Thus one of the king’s most senior officials, the vizier Nakht, lived almost as far away from the king as he could.25 The house of the ‘first servant of the Aten’ Panehsy (one of the favoured few with a large tomb in the northern group and, in his case, an official residence beside the Great Aten Temple) lay in the Main City, well back from Royal Road;26 another senior figure in the Aten cult, Pawah, lived in a large house in the middle of the Main City.27 As these various processes unfolded so gaps, largely accidental at first, became established paths of access. The most frequently used were those which took officials from their houses to their offices in the centre, travelling to and fro by chariot, which was an aspect of life recorded in some of the tomb scenes. Yet even these primary routes, running parallel to the river, were not laid out with straight sides and even widths.28



Figure 8.7Self-organization at work. At the top is a near-perfect example of self-organization where minimum constraints apply (temporary camps at a seaside beach, where open rectangles are beach towels, black circles are Caption for Figure 8.7 (continued) umbrellas and the one black rectangle is a trailer). The second register has three sections illustrative of a progressive dynamic. (1) A conversion of the top register to an urban pattern where most houses are small but a few are larger and within walled courtyards: these are the umbrellas and trailer of the top register. A selection of the almost unlimited number of potential pathways amongst the beach camps has been marked. (2) and (3) introduce factors which disturb the normal dynamic of self-organization. These are (2) the need for access to the city centre and (3) the aggregation of smaller houses towards the houses of local patrons, and gradual infill of open spaces as time passes. At the bottom is a section of the Main City at Amarna, after Kemp and Garfi, Survey, Sheet 6 (part). The beach plan of the top register is based on an aerial photograph by Gray Malin, www.designboom.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/aerial-beach-gray-malin-designboom02.jpg.



The result is not the city we might have expected, with a predetermined geometrical form. Instead it beautifully exemplifies self-organized order. Each part, at ground level, was unique, instantly familiar to its occupants, and acceptable. It was acceptable because it worked: it matched its shape to the complex personal interrelationships of its inhabitants.





The arena of royal display


The point was made in Chapter 6 (p. 275) that the sources for Akhenaten’s kingship create, quite unintentionally, a caricature of the public role of the charismatic leader as it has survived from the Bronze Age to this day. The elements can be summarized thus:

1.the state procession;

2.armed escorts;

3.postures of special deference for those allowed to approach;

4.the ‘Appearance’, alone or with family, at a public or semi-public balcony;

5.the open-air review of troops and representatives of client societies;

6.the leading of public or semi-public acts of worship of a symbol or symbols of the state’s power;

7.pictures of the leader, alone or with family, in people’s own homes (Figure 8.2, p. 326).





A major palace stood at either end of Royal Road (Figure 8.5, p. 332). Most of the North Riverside Palace in the north (being part of the North City) has been lost to cultivation and through earlier erosion of the river bank.29 What survives is a substantial length of double wall, with external towers or buttresses, which, more than is the case for other buildings at Amarna, appears to have been designed to provide a high level of security. Between the wall and the palace proper (of which only a tiny corner has been found) were storerooms and other buildings which might have been barracks. Across the road lay a group of houses, of which some were the largest in the whole city and presumably for some of the courtiers closest to the king (none of the owners having been identified by inscriptions). The North City was closed at the north by a large administrative building terraced up into the lower slopes of the cliff, and containing a huge warehouse block for commodities, with part of it perhaps having been a granary. This might imply that the North City and the king’s private residence were self-sufficient in food, with a supply independent from the sources which sustained the rest of the city. This whole part of the site, because of the overshadowing cliff, has a very different atmosphere from the rest of the city, and was evidently as attractive a place to Akhenaten as it remains to visitors today, and was more easily sealed off from the rest of the city.

At the southern end the Great Palace occupied the western side of the Central City, probably as far as the waterfront (Figure 8.5, p. 332). A picture in one of the rock tombs (no. 14, of May) shows a colonnade above a stretch of river bank at which boats are moored, including what appear to be two state barges.30 Much of the Great Palace had been built from stone. The heart of the building was an immense courtyard (c. 160 m square) surrounded by colossal granite and quartzite statues of Akhenaten and his family. Beyond it, to the south, lay a complex of halls and smaller courts and monuments, probably terminating at the back with a throne room. The whole architectural ensemble provided the king with a sumptuous and solemn setting in which formal receptions and ceremonies could be held and which advertised his new style of reign. From the point of view of his courtiers and officials, the most important ceremony was that of personal reward by the royal family at a public gathering in front of a Window of Appearance.31 Pictures of personal attendance at the Window of Appearance are common in the tombs at Amarna (Figure 8.8; cf. Figure 6.10, pp. 271, 286). The tomb owner receives gifts of gold and other precious things, or hears the formal announcement of a promotion to higher office. We know from the Horemheb Edict (p. 270), however, that the reward ceremony could also be used for the regular distribution of rations, in this case to soldiers providing a household guard. The Window of Appearance was a repeated ceremonial reminder of the dependence of the state’s officials on the king. Its exact location at Amarna has long been a matter of debate. I have placed it at the critical junction in the Great Palace between the partially roofed and more hidden southern section and the giant courtyard on its north where large crowds could gather. This seems to match the desire, long-established at shrines and temples, to create a moment of drama when an object of deference (a portable image or the person of the living king) made the transition from a screened-off location to visibility. This interpretation of the Great Palace finds a parallel in the temple of Luxor (which also faced downstream of the Nile), where a major object of deference was the king on his emergence at the climax of the Festival of Opet.



Figure 8.8Akhenaten at the Window of Appearance, rewarding one of his loyal officials, Parennefer. Note the ‘unification’ symbol with bound captives which appears below the window in section (a), cf. Figure 6.10, p. 271. In register 4 of section (b), at the left end, the official Parennefer receives gold necklaces bestowed by the king, whilst to the right servants and scribes record other gifts and pack them into a chest. Register 5 shows pottery amphorae and baskets of commodities being carried out, showing that the ceremony included the distribution of goods of a more mundane, ration-like kind as well as precious objects. The upper registers (1–3) depict other officials and courtiers (awaiting their turn?), and some of their waiting chariots. From the tomb of Parennefer (no. 7), after Davies, Rock Tombs VI, Pl. IV.



Alongside this formal stone-built part of the Great Palace, a set of halls, courts and a sunken garden, with mud-brick walls, offered a more secluded place for the royal family to retire to, the walls and floors covered with brightly painted scenes (see Figure 6.14, p. 281 Right, for the painted pavements).32 Further to the south and beyond the back of the Great Palace a hall of 544 rectangular piers constructed of mud bricks was later added, much of it consisting of a single, uninterrupted covered space. Many glazed tiles found in the debris may have been used to decorate its surfaces. A few loose bricks stamped with the name Smenkhkara (Akhenaten’s male successor) were also found in the ruins and perhaps point to its date. Acting like a huge tent with brick instead of wood supports, it could have provided additional space for assembly, perhaps for banquets at times of state funerals and coronations.33

Royal Road linked these two principal palaces, the Great Palace for the business of kingship, and the North Riverside Palace offering a safe base away from the main city. It also provided a route for a processional chariot drive by the royal family, often depicted in the private rock tombs (Figure 8.6, pp. 334–5). In Chapter 6 we saw how important to the city of Thebes were the processional festivals of its gods, and how they provided a round-the-year public spectacle and a symbolic claim to the external world by traversing long distances. For the most important of them the king arrived to add to the sense of occasion and, reciprocally, to enhance his own standing. The worship of the Aten stopped this. There were no sacred boat shrines to carry. The Aten’s disk made its own way across the sky, permanently in procession. Akhenaten had created another vacuum and tried to fill it with processions of himself as the focus of public adulation, replacing with military dash the stately, colourful and noisy bearing of the divine images of old. Here again we catch a foretaste of the world to come. King, queen, daughters, retainers in their chariots, the bodyguards running along in a stooping posture: we can recognize the basis of the scene re-enacted today in capital cities and on state occasions the world over. The presidential limousine, the royal landau, motorcycle outriders, presidential advisers and security guards, all are parts of a public performance acted out over the subsequent millennia as rulers and leaders have responded to the urge for public acclaim.

On its way south, the Royal Road passed an isolated building facing the river, the North Palace.34 When excavated in the 1920s it was found to be a self-contained royal residence, largely constructed from mud bricks. It included formal reception halls, a domestic suite with bedroom and bathroom, an open-air solar temple and gardens and courts, where the walls were painted with bright scenes from nature, and live animals and birds were kept. The many fragments of inscriptions recovered show that the person for whom the palace was finally intended was the eldest daughter, Meritaten, who seems to have acquired the responsibility for running the royal household. In its basic purpose – providing a quite separate palace for a major queen and her staff – it conforms to the type of harim-palace documented both from texts and from the site of Medinet el-Ghurab (pp. 277, 279). Meritaten was also provided with a private retreat, a walled enclosure at the far southern end of the city, which combined gardens with pieces of formal stone architecture, including a shrine, which was named Maru-Aten (see further below).

Akhenaten’s stated purpose in founding Akhetaten was to establish a place worthy of the Aten. Cliffs and desert almost achieved this in themselves. What was further required (in Akhenaten’s mind) was a place where he could demonstrate his commitment, by ceremonies which centred on a concept so fundamental in Egypt that Akhenaten seems to have taken it for granted: the presentation of offerings, primarily of food. Deference and praise by thoughts and words were not enough. Actions (involving much administration and movement of commodities) were essential. Conventional large temples built up huge stocks of foodstuffs and other goods which were together referred to as ‘offerings’. The temple buildings themselves, however, allowed for only token portions to be actually brought before the images of the gods. To judge from the design of his Aten temples, Akhenaten felt it necessary to bring out into the sunshine (where the Aten’s presence was to be seen and felt) a far larger portion. This was made possible by constructing hundreds of fairly small rectangular offering-tables from stone or mud brick on which the food (bread, joints of cattle meat and birds, accompanied by bouquets of flowers and bowls of incense) could be stacked, supplementing them with stands and wooden tables, some of them to support jars (probably of water, an important purificatory element in offering-ceremonies35).

Scenes and texts from Amarna show that the main place where all this would take place was the ‘House of the Aten’ (Figure 8.9). This can be identified on the ground with the spread of remains known today as the Great Aten Temple.36 It ran back from the east side of Royal Road from a point towards the northern end of the Great Palace. It was given a huge enclosure surrounded by a mud-brick wall, 260 m wide × 730 m long. Large parts of the interior seem to have been open space. By the time Amarna was abandoned, two large stone buildings – the Sanctuary and the Long Temple – had been erected on its east–west axis with a gap of some 340 m between them. The Sanctuary, towards the eastern end, seems to sum up the essential nature of the Aten cult (Figure 8.9). It was to be performed within a walled but roofless courtyard filled with many offering-tables, in this case numbering around 150. The courtyard was slightly elevated, allowing its sides to be built up into slopes. From each side, an L-shaped wall extended forwards to mark a bounded space, which embraced the main part of the building. The intention was perhaps to depict in a simplified, miniature form the place of sunrise at the encircling cliffs in the desert behind.



Figure 8.9Semi-public ceremonies in the ‘House of the Aten’ (the Great Aten Temple) at Amarna. Above. Akhenaten and Nefertiti (her figure partly lost) stand together on a platform within the temple making offerings to the Aten. They are accompanied by three daughters, each of whom holds out a metal rattle (sistrum), and by groups of obsequious onlookers (some of them, especially those to the right of the platform, presumably temple staff). Within the temple are numerous small offering-tables and offering-stands within separate small courts. Note the cattle slaughterhouse in the top-left corner, with its tethering-stones. Despite the amount of detail, the results of excavations (some of them shown in Figure 8.10) show that an important ‘public’ aspect of the life of the temple is omitted. From the tomb of the ‘first servant of the Aten’ Panehsy (no. 6), after Davies, Rock Tombs II, Pl. XVIII. Below. Reconstruction of the Sanctuary of the Great Aten Temple. The sloping external surround and projecting ‘wings’ at the front are perhaps an attempt at simplified modelling of the desert cliffs which encircled the place of sunrise at Akhetaten. The drawing appears in Kemp, City, 95, Fig. 3.17.



A second version of the Sanctuary was built to the south, inside its own enclosure. This was the ‘Mansion of the Aten’ (or Small Aten Temple in modern naming practice), with its towered enclosure subdivided by cross walls, each of them entered between large pylon towers.37 If one stands at the front of the temple pylons and looks directly along the temple axis to the distant cliffs (a view that would originally have been blocked by the high walls of the inner constructions), one will find that the temple axis points roughly towards the entrance to the wadi which leads to the Royal Tomb. On modern maps a prolongation of the axis more or less crosses the location of the tomb itself.38 One can argue from this that the temple was designed to provide for a permanent offering-cult for the royal family (Akhenaten, Nefertiti and Meritaten) who, according to the Boundary Stelae, were the intended occupants of the Royal Tomb. The presence in the second court of a small building which probably consisted of a robing-room and Window of Appearance adds some weight to this, for this feature was an essential element of the royal mortuary temples at Thebes.39 So, too, does the use of the term ‘Mansion’, which was commonly, though not exclusively, used for funerary temples and shrines in the New Kingdom. The primacy of its location could also have arisen if it were the place where the foundation ceremony for the establishment of Akhetaten and the Aten cult were celebrated (described in the second set of Boundary Stelae).

An apparent synonym for the ‘House of the Aten’ was ‘Mansion of the Benben’, in one place accompanied by a hieroglyphic determinative of a round-topped stela (Figure 3.14 (4), p. 142). As noted earlier (p. 141), from early times this was the shape of a sun symbol, the original possibly standing at Heliopolis, just outside modern Cairo. The origin of the shape and reason for its connection with the sun are not really known, but its retention by Akhenaten is one of many signs that in the form and presentation of his cult he relied heavily upon traditional ideas. A benben-stone was not, however, the focal point in the open courts where the Aten was honoured. This point was marked by two larger offering-tables (each with its own court) which, in being shown with open sides, were probably made of wood covered with gold leaf.40 The round-topped stela is shown in the reliefs occupying a separate location in front and to one side of the Sanctuary.41 To judge from many stone fragments found at the likely actual site, it bore an extensive list of offerings although the excavation of the site has brought to light no remains of offering-tables.42

At the front of the enclosure of the Great Aten Temple stood the Long Temple (of which the ancient name may have been ‘Gem-pa-Aten’, or ‘The Aten is found’). In the place of one main courtyard came a series of six, one behind the other, all filled with offering-tables, at this time reaching a likely total of at least 750. They extended from behind a broad entrance flanked by stone pylons fronted by a pair of deep porticos, each of eight colossal columns.

At first sight the correspondence between the plan of the temple recovered by excavation from marks left on a foundation bed of cement and the pictures in the tombs (Figure 8.9) seems fairly close. Examination of the remains through archaeological excavation changes that perspective, however. Two conclusions can be highlighted. The first is that the remains are not all of one period. This might seem surprising in view of the temple’s brief history. Nevertheless, in the case of the Long Temple the evidence points to substantial rebuilding and enlargement during Akhenaten’s reign, beginning after his twelfth year.43 We cannot thus be certain that the final version of the temple was finished before the Amarna Period ended. Moreover, because the foundations of the second temple obliterated all trace of the earlier stone building, we do not know whether it was similar in size and design or different.

The second is that the tomb pictures, despite their detail, are filtering out some of the activities for which provision was made on the ground that surrounded the stone building. The space (c. 50 × 15 m) between the formal front of the Long Temple and the gateway in the mud-brick enclosure wall was used for a purpose centred on low rectangular pedestals made of mud and mud bricks that measured c. 1 × 2 m (Figure 8.10).44 Each was surrounded by a shallow trough, in most cases subdivided by partitions to create more or fewer basins, with each construction coated with a thick layer of lime-gypsum. This was periodically renewed, sometimes in conjunction with modifications to the trough and its partitions. Each set of pedestals and troughs was made separately, roughly in line with others, but given individual treatment according to its own schedule. They were not made and maintained as a single system. It is likely that the basins were filled with water, drawn from small circular reservoirs (though the ultimate source of water has yet to be discovered), which also sometimes saturated and distorted the ground. At the same time, and spread across the surrounding ground in an asymmetrical layout, groups of offering-tables were constructed, either in white-plastered mud brick or, occasionally, in limestone blocks. They, too, came and went in response to decisions which did not necessarily affect all of them. In addition, a field of 920 mud-brick offering-tables was laid out in rows to the south, but was later buried by a layer of rubble which raisedthe level of the temple ground in the second period. These external facilities imply a form of management that gave attention to individual parts as and when they were required, implying in turn that it served individual needs, in effect, ‘customers’. One possibility is that the low whitened platforms were places where the dead were temporarily laid out for purification at the same time that offerings were placed on groups of the offering-tables. These structures would then be the practical expression of the desire to receive perpetual offerings in the temple, which we find in prayers in the tombs of Akhenaten’s officials. In whichever way we interpret this evidence, it tells us that the temple supported a life which is not hinted at in the formal pictures, although it would have turned the main temple to the Aten into a place of public benefit under the king’s patronage.



Figure 8.10Uncovering the untold story of activity at the Great Aten Temple. Contemporary pictures (of which Figure 8.9, Above, is an example) make the temple the exclusive preserve for the royal family. Excavation (still far from complete) reveals a more complex picture, with provision outside the stone temple for activities which probably served the needs of the people – especially those centred on the dead – and was subject to piecemeal modification.

Note that the temple shows two major phases of building and use, each represented by its own mud floor. Elements which are shaded in grey belong to the lower floor. The irregular outlines of the preserved areas of the upper floor represent the edges of an excavation carried out in 1932. Prior to the second phase of building (after Akhenaten’s year 12) constructions of wooden posts and screen walls were laid out on the mud floor.

Key to numbers in circles (1a) and (1b) Two possible locations for the large offering-platform (or altar) shown in Figure 8.9, Above. Location (1b) is implied by the foundation for a stone causeway or staircase lying to the west. Location (1a) limits the width of the platform to c. 2.5 m. (2) North–south row of rectangular mud pedestals surrounded by narrow basins, all surfaces thickly coated with gypsum plaster, laid out on the upper floor. (3) East–west row of similar basins laid out on the lower floor. (4) Pattern of post holes from a building of wooden uprights and screen walls, probably facing north, and provided with a mud-brick construction (probably a low platform) which had been decorated with foreign captives painted on gypsum plaster, a sign of royal presence. The mud plaster floor had been laid over a series of stone pedestals which must have supported upright stones from the very first temple layout. (5) Post holes from the edge of a building of posts and screens, alongside a row of buried pottery storage jars (taken out when the building was removed).



Early in its short history, the temple also saw a phase of construction in which wooden posts played a major role, the evidence in the form of alignments of post holes. Towards the front of the Long Temple, post holes define a building (of at least 16 × 7.5 m) subdivided into two sections (Figure 8.10 (4)). Fragments of painted gypsum floor plaster, recovered from deep within one of the post holes and depicting foreign captives, imply that this was a place where the king appeared, so that the building was, in effect, a small wooden palace. One side of another building of posts and screen walls has been found close to the north side of the later stone temple (Figure 8.10 (5)), built alongside a row of buried pottery jars. A third appearance of timber construction is at the site of the round-topped stela situated between the Long Temple and the Sanctuary, mentioned above. A stone-built supporting platform and access stairs had been preceded by a small mud-brick platform surrounded by large wooden posts. Pieces of incense had fallen into the holes. In the case of the wooden ‘palace’, we are not looking at something erected at the very beginning. It replaced an alignment of stone pedestals which had probably supported standing stones (stelae?). Given the prominent symbolic role of wood-and-matting forms in Egyptian architecture (Figure 3.21, p. 153), the possibility should be kept in mind that these buildings were appropriate to a particular celebration and were not simply makeshift constructions from the temple’s first days.

The city proper (at least as it has survived) ended by the modern village of El-Hagg Qandil, 6 km from the northern end of the city, but this was still only about halfway along the line connecting the headlands which define the site of Amarna. A number of isolated royal enclosures were built on the desert to the south and east.45 To the modern eye they appear inconveniently located in arid settings. One wonders if they represent a pattern of subsidiary private places for individual members of the royal family which, at Memphis especially, would have been set within the fields and trees of the nearby countryside. The one that we know best was called Maru-Aten and a part of it, at least, was called a ‘Shade of Ra’ (often translated as ‘Sunshade’ and meaning a sun temple).46 It consisted of two large, walled enclosures, in one of which the central feature was a shallow lake into which extended a stone causeway. Gardens had been laid out, within which were pavilions and a group of shrines, including one with platforms standing on an island surrounded by a shallow moat. A building with brick pillars, perhaps to support an open trellis roof, had contained a row of interlocking T-shaped basins intended to be filled with water, and was surrounded by a gypsum pavement decorated with painted panels showing plants, waterfowl and calves. A large number of wine jars was found stored in another building. The whole complex brings out a contrast in images. The essence of Akhetaten was a tract of pure desert, with the ‘House of the Aten’ on its edge. But much of the preferred imagery of art and texts in the Amarna Period invoked idyllic landscapes of greenery, water, birds and animals: the harshness of sun and desert set against the luxuriance of the papyrus marsh. Maru-Aten exemplified the contrast: an oasis of maintained fertility, set with shrines, walled off from the surrounding desert. It also exemplifies the wish for retreat, mentioned in the treatment of palaces in Chapter 6, and is symptomatic of the age in that a crucial part of it, the ‘Shade of Ra’ itself (and possibly the whole building), belonged to a leading royal lady. By the end of the Amarna Period the formal owner was the king’s eldest daughter, Meritaten. In the same area, 1.25 km distant, lay another enclosure of a broadly similar nature, its modern name Kom el-Nana, identified as the ‘Shade of Ra’ (thus sun temple) of Nefertiti (see p. 331).47 Its only partial excavation so far has uncovered a number of formal buildings, in mud brick and stone, as well as a bakery block, but so far nothing comparable to the pools and gardens of Maru-Aten.





Imagining the city at work


Akhenaten’s interests were directed towards intellectual and ideological goals. Although political consequences came in their wake (in the end military leaders took over), and the creation of Amarna may have disrupted the normal workings of administration, we are entitled to wonder whether he sought other changes, less obvious to us. We have many sources for the workings of society in the New Kingdom. At Amarna we possess a physical profile, a kind of giant theatre, of how they were played out on the ground during Akhenaten’s reign, and can try to interpret the evidence accordingly.

The Central City was largely defined by three major royal buildings: the Great Palace on the west, and the ‘House of the Aten’ (Great Aten Temple) and the ‘Mansion of the Aten’ (Small Aten Temple) at the northern and southern ends on the east side of Royal Road. Between the two temples and running behind the Small Aten Temple was a large tract of desert occupied by groups of brick buildings, which were laid out with some regularity. In several different ways they served the king’s administration and should be seen as parts of the palace (as broadly defined), although no architectural recognition was given to this essential unity of purpose.48 No surrounding wall bound them together. They appear to be divided into two groups. One lay adjacent to the southern side of the Great Aten Temple enclosure. Closest was a huge bakery. It consisted of long ranges of narrow parallel chambers (Figure 8.11). Each chamber was a single baking unit, containing one or more circular ovens of standard domestic design at the back. Brick bins lined the walls. The number of baking chambers amounted to more than a hundred. Details of what went on inside are illustrated on a block originally from one of the Amarna stone buildings (Figure 8.11). From one side of a courtyard two chambers open. The curvature across the top of each implies a vaulted roof. In each chamber, a man tends an oven. Behind the one on the left, flat round loaves are stacked on a table; behind the other, the table bears instead long cylindrical bread-moulds. This reflects the two basic Egyptian baking methods: flat loaves baked on round mud trays, and tall narrow loaves baked inside cylindrical pottery moulds. Fragments from tens of thousands of such moulds are not only heaped on the desert behind the Great Aten Temple bakery, they seem largely to bury the baking chambers as well.49



Figure 8.11The temple bakeries in the Central City, a rare example of large-scale factory production though arranged in the form of repeated cellular units. The scene below, from a block originally part of an Amarna building but found reused at El-Ashmunein (Hermopolis), is after Cooney, Amarna Reliefs, 73.



The form of these bakeries is very revealing of the Egyptian approach to organization. Here was a major challenge: how to bake bread in industrial quantities? A modern approach might be to rethink the whole organization and to redesign the ovens, giving them larger capacity, so that the ratio of loaves to manpower would be improved. This is the mentality of ‘productivity’ and ‘efficiency’. The Egyptian solution was very different. It was simply a repetition of the basic domestic kitchen until the necessary capacity was obtained. This presumably involved a simple multiplication of the necessary number of people as well, subdivided into as many teams as there were chambers, each chamber under its overseer, and all working under the responsibility of an official. This seems also to be the system behind the bakery records from Memphis from the reign of Seti I, less than 50 years afterwards, which is discussed in Chapter 6 (pp. 279–80). There the responsibility for baking rested with the mayor of Memphis. It is worth noting that Amarna had its own mayor, too (the owner of tomb no. 13).50 We can surmise that he was based in the ‘Office of the Town of the Aten’ (see below). This cellular approach to a large-scale operation offers a paradigm for the whole ancient system. It was a system based on a ready supply of cheap labour. This is why we can say that in organization the ancient Egyptians could be very effective, but we cannot say that they were efficient in the modern sense of the word. Pottery bread-moulds are easily recognizable. A study of the pottery recovered from the extensive excavations at Amarna reveals that they were rare in residential areas and common within and around bakeries attached to the two main temples (and also one within the enclosure of the ‘Sunshade of Ra’ of Nefertiti at Kom el-Nana). This helps to confirm that, by the New Kingdom, mould-baked loaves denoted festival occasions.51

Bread was an essential ingredient of life and component of offerings but what was most desired was meat, especially from cattle and from fowl (primarily geese). The offering-tables in the temple are shown in the contemporary pictures piled high with both (over a bottom layer of loaves). At the centre of the meat supply for the temple was a man who combined the offices of manager of the cattle and of the granaries of the Aten with that of ‘first servant of the Aten’. The man we know who filled these offices was named Panehsy and, in addition to a large private residence to the south (and a large rock tomb, no. 6), he had a building beside the enclosure of the Great Aten Temple which looks like a house but must have served as his official place of work.52 The debris in which the remains of this building were buried contained many bones of cattle (large, sturdy specimens to judge from their bones) and of birds, mostly geese but including common crane, teal, water rail, doves, quail, wading birds and a variety of perching birds. In all cases the main meat-bearing parts had been removed to leave mainly wing and lower-leg bones, implying that whatever was captured in the large nets that the Egyptians used for fowling could be incorporated into ‘offerings’.53 Yet pictures of the temple show slaughtering of cattle being done in one or two enclosures within the temple precinct, and the actual remains of one seem to be present, located near the stela (or benben-stone) in front of the Sanctuary.54 This implies that the cattle, at least, were led into the temple area, slaughtered and butchered in a designated location, and the extracted bones then taken outside the temple enclosure and dumped beside the manager’s office. The seeming inconvenience of this pattern of movement is representative of the whole layout of the temple, with its multitude of offering-tables lying distant and walled off from where the offerings must have been prepared.

Not all of the meat for offerings was the result of on-site slaughtering and immediate presentation. When cut into joints, cured and dried it could be packed into pottery jars for storage or transportation. Amongst many ink labels originally written on the shoulders of such jars we find mentions of meat for ‘the daily service’ and also for the ‘birthday of the Aten’ (though how periodic this was we do not know).55 The source of the meat might not have been Amarna, but a more distant establishment which sent its consignments to Amarna. A concentration of these labels in a building group south of the bakeries might indicate the location of a meat store.56 Other pottery jars, often in a two-handled amphora shape, held a wide variety of other commodities. One was wine, which was commonly identified as to age and source by ink labels on the amphorae shoulders and related information stamped on the large mud stoppers that sealed the mouths of the vessels. The remains of wine jars are also amongst the material found in the precinct of the Great Aten Temple.57

It was a deeply embedded aspect of Egyptian society that temple ‘offerings’ were ultimately distributed as ‘rations’ to people who had been officially given this entitlement. An arrangement of this kind must explain a text from Akhenaten’s early days at Karnak which recorded that the towns of Egypt, through their mayors and the royal domains, were obliged to pay an extra levy to support the staff of the Aten temple at Thebes, with one total giving the figure of 6,800 persons.58 If the figure referred to men who were heads of their households, it could represent the bulk of the families of a city the size of Amarna. In their tomb chapels some of Akhenaten’s senior officials recorded the king’s promise of food benefit from the temple. ‘I give you the office specifically so that you may eat the provisions of Pharaoh, your lord, in the House of the Aten’ is one example, made to Meryra on his appointment as ‘chief of seers’ in the Aten cult.59 The fundamental expectation, at least of the official class, that their spirits would continue to receive offerings after death was also to be satisfied at Amarna, at least in part, through what was offered in the Great Aten Temple. The ‘first servant of the Aten’ and temple administrator Panehsy asks, in a text in his tomb, to receive offering-loaves ‘on every festival of the living Aten in the Mansion of the Benben’ (a synonym for all or part of the Great Aten Temple).60 As mentioned above, in the myriad offering-tables at the Great Aten Temple, many of them outside the walls of the main stone building, we could have the physical evidence for this practice.

In what way does this aspect of Amarna clarify our understanding of how New Kingdom Egypt worked? On looking at the plans of the Central City an obvious contrast emerges with what we can see of the surroundings of large conventional temples. For the latter we have to rely largely upon Medinet Habu, the Ramesseum and the temple of Seti I at Abydos where we have plans of much of the enclosures which surrounded each of these stone temples. (With other major temples, of Ptah at Memphis, for example, or Karnak at Thebes or of Ra at Heliopolis, we know next to nothing about how the surrounding ground was filled during the New Kingdom and, in the case of Heliopolis, even what the temple of Ra looked like.) In these three cases the enclosure was packed with storage and administrative buildings (for the Ramesseum, see Figure 6.6, p. 259). The stone parts of the two main Aten temples at Amarna, however, stood surrounded or fronted by huge open spaces. The supply of offerings, requiring storage and production facilities, was primarily located in ground lying outside (though even here one should note that bakeries were not included within the precincts of conventional temples61). This change in how the ground inside the enclosure of the Great Aten Temple was used might, as suggested above, reflect a radical change in the policy of admittance: the space was at the disposal of the city’s population in an experiment of inclusion.

The extensive buildings for the production and storage of food lay beside the Great Aten Temple and also across the road from the Great Palace. In this building, too, as we have seen, there were large halls and especially the great courtyard surrounded by statues of Akhenaten and his family. The whole ensemble was built to allow the king to appear before an audience, which was a large one to judge from the scale of the surroundings. Whether such occasions were accompanied by feasting remains conjecture, but a reasonable one: feasting is something that courts across the Near and Middle East did over long periods of history.62 The main food centre, in that case, was well placed to serve both the main temple and the main palace, perhaps implying a degree of integration between what was understood to be ‘offerings’ and what was delivered directly to the palace, although it would require written records to work out the details. In the case of the Great Aten Temple (Amarna’s equivalent to the Karnak of his predecessors) we can develop the contrast, from architectural appearance to behaviour: exclusion versus inclusion, with public gratitude added to deference on a large scale. What Akhenaten offered his people was feasting on a bigger scale than ever (but probably no remittance from the ardours of conscripted labour; see below).

The other group of buildings beside and behind the Small Aten Temple was an unpretentious spread of offices intended to house the archives and officials of those departments which worked directly beneath the king. Some were designated according to the name of a senior official, in two cases ‘royal scribes’. There was an ‘Office of the Town of the Aten’ (perhaps the base for the city’s ‘mayor’, owner of one of the rock tombs). Another was the ‘Bureau for the Correspondence of Pharaoh’ (often called the ‘Records Office’ in modern writings).63 Late in the nineteenth century AD, local villagers discovered inside it the hoard of clay tablets now known as the Amarna Letters (the archive of diplomatic correspondence briefly discussed in Chapter 6, pp. 280–2), which also contained material suggestive of a small international centre of literary study (Figure 6.15, p. 284). We know from labels stamped into the bricks that a further building in this group was called ‘The House of Life’. By this term the Egyptians referred to an institution where texts of a serious nature (medicine, astronomy, etc.) were studied and copied, making it a library. It is noteworthy that Akhenaten did not dispense with this traditional centre of knowledge (and how one would love to have a copy of its catalogue), and excerpts from traditional pieces of literature have occasionally been found at Amarna.64

The running of the administration required the employment of many ‘scribes’ or junior officials (clerks, to use a somewhat old-fashioned term) whose job it would have been to write and receive reports and letters giving instructions, to keep accounts and lists of people, and to maintain archives of property ownership and transfer. They were allocated a separate village within this administrative zone, five or so (it is not fully preserved) straight streets of small back-to-back buildings which, apart from lacking kitchens, have the room layouts of conventional houses.65 We have a tendency, encouraged by the normal absence in archaeology of explicit sources, to expect the plans of buildings to reflect the way they were used. In particular, obvious houses are houses, whereas those with plans that are more difficult to resolve we can class as ‘administrative’ (or even ‘cultic’). But sometimes the distinction fails. The ‘first servant of the Aten’ at Amarna, Panehsy, had two ‘houses’: one in the Main City, which, within its substantial estate, we see as the proper private residence for himself and his household; the other, beside the Great Aten Temple and surrounded by butchery waste, we see as his administrative base, his ‘office’. So, in the Central City where we find groups of houses interspersed amongst buildings that we know really did contain administrative departments, we can feel more obliged to interpret them as scribes’ offices. Hence the identification of the streets of ‘houses’ behind the Small Aten Temple.

The head of the king’s administration in Egypt was the vizier (sometimes a dual post, with each vizier responsible for one half of the country). Amarna was the base for one of them. We have a large house (at the far southern end of the Main City) for a vizier named Nakht, and the beginnings of a decorated rock tomb for him which gives the impression, however, that, had it been completed, it would not have been particularly grand. Viziers, in effect, ran the country (we have detailed accounts of their responsibilities) and did so from their own court, with a protocol which included a formal procession each morning from their office to a part of the palace where they would greet the king and brief him on what was happening in the country, including matters of security.66 The eastern half of the Central City would have been pre-eminently the vizier’s territory, where the key offices of state were situated. The difficulty of being sure about the way in which buildings were used becomes acute at this point.

Beside the Small Aten Temple stood a large enclosure, 120 × 137 m, divided into three parts. One part was a large court planted with trees, another was an example of the magazine or warehouse block composed of many contiguous and parallel chambers. A picture in one of the rock tombs (no. 4, Meryra) depicts the contents of such a store in detail (a portion shown in Figure 6.5, top, p. 257). It might even be this particular one. The third part of the enclosure contained a version of a ‘house’ but sufficiently large and elaborate to suggest that it could have been a palace (its modern name is the ‘King’s House’).67 Furnished with wall paintings of the royal family, a throne room and a likely Window of Appearance, the King’s House is generally regarded as a secluded set of royal apartments. A bridge resting on brick piers and approached at each end by a ramp carried a broad corridor, its internal walls painted with further scenes of the royal family and probably gardens, between the King’s House and the Great Palace. Whilst, in this way, it provided an extension of the king’s realm, its location raises the possibility that it also provided the necessary court for Akhenaten’s vizier, providing for the processional movement of king and vizier between their respective realms (Figure 8.5, (1) and (7), p. 332). When written sources are lacking, we have to rely upon inference for even major statements and identifications as to how society worked.

The scenes of the king’s public life which dominate the decoration of the rock tombs give a conspicuous place to soldiery. Wherever the king goes we see contingents of Egyptian and foreign troops.68 This is in keeping with the strong military profile of the New Kingdom. Yet, in the city layout, any military architecture is not obvious. The city remained without a surrounding wall and thus without the grand fortified gateways that, elsewhere and at other times, often marked city entrances. The North Riverside Palace looked from the outside like a great fortress, and in its outer parts we can perhaps detect the outlines of a barracks for the king’s own bodyguard. But this is exceptional. What we do find on the far eastern edge of the Central City is a set of buildings evidently for a force of men and chariots, the horses kept in a set of stables with cobbled floors, mangers and tethering stones.69 Outwardly, however, the buildings remained plain. We know from the rock tomb (no. 9) of the chief of the Medjay police, Mahu, that Akhetaten had a force of police equipped with chariots who were separate from the normal army and were responsible especially for security across the desert hinterland (and answered to the vizier).70 There has to be a strong presumption that these buildings were the Medjay headquarters. A possible smaller police post, again without the architectural trappings of fortification, lay in the desert a short way behind the South Suburb.71

The essence of Akhetaten, the reason for its foundation, was to provide the Aten with a pure landscape over which it could rise each morning. The ideal had been compromised to a small extent by siting the cemeteries within it, as well as two workmen’s villages although these were out of sight from the city. As a way of controlling access to the adjacent desert an irregular network of tracks was laid out across it.72 In part they provided straight routes between the city and the tombs; in part, they doubled as patrol roads and boundary lines that should not be crossed, the purpose being to keep people away from the central tract of desert and the place where the royal tombs were being prepared. It is likely that the Medjay police had the responsibility for enforcing a policy of exclusion, as seems to have been the case at western Thebes and the area of the Valley of the Kings.





Where the people lived


Much of the city began as a rapid informal colonization of the desert on either side of the Central City. Hasty decisions as to locations and routes of access quickly became fixed and shaped a city which, had Akhenaten’s plans been more successful, would have lasted for generations. Even by the time Amarna was abandoned, the process of piecemeal replacement of houses by building the new over the foundations of the old had started, though keeping to the initial routes of access.

Although the city lacked uniformity of plan, its individual elements, its houses, reflected a common preference in layout, one which (fortunately for us) is relatively easy to comprehend and which allows us to distinguish one house from its neighbours (something not to be taken for granted on archaeological sites). Although it is rare to find two identical houses, the same elements are repeated in slightly different combinations and at different scales (Figures 8.12 and 8.13).73 The main feature is a square, central living-room. Against one wall stood a low brick dais, where the owner and his wife would sit to receive guests. Against another wall was sometimes a plastered stone washing-place. In larger houses one or more wooden columns raised the ceiling sufficiently to allow windows to be inserted high up in one or more walls. In large houses, such windows took the form of stone grilles. Around the central room were grouped others: an outer reception room, storage rooms and more personal domestic quarters. A principal bedroom served the owner, in which a wooden single bed stood at the back in a raised alcove. Beside it, ideally, was a bathroom and lavatory. The disposal of personal waste, however, was of the simplest kind. It was collected in a vessel and carried outside for disposal. There is no trace of a public drainage system within the city, or of a general water supply, which went beyond servants struggling to carry loads of water from sources (wells and the River Nile) to houses.



Figure 8.12Plan of a characteristic part of a residential area at Amarna, in the Main City. The painted bust of Nefertiti was found in the house of a sculptor, whose name may have been Thutmose. The key to the letters on the plan is: ‘W’: well; ‘C’: chapel; ‘G’: granary. The sign ‘*’ indicates the probable presence of a pottery kiln. The ‘sculptors’ workshops’ are those of house groups O47.16a and 20. Figure 8.13 is based on part of this map. Inset. Bar-chart showing the frequencies of houses of varying size within the Main City. House sizes are grouped in steps of 10 sq. m. After Piers Crocker, unpublished dissertation, University of Cambridge, and see JEA 71 (1985), 52–65.





Figure 8.13Perspective reconstruction of part of the area of Figure 8.12. The house of Thutmose is shown in the condition in which it was found when excavated in 1912. The numbers in circles are explained in the text, pp. 352–6.



Possessing a title in ancient Egypt was an important mark of success as well as of identity. One place to display this, along with your name, was on the door frame of your house. Preferably this was of limestone with carved and painted hieroglyphs, but it could be of wood. For larger houses the main door, with its decorated frame, drew attention also by being set in a small projecting room and at the top of a very shallow flight of brick steps. From this entrance porch and a vestibule beyond you entered a long reception room. A doorway in the middle of one of the long sides gave access to the central hall. This internal doorway, which could be of double width, offered scope for an even more prominent display of the owner’s situation in life than his front door. On a carved and painted door frame he could be shown paying respect to the king and to the Aten, and presenting himself through prayers and epithets more or less identical to thosehe would inscribe in his tomb. As the patrician head of a household he would be already entitled to the deference of an ancestor-to-be possessed of an aura of enhanced respect, in effect, of divinity.

As far as we can tell, houses bore only limited decoration. Mud-brick walls were almost invariably covered with a layer of plaster made from mud mixed with chopped plant material. When uncovered by excavation it is common to find that most of it has crumbled away. Sufficient has been found, however, to show that, outside and inside, plaster surfaces were mostly not decorated, even by whitening. Plain mud was the dominant surface, even within the larger houses of officials. It gave way to colour in two main areas. Set into some of the wall surfaces of the front reception room and the central hall of the larger houses were shallow niches meant to resemble doors. The rear surface was normally painted red, to simulate wood, and side and top panels were painted with designs that included, in hieroglyphs, short prayers and the names and titles of the owner. The other area given coloured treatment was a zone below the ceiling and the ceiling itself. A deep band of plain white towards the top of the walls was set off with bands of coloured decoration and sometimes semicircular panels painted with designs that included plants and suspended wildfowl.74 The wooden beams which supported the ceiling were encased in mud plaster and often painted pink though the intervening spaces were white. Wooden surfaces, both door panels and column shafts, were painted red. The overall effect was one of contrast between the muted surfaces of mud plaster and areas of bright intrusions. Wall decoration was also one way by which the surroundings in which the royal family lived differed from those of everyone else. Where the mud-brick walls of palaces have been preserved they have often revealed that paintings, of nature and the life of the royal family, covered large areas, sometimes, in the case of nature scenes, extending across floors of painted lime-gypsum (Figure 6.14, Right, p. 281).

One problem faces archaeologists everywhere. If we find only the ruins of a building, how can we tell if it had more than one floor or storey? It was long accepted that Amarna houses were primarily single-storeyed. The windows beneath the raised ceilings of the central room guarantee this for at least one or two of its sides. Many houses, however, also possessed an internal staircase. It could have led just to the roof, a useful area for storage and summer sleeping. There are good reasons, however (including smaller stone column bases found fallen to the ground floor), for thinking that upper rooms often covered large parts of the house, something supported by a few ancient pictures (Figure 8.14).75



Figure 8.14Three ancient views of houses. Top. Two houses depicted on a block originally part of an Amarna building but found reused at El-Ashmunein (Hermopolis). They appear to stand beside the river. A pottery bowl in which charcoal could be burnt is in the central room of the left-hand house. A bed with a thick mattress is in the top-left corner of the right-hand house. After Cooney, Amarna Reliefs, 74. Middle. Block originally from an Amarna building. On the right is what appears to be a picture of a house. In its top-left corner grinding is being done at a quern emplacement; in its top-right corner is part of a vertical loom. The left half of the block shows masons working out of doors on stone blocks. The block is in the Malawi Museum in Egypt. After B.J. Kemp and G. Vogelsang-Eastwood, The Ancient Textile Industry at Amarna, London, 2001, EES, 338, Fig. 9.22. Bottom. A multi-storey house in its grounds, surrounded by an enclosure wall with a wavy finish to the top. Two grain silos and the roof of another building are visible above the wall, along with a tree. Although not from Amarna, its portrayal of a multi-storey house in a walled garden provided with granaries closely matches the appearance of the larger Amarna houses. From the tomb of Anena (no. 81 at Thebes), early Eighteenth Dynasty, after N. de G. Davies, Scenes from Some Theban Tombs (nos 38, 66, 162, with Excerpts from 81), Oxford, GI, 1963, Pl. XXIII.



The ideal larger house – built for ‘officials’ – stood within its own grounds, surrounded by a wall which could reach at least 3 m in height, its main entrance marked by a pair of low projecting walls which guided chariots in at right angles and gave some protection to a person emerging from the gate into the street. The loose arrangement of elements in the compounds stands in marked contrast to their carefully prearranged place in the formal Middle Kingdom layouts discussed in Chapter 5 and exemplified at Kahun. Many details of usage are still not clear but the general outline is tolerably so. The list of basic elements (marked on Figure 8.13, p. 351, house of the sculptor Thutmose) is as follows:

1.Granaries: up to a certain individual capacity they were tall, circular constructions of brick, in diameter about 2.5 m and with domed tops (Photograph 8.2). The principal grains were emmer wheat and barley, poured in at the top from someone standing on a short flight of steps, and withdrawn through a trap-door at the bottom. However, over a certain size they were replaced by long vaulted rooms of the ‘magazine’ kind. Then, since other commodities were stored in them as well, it becomes much more hazardous to estimate stored grain capacity. The farm-centre aspect of Amarna is well documented, for the larger houses look like little farms, and in so doing both reflect the commodity-based nature of the Egyptian economy, and at the same time make an important contribution to the debate about private economics in New Kingdom Egypt. We can estimate that the capacity of an average silo not filled to its entire capacity was about 9,500 litres, equivalent in ancient terms to about 125 khar of emmer wheat. At the Theban necropolis Workmen’s Village of Deir el-Medina a skilled artisan’s annual wage for his family included a maximum of 48 khar of emmer, whilst the foreman received 66. For guards and porters, the annual rate was 24 and 12. The payments in barley seem to have been about a third. Thus two or three of these silos, a not uncommon number in the Amarna house compounds, would appear to suffice a family with a purchasing power somewhat larger than a Deir el-Medina foreman’s. However, the Deir el-Medina householders did not have large silos in which to store their grain. They were paid monthly and evidently consumed most of it rapidly, either as food or as a medium of exchange. They did not accumulate grain balances. To be able to do that was a significant mark of status. The groups of silos at Amarna thus indicate two possibilities (as alternatives or present together): either storage of an annual harvest, or a monthly receipt of ration payments far in excess of basic needs. We know, from many sources from the New Kingdom and earlier (the Wilbour Papyrus and Hekanakht’s letters are examples, pp. 253 and 311–12), that it was both an ideal and common practice for individuals with an official title to own or to rent land that often comprised plots that were scattered and not necessarily adjacent to the main place of residence. This gave them a degree of independence from the largesse of the court and made them, as patrician heads of households, the focus of local deference. The good life of the successful official is one subject of scribal manuals:

You go down to your ship of fir-wood manned from bow to stern. You reach your beautiful villa, the one you have built for yourself. Your mouth is full of wine and beer, of bread, meat and cakes. Oxen are slaughtered and wine is opened, and melodious singing is before you. Your chief anointer anoints (you) with ointment of gum. Your manager of cultivated lands bears garlands. Your chief fowler brings ducks, your fisherman brings fish. Your ship has returned from Syria laden with all manner of good things. Your byre is full of calves, your weavers flourish. You are established whilst (your) enemy is fallen, and the one who spoke against you is no more.76



The villa could be in the country, but the larger Amarna houses seem designed to accommodate just this kind of life. The emphasis on the self-made aspect of the official is notable. No hint here of the good life being handed down from the king in return for loyal service.





Photograph 8.2Private wealth: the bases of circular brick silos or granaries in a private estate at Amarna, house U24.1, looking north-east. The diameter of each silo is c. 3.5 m. By courtesy of the Egypt Exploration Society.



2.Animal byres: generally identified as sheds with roof supported on several square brick pillars. In one house (no. Q44.1), however, a narrower building, not requiring roof supports, housed a line of eight neatly made mud-brick feeding-troughs, presumably for cattle.77 One occasion for slaughter was probably a funeral feast for a member of the family but held on the premises of the Great Aten Temple.

3.A well dug in two stages, the upper part a wide basin containing spiralling steps which led down to a shaft descending to the water table. A damaged scene in the tomb of Meryra (tomb no. 4) appears to show a water-lifting hoist (a shaduf) somehow erected as part of a large well in a royal garden.78 The water, being mildly salty, may have been less suitable for human drinking than water carried to the house from the Nile. Groups of smaller houses were served by similar wells in public spaces.

4.A garden, presumably for both vegetables and flowers, and planted with trees, the roots of which are sometimes preserved within pits which had been filled with fertile soil. If the owner followed good practice, the gardens were laid out as grids of growing-beds measuring one cubit square, a practice going back to the Old Kingdom (Figure 0.3, p. 16).

5.Kitchens: always outside when the house stood in its own grounds, they often lay at the southern end of the enclosure, downwind of the prevailing north wind, which reduced nuisance from smoke (except to neighbours). They were simple affairs: small groups of circular clay ovens used primarily for baking bread although bronze basins could also be placed over the open top to enable cooking by boiling. Circular ovens could be supplemented by open fireplaces. Bread and beer remained central to the Egyptian diet. Quern stones and sometimes their mud-brick emplacements (little changed since the Middle Kingdom, Figure 4.4, p. 174) are a common find during excavation and show that unprocessed grain was an important raw material (as it was at Deir el-Medina) as distinct from loaves baked in distant bakeries.

6.Walled spaces (some roofed and some open) of uncertain purpose, though in some cases they were used for craft activities (the category also overlaps with spaces where animals could have been kept). Sculptors, whose debris archaeologists can easily identify, are one group whose workshops were in and beside their house compounds, the most famous being that (ascribed to a sculptor named Thutmose) where the painted bust of Nefertiti was discovered in 1912.79 Linen cloth, glass ornaments, faience jewellery, pottery, inlays and coloured tiles in faience intended for the decoration of the main stone buildings of Amarna, wooden coffins and wooden furniture covered with gold leaf; all these things were made amongst the places where the makers lived. It is a reasonable guess that a proportion of the finds from Tutankhamun’s tomb in the Valley of the Kings was made in backyard workshops in Amarna’s suburbs (tiny flakes of gold leaf are not rare finds). The excavation of a sample of small houses in 2004 and 2005 brought to light evidence that, alongside other industries, scrap bronze was being melted down, the evidence being of a kind (tiny pieces of cut bronze and sherds from coarse pottery crucibles) that earlier excavations would not have registered.80 Where heat was required, this was supplied either by ovens indistinguishable from those used for bread or by small, easily made (and then easily destroyed and lost) fire pits in which temperatures sufficient to melt bronze could be reached by the use of bellows and charcoal. The city incorporated within its myriad houses and small courtyards the manufacturing capacity of a huge factory.

7.A shrine, which in the houses of some of the richest men (but by no means all, the sculptor Thutmose lacking one) stood in its own enclosure which could, in the largest examples, also contain an ornamental lake, a garden and separate pylon entrance to the street. With one exception (a house in the North Suburb modelled as a tiny Aten temple with offering-tables) they contained statues and/or stelae depicting the king and members of his family (Figure 8.2, p. 326, is one example).81

8.Separate accommodation, including a porter’s lodge at the gate, but most importantly a completely separate house. It remains uncertain who occupied this house: a steward, a married son, servants?



Houses of rich and poor are distinguished more by size than by design, although larger houses generally gained greater privacy for the occupants by standing within a walled enclosure containing some or all of the features just described. If we take the size of a person’s house as even a rough-and-ready measure of his status, the spread of house sizes provides a general profile of the kind of society we are dealing with. An easy way to view the whole mass of data is in tabular form (Figure 8.12 inset, p. 350). Although there are some jumps and gaps the overall pattern of the data fits a single curve in which, beyond a point of very basic housing, ever-larger houses grow steadily rarer. There are no obvious breaks or plateaux. If we remember that this was a time of great national prosperity, the gulf between rich and poor in this respect was not as great as we might expect. The rich and powerful lived in large houses, not in palaces. The great gulf was between the king and everyone else. If we added royal palaces to Figure 8.12 inset, they would be off the edge of the page.

The diagram of house size presents a gradient rather than one or more steps. Very different is the picture of the resources which people allocated to their places of burial and memorial. This reveals a major divide in attitude as much as in wealth. Several cemeteries laid out on relatively flat ground have been discovered at Amarna and excavated since 2006.82 Burial (mostly without mummification) was normally within a pit dug into sand or gravel to a depth of no more than about 1.5 m. The pits were body-sized or made a little wider to accommodate a few grave goods, mostly pottery containing food offerings, or sometimes more than one body. Once backfilled with sand they were marked on the surface with a low pile of rough stones. Small limestone markers, some originally with a scene of the deceased and favouring a triangular top, were fixed in place with a little mortar (Figure 8.15). To accomplish a burial of this kind represented the labour of probably a single day (although in a few cases a decorated wooden coffin had been purchased to which varying degrees of skill had been applied). The density of burials in sample excavated areas suggests, by extrapolation across the full extent of the cemeteries, a figure of at least 10,000 individuals who had died and been buried at Amarna.83



Figure 8.15Grave marker (object no. 39938) from the South Tombs Cemetery carved in a small slab of limestone and considerably weathered. It was set within a larger limestone frame with a pointed top. The height of the stela and its surround is 66 cm, and of the stela itself is 26 cm. The plan of excavated graves is the portion of the cemetery where the stela was discovered, in square Z105, in a robbers’ pit. Note the absence of a common orientation for the graves. Those on the left are aligned down the slope of the ground, whilst those on the right are on the almost flat valley floor, and were probably aligned according to paths of access. See A. Stevens, JEA 96 (2010), 11, Fig. 5, 15.



Akhenaten included the upper section of his society in the scheme announced in the Boundary Stelae, comprising categories of priests (‘Chiefs of Seers’, ‘God’s Fathers’ and a third that is illegible). They were to be allowed to make their tombs in the ‘eastern mountain’. Two separate groups materialized, the North Tombs and the South Tombs, and their owners represent a broader sample of ‘professions’ than the priestly, including the Chief of Police of Akhetaten, Mahu (tomb no. 9). As tombs, they served as places of burial, of memorial where an offering-cult could be performed in a shrine containing a rock-cut statue of the owner (and maybe his wife as well), and of advertisement of the owner’s success in life. The number of rock tombs, however, falls well below the number of officials who, so we can estimate, lived in the city. For one means of estimation we can select the smallest house known to have been occupied by an official, N49.18, of the chariotry officer Ranefer. We can then assume that all houses of this size and above are likely to have belonged to men with official titles. They actually number 65. The excavated housing zones represent something like two-thirds of the total likely residential area, so that we must think in terms of around 100 as at least an order of magnitude for officials of more than modest rank. Some of them, of course, would have been ‘replaced’ through death during the 17 years or so of the city’s occupancy.

Nearly all the tombs at Amarna remained unfinished when the city was abandoned. Starts had, however, been made on at least 43. They varied a good deal in size and elaboration, reflecting both the varying status and resources of their owners and how much expenditure they were willing to undertake (and perhaps how much assistance they received from the king). Despite their unfinished condition we can still draw one subdivision: between those intended to have an internal columned hall (or more than one), and those which were not. We have 16 of the former, 20 of the latter, and 7 where we cannot tell. The pattern of ownership of the two groups reflects what we might expect. People who, by their position, we would expect to be important have tombs in the former category, with the columned hall. They include the vizier Nakht(pa-aten), the mayor of Akhetaten Neferkheperu-her-sekheper, the ‘chief of seers’ Meryra, the ‘first servant of the Aten’ Panehsy, the personal stewards of Nefertiti and of the queen mother Tiy (Meryra II and Huya, respectively), the chamberlain Tutu (who may well have been in charge of correspondence with foreign powers and client rulers in western Asia), and the chariotry officer and god’s father Ay (subsequently to become king). Although the tomb of the vizier Nakht is in this group, in its unfinished state it still seems to represent the smallest of them. As for the group without columns, whilst some were still intended for men of high position, others, even though unfinished, were designed to be quite small. One of them (no. 1a), left undecorated, preserves a name on the lintel of its well-carved doorway, Rudu, but without a title.84 If we take this at face value, it would imply that Rudu was the owner of one of the smaller houses in the city, yet someone with the capacity to undertake stone cutting of reasonable quality (was he himself a stone cutter?). His tomb also implies that there was no prohibition against men who were not officials making a rock tomb for themselves if they could manage it.

A total of 43 rock tombs is obviously less than the number of officials who had houses at Amarna. Furthermore, the number of those who were established early enough to see much progress made on their tombs was smaller still, around 25 at the most. Nor is there a close match between the known owners of houses and the named owners of rock tombs (tomb no. 16, we should note, was one of the largest but the owner had chosen to wait until more of the cutting had been finished before starting the decoration, and had had no time to have even his name carved on the doorway so that the tomb remains anonymous). No rock tomb is known for the sculptor Thutmose, for example, even though his sculpting career extended through at least part of the reign of Akhenaten. The absence of a tomb for the chariotry officer Ranefer is more easily understood. He was either a late arrival or a case of promotion, for he built his house over the foundations of a smaller and earlier one, and honoured in its carvings not Akhenaten but his successor, King Ankh-kheperura (Smenkhkara).85 He would have had insufficient time in which to organize the making of a rock tomb.

The imbalance between numbers of officials and numbers of rock tombs can, in part, be explained by a provincial home for a proportion of officials exerting a stronger attraction than Amarna in choosing the location for the new family tomb. We can find an example of how this could work at the site of Sidmant el-Gebel (Sedment), the cemetery for the city of Herakleopolis. Several New Kingdom tombs excavated last century provided evidence of who their owners were.86 Some were people who were prominent in local society, which in practice meant the staff of the local temple. We have an Amenhetep, who was a priest of the local god Heryshef, and an Amenemhat, who was a god’s father in the same cult. There is also a record of a mayor called Menena. The remainder, however, were officials of the court or the army: Nebenkemt (chief of bowmen and fan-bearer on the royal boat Khaem-maat), Seti (general, overseer of attendants of the Lord of the Two Lands, ambassador in all lands), Pahemneter (deputy commander of chariotry, chief of bowmen), and Rahetep and Parahetep (viziers), and possibly an earlier vizier called Thutmose. These are just the ranks of officials whom we find at Amarna and could probably have been found at Thebes, Memphis, and later at Per-Rameses but who, in this case, preferred to be buried close to what we must assume was their original home rather than in the cemetery which served the current capital. A person was not, it seems, forced to make his tomb at the capital just because he was prominent at court.

Amarna itself provides a good example of the provincial connections of a prominent individual, Ay, who was to become king after Tutankhamun and who was able to have made what would have been (if it had been finished) the finest tomb at Amarna (no. 25). A strong case can be made for regarding Ay as a member of a prominent family whose home was the city Akhmim, in Upper Egypt. His parents would have been a couple, Yuya and Tuyu, whose tomb was made in the Valley of the Kings. They had earned this honour because their daughter had married Amenhetep III and had become his principal wife, Queen Tiy (Akhenaten’s mother). Typically for this as for other periods, the family had leading positions in the local Akhmim temple and in the army. Ay himself acquired army titles. When he finally became king, he was able to make an impressive gesture towards Akhmim, having a small rock-cut temple hewn in the cliffs behind the city.87 This is symptomatic of another aspect of New Kingdom Egypt. As pointed out in Chapter 6 (p. 264) for many provincial towns or cities this was the first chance to possess a prestigious stone-built temple. Embellishing it or adding to its lands provided important people with an opportunity for munificence to their home town, recorded in a dignified way for posterity.

One might also wonder if the making of a rock tomb (which could take years and risk remaining unfinished) was a long-term commitment (to expenditure and the effort of finding the right craftsmen at the right time) that did not appeal to all households even if they had the resources to start one (and they might have started one somewhere else before they moved to Amarna). But then, supposing a head of household died at Amarna without a rock tomb ready to receive him, what would the relatives have done – transported the body to a family tomb elsewhere? Another category of persons not easily accounted for in the known cemeteries is that of palace occupants, many of them women (some would have been foreign), who attended the predominantly female royal family. Despite their apparently privileged status did a lack of personal property and of family resources mean that their burials are lost to us amidst the mass of graves in the general cemeteries?

The picture we seem to have is that most people at Amarna centred their lives on where they lived, giving priority to their houses and domestic comforts, whilst making little or no provision for death. When it came, families followed a routine which required them to make immediate payments – for the grave-digger, linen wrappings for the unmummified body, a feast probably, perhaps a stonemason to make a small grave marker – but did not involve them in recurrent expenditures. For men of high standing, however, the option was there of embarking on years of expenditure and organization to create not only a secure place of burial, but a personal monument, knowing that it might not be completed in time. It seems to have attracted mixed levels of commitment.

Who lived at Amarna? The easiest to identify are the officials, who were representatives of that broad category whose lives weave their way through Egyptian history from beginning to end. Unfortunately, when the city was abandoned, it would seem either that most people took their door frames – expensive fittings – with them, or that termites have thoroughly consumed wooden versions, so that only rarely do we know who lived where. The most important was the vizier Nakht, with a particularly large house with extra columned halls. We have the houses of two senior figures in the cult of the Aten, Panehsy and Pawah. Military officers had houses scattered through the city: Ranefer, a chief charioteer, owned a quite modest house on a corner in a neighbourhood of small houses or workshops; a commander of troops, Ramose, had a somewhat larger house a few streets away from the sculptor Thutmose (see Figures 8.12 and 8.13, pp. 350 and 351). The latter’s studio, close to his house, lay in a part of the Main City where other sculptors lived and had their workshops. Thutmose’s workshops were simple courtyards with separate working spaces built against the walls. When the city was abandoned, unfinished sculptures and pieces used as models were left lying about or were packed away in the sculptor’s house. One such piece was the famous painted head of Queen Nefertiti. The owners of two more houses must have been involved in Akhenaten’s construction works. One, an overseer of builders, Maa-nakhtuef, had an unpretentious house in the Main City. Away in the north, in the North Suburb, the handsome painted door lintel (from the doorway between the reception room and the central hall) of an overseer of works, Hatiay, owed its good state of preservation to the fact that it had been left in place and then fallen face downwards and been buried in rubble after the city had been abandoned.88 Such examples of individuality are, however, exceptional. The city remains for us generally an anonymous place.

How many people lived in the city? One way of attempting an answer is to estimate the likely number of houses in the city and to multiply that by an estimate of household sizes. For the first, it is necessary to allow for the widely varying density of housing that is visible across the excavated parts of the city, and then to apply the result to an estimate of how much of the city remains unexcavated.89 Density within the Main City varies between c. 50 and 110 houses within a 200m modern survey square, and minimum and maximum estimates give the Main City an original area equivalent to between 44 and 54 of these squares. If we assume that half the area had a housing density of 50 per square, a quarter at 80 and a quarter at 110, then the number of houses (thus households) in the Main City would have been between 3,190 and 3,915. Estimates for the North Suburb and North City are 550 and 105, respectively, thus a total for the full city of between 3,845 and 4,570 households.

We can gain a snapshot of households from fragments of census lists from Deir el-Medina from late in the Twentieth Dynasty.90 They represent more than one list (perhaps five or six) spread across several years (30 to 40 have been suggested, with some households appearing in more than one fragment). They are summarized in Figure 8.16. Although we are accustomed to say that the inhabitants of Deir el-Medina were workers and craftsmen engaged in making the tombs in the Valley of the Kings, the men had occupational titles, but these are not recorded in these lists although their names and the names of their parents are. What makes the lists particularly interesting is the small size of many of the households. Amongst the 59 households for which the records seem to be complete, 54 per cent had no more than one child (11 of the houses were registered as being occupied by single men). Is this a result of low fertility and high infant mortality? Detailed studies of early modern societies reveal underlying population dynamics that are quite complicated and which caution against taking one set of figures at face value; on the other hand, we should make the best of such information that we have. One sign that we can treat the lists with some confidence is that there is a rough balance between the number of males and the number of females: 91 as against 85 (omitting uncertain examples). We can note, however, the absence of lone-mother households (true also for the list of inhabitants of western Thebes mentioned below, p. 363. Were widows who did not remarry normally incorporated into the families of others, though the lists offer few possible cases?) Two ostraca from Deir el-Medina give similar household information, but list six and seven persons (six daughters in one, with a single male parent, and three sons and two daughters in the other). We should recall the changes in the size of the Kahun household (Figure 5.13, p. 220), from six, increasing to nine and then decreasing to three. The range of sizes of houses at Deir el-Medina corresponds to that for a large section of Amarna houses. If we apply the Deir el-Medina range of household size to Amarna the result is 9,984–12,253 for the Main City and 12,034–14,304 for all areas occupied by houses.



Figure 8.16Members of households at Deir el-Medina, as registered in fragments of census lists and presented in hieroglyphic transcriptions of the original hieratic entries. The fragments derive from perhaps five or six lists covering a period of between 30 and 40 years but are here conflated into a single list of 59 households. The lists from two ostraca from Deir el-Medina (in collections in Uppsala and Liverpool) appear beneath. The percentage of households according to the numbers of members present in the 59 households are as follows: 1 (18.6 per cent); 2 (18.6 per cent); 3 (16.9 per cent); 4 (23.7 per cent); 5 (20.3 per cent); 6 (1.7 per cent). After Demarée and Valbelle, Les registres.



A significant unknown is the size of a serving population that lay outside the scope of households. No slaves are recognized in the Deir el-Medina census lists. Yet it is known that people who appear to have been of relatively low status in the New Kingdom (servants, traders, Deir el-Medina inhabitants) nevertheless owned them (e.g. ‘the servant Shedbeg’ in the tomb robbery papyri, p. 304). At Deir el-Medina itself the state also provided a ‘pool’ of female slaves (numbering at least six and possibly up to 16) who seem to have been regularly available for individual days of household duties up to every third day.91 We have no basis for estimating their numbers at Amarna, and have to guess that they lived in the houses to which they were attached, perhaps without their own allocated space (but where would a ‘pool’ of slaves have lived, supposing the practice existed at Amarna?). Would they have been an additional 5 per cent of the population? We should also assume that the main palaces had their own permanent resident populations of slaves, servants and attendants, female and male. In the plan of the North Palace, completely preserved and excavated, we can recognize areas probably reserved for such persons though we can only guess the number: 200 (and, say, 1,000 for all of these separate palace establishments)? Following these lines of argument, we can arrive at a total population for Amarna of between 13,635 and 16,019 (for which a rounding up of 20,000 appears in order). This does seem at first sight to be intuitively low, but the basis of our intuition is experience from later societies with generally larger populations.

Clarity often comes from comparison. The comparison – contrast rather – between Kahun of the Middle Kingdom and Amarna (pp. 216–17) tells us something about the society of the two periods. For the New Kingdom, an intriguing basis for comparison is the combined written and archaeological record of western Thebes from the end of the New Kingdom, thus around three centuries after the end of the Amarna Period. Life will have moved on, but not necessarily to so great an extent. A major development in the life of the west bank of Thebes was the building of Medinet Habu in the reign of Rameses III (Figure 8.17). At its centre was another monumental stone temple where cults of Amun and of Rameses himself were established surrounded by extensive magazines. What made the complex different from others was an outer wall of even greater dimensions which turned it into a citadel or fortress. In the spaces between the inner and outer enclosure walls an orderly town was laid out, of mostly similarly sized houses. At an undetermined point during the Twentieth Dynasty this small town saw piecemeal rebuilding which replaced the original layout with a characteristic product of self-organization. Until modern times, the ancient landscape of the Theban necropolis area had survived to a remarkable extent. The Medinet Habu town appears to have been the only significant long-term population centre to have developed, continuously occupied into the Middle Ages. It offers, from a much later period, a good parallel for the way that some of the Old Kingdom pyramid communities developed (Chapter 5, pp. 204–11).



Figure 8.17Left. Plan of the mortuary temple of Medinet Habu and its surrounding town of Maiunehes from the period of the late Twentieth Dynasty and beyond. After Hölscher, Medinet Habu I, passim. Right. Outline plans of Deir el-Medina (in its final, late Twentieth Dynasty phase) and the Workmen’s Village at Amarna, all at the same scale.



When reading the accounts of the robberies and other documents of the period which centre on the affairs of townspeople (pp. 303–4), two of the questions that arise are: where did many of them live and where were many of the events played out? In particular, where did the mayor of western Thebes (as he is termed in the papyri) live and carry out his functions? The only realistic answer is the Medinet Habu town. One clue is that immediately behind and facing the rear fortified gate lay the tombs and tomb chapels of mayors.92 The town itself also contained several larger houses in the southern sector possessed of columns. Rameses III’s temple had originally been provided with a small palace. This had been significantly modified at a later date and probably kept in use for a long time after the end of the New Kingdom. It makes sense to see it as the mayor’s residence and place of office, a place fit to receive the vizier and in which to hold important trials.93 It recalls the size of the mayor’s residence of the Middle Kingdom at Tell Basta (Figure 5.24, p. 240), but also, in size, formality and royal associations, the King’s House at Amarna (see p. 348), which I have suggested was where the vizier held his court.

The identification allows a profile to be drawn of its population which can be compared with Amarna. In the first place, we can note its scale. One of the ‘tomb robbery papyri’ (Papyrus B.M.10068, dated to year 12 of Rameses XI) contains a list of the households to be found in western Thebes, extending between the mortuary temple of Seti I in the north and a place called Maiunehes in the south, a distance of 3 km.94 (Figure 6.8, p. 264 marks their positions, Maiunehes being within the walls of Medinet Habu.) Between the temples of Seti I and Rameses III (Medinet Habu) come 24 houses identified by the name and occupation of the head of the household. (The temples themselves, together with that of Rameses II which lay in between, are also listed as ‘houses’.) Then, after the ‘house’ of Rameses III come 155 more before the list ends. There can be no serious doubt that Maiunehes is the town that crowded between the two enclosure walls of Medinet Habu. We cannot be sure that the details of the plan given in Figure 8.17 are exactly those of the town at the moment of the census. There are many gaps in the plan and it is impossible in most cases to separate one house from another. Nevertheless, the space available is fixed by the inner and outer enclosure walls and, by this time, was filled with a settlement that must at least have approximated to Figure 8.17 and which the census list tells us included 155 households.

The first five houses cover the mayor himself (Paweraa) and other officials, one a scribe of the army. The list continues following no obvious system of grouping, probably because the compilers were making their way around the three sides of the town, having begun with the largest houses in the south corner, recording each house as they encountered it. If we include the first five, the 155 heads of household comprise the following: 7 senior civil officials, 32 temple personnel, 12 scribes, 12 ‘military’ (policemen and stable masters), 13 junior officials, 31 urban craftsmen, 47 with rural occupations (cultivators, herdsmen and fishermen) and one with no occupation specified.95 We can group them into two main categories: officials (including those belonging to temples) on the one hand (76), and those engaged in manufacture and agriculture on the other (79, including the one householder without a title), an approximate 50/50 split. This is not what one would expect in a normal society where the non-elite considerably outnumber the elite. The large number of those attached to temples could reflect the concentration of temples and tomb chapels in the area, and the census identifies three who had outside appointments: in the temple of Rameses II, the temple of Amenhetep III (probably) and a temple of Sebek. (Four temple personnel also had other listed occupations: two were bronze-workers, one was an inspector or agent of land and one was a chief guard.) But, even so, the top-heavy picture remains. The explanation could be that the households of at least some of those in the first group contained men (and their families) who were dependants and so were not regarded as having households that should be registered and yet lived in one or more sets of rooms of their own and perhaps followed a particular occupation. This is what I have argued for Amarna, that many of the small houses belonged to people who were dependants of the officials living in the larger houses. If we apply to the 79 households of the second group the ‘formula’ for family size that we have encountered in the Deir el-Medina household lists (see the caption to Figure 8.16, p. 360) we gain a total of 247 individuals. For the more senior households who make up the other group we have little to guide us. Suppose, for the 76 households of the officials, we triple the size of the households of the second group, thus 247 × 3, and so we obtain a figure of 741. Added together, the result comes to 988 (say 1,000) for the population of Maiunehes at the end of the Twentieth Dynasty. This is a figure which will be not far short for the population of the whole of western Thebes, given the small number of houses that lay between Medinet Habu and the temple of Seti I.

The crowded plan offers far less space for houses of dependants (or anything else) than Amarna, and this is a contrast in itself. The town occupied a space of c. 24,500 sq. m. One of the modern reference grid squares of Amarna (200 × 200 m) has an area of 40,000 sq. m. As we have seen (p. 359), these grid squares in the Main City contain between c. 50 and 110 houses. This is well below the density of Maiunehes, which compressed 155 households into 60 per cent of the area. (Or is it a sign that more of the walled spaces at Amarna that we do not count as houses actually accommodated people?) At the very least, the comparison shows that, on the scale of the time, Amarna was a place of significant size in area and in likely population. The census list also helps us to imagine what a census of Amarna might have looked like. A proportion of the households might have been omitted because they came under the ‘jurisdiction’ of an official. In the remainder of the cases almost all the heads of households would have been classed by an occupation, from scribe to bronze-smith, from fisherman (fish hooks are one category of finds from Amarna) to preparer of unguent (or oil boiler).

So far, we have looked at the range of people who might have lived in the city and been classed according to a rank or occupation and considered their numbers. It was deeply rooted in ancient Egypt (as in so many other societies at different times) to consider the people as a whole as ‘hands’, units of labour whose energies could be directed by the state into building, agricultural projects and soldiering. In considering the status of many of Amarna’s inhabitants, therefore, we have to allow for individuals having two modes of existence: following a ‘profession’ and being conscripted or drafted to do something that was typically onerous. We might expect this to have applied primarily to men but we should not take this for granted. As we will see, there is convincing evidence from the cemeteries that children, both boys and girls, were subject to heavy labour. In the case of the private houses the city plan itself implies that the onus for building them lay on the people themselves, perhaps combining to assist one another and, in the case of the larger houses (which were well built), employing experienced builders. Akhenaten’s plan also, however, envisaged several large stone buildings which required surface decoration through carving, painting and sometimes the use of coloured inlays. The Great Aten Temple and the Great Palace were the largest. Both saw changes of plan, in the case of the former amounting to a complete rebuilding on a larger scale, and neither may have been finished, implying that workers and craftsmen were needed for much of the city’s brief history. We have one direct clue as to where labour was coming from: the myriad small glazed inlays that were set into stone blocks seem to have been one of the products of the city’s many workshops which were embedded amongst the housing areas.96

Labour was particularly needed for the supply of the standardized stone building blocks (each being one cubit = 52 cm long). Amarna was located within an area of limestone suited to being used as building material. New quarries were opened, mostly towards the northern end of the site. One of them was a large, compact, underground quarry, seemingly belonging to the king’s mother, Queen Tiy, who would thus have been following the ancient practice of donating labour for a particular project (see p. 181). The desert hilltops behind Amarna also preserve innumerable shallow surface quarries which look like the product of self-organization, in which many individuals have been told to deliver a quota of blocks and have spread out over the desert surface, squatted down on a vacant patch and begun hacking out the narrow trenches needed to isolate a block (or conceivably ‘employed’ a substitute to do it for them).97 As a further supplement, the output of an existing quarry organization which served the nearby city of Hermopolis (El-Ashmunein) was diverted to Amarna and probably extended. These quarries (at Deir Abu Hinnis) supply a good example of scribal management preserved in patterns of lines and dates marked in red or black ink on quarry ceilings (as referred to in Chapter 4, pp. 184–5).98 Graffiti record a few names, one of them a ‘royal scribe and steward, Ahmose’; another records the visit of one Ramose, of ‘the crew (named) Sehetep-Aten’, evidence that the Old and Middle Kingdom system of organizing such work by individually named ‘crews’ was still in use, although there are no graffiti of crews in Amarna quarries. (The same man, with the title ‘standard-bearer’, also donated one or more bronze vessels to the Great Aten Temple.) As to the main source of the labour, we can look to how, at the beginning of his reign, Akhenaten laid the responsibility for providing blocks for his early buildings at Karnak on a high official and on ‘the leaders of the army to perform a great forced-labour duty of quarrying sandstone’99 at the quarries of Gebel Silsila, and wonder if the army units at Amarna did the same with the people of the city.

Akhenaten planned for a new Valley of the Kings at Amarna. To begin with, a single tomb for himself, Nefertiti and Meritaten was intended. This plan was subsequently modified by starts being made on separate rock tombs for the two women, so that each of the three key members of the family would have their own tomb.100 At Thebes, royal tomb creation was the work of the community which lived at Deir el-Medina. Akhenaten transferred this organization to Amarna (and perhaps the actual community). As a result, two villages were built in the desert, isolated and virtually invisible from the main city but much closer to the track that would have led to the site of the new royal tombs. Separated by c. 1.1 km, their modern names are the Workmen’s Village (Figure 8.18) and the Stone Village. The Workmen’s Village especially resembles the village of Deir el-Medina at western Thebes, and this points to an explanation for its similarly isolated location: it housed workers and craftsmen employed to create the royal tombs and perhaps to contribute also to the making of the decorated tombs of officials.101 It was laid out on the floor of a shallow valley as a rectangular walled enclosure subdivided into long rectangular plots separated by streets. The plots were further subdivided into house units of similar size and basic design, although individual occupants completed their houses according to their own preferences (and access to resources). Following the addition of an extension to the village on the west side, it contained 72 houses (two of them, at the corners, larger than the others). On the ground outside the walled village, and climbing the slopes of the valley sides, the inhabitants constructed a self-organized jumble of buildings of brick and rounded boulders: family chapels brightly decorated with wall paintings, sets of animal pens and related buildings dedicated to the raising of pigs (Photograph 8.3), and an area where water and perhaps other commodities were received from the Main City; and created small gardens, a few tombs and extensive rubbish dumps, all of these features intermingled. The main groups of tombs, however, lay further back, on the upper edges of small valleys.



Figure 8.18Plan of the eastern half of the Workmen’s Village at Amarna, showing the contrast between the planned layout of the walled village of houses and the self-organized mix of chapels and farm buildings on the ground outside.





Photograph 8.3A village industry: a pig-pen at the Workmen’s Village, Amarna. It is one from Building 300, viewed to the north. The scale is 1 m long. By courtesy of the Egypt Exploration Society.



The Stone Village was smaller and more irregular, with much less in the way of external structures, part of its internal space occupied by open areas containing ovens and adjacent ash heaps. That it was a place where people lived is to be deduced from the nearby presence of a small cemetery.102 Two explanations have arisen from the presence of two settlements. One uses the three sets of buildings associated with the Deir el-Medina community as a close parallel. They are, first of all, the main village of Deir el-Medina itself; secondly, a smaller collection of huts (‘Station de Repos’) built of rough stones on the high ground which one passes on the track between Deir el-Medina and the Valley of the Kings (where the workmen worked); and, thirdly, a collection of huts within the Valley of the Kings itself (something which was not replicated at the Amarna royal valley). It has been argued that the ‘Station de Repos’ served as a possible control post and supply station for the Deir el-Medina workmen.103 By analogy, therefore, the Stone Village would be its equivalent at Amarna, and both villages would have served the same community of workmen and their families. Yet the Stone Village and the ‘Station de Repos’ are significantly different in layout, the numerous ovens and thick accumulations of ash at the former seemingly having no parallel at the latter. The alternative is to see the two villages occupied by two different groups of workmen. The Workmen’s Village itself, built as an official project, housed the initial workforce for the Royal Tomb. As the scale of work increased, with the development of separate rock tombs for members of the royal family, a new group of workmen from a somewhat different background was brought in to help out. By this time interest in creating a formally laid out village by the authorities had waned, and the incomers were left to make their own settlement with whatever materials they could gather from the area.





Imagined worlds at Amarna


Apart from loyalty and deference, what did Akhenaten demand of people? The move to Amarna and a substantial building programme must have affected the lives of many, but serving the ambitions of kings was a regular feature of life in ancient Egypt. People generally must have lived under the shadow of disruption to their lives and periods of hard labour ordered from above. The creation of Amarna involved a familiar kind of imposition. But what of Akhenaten’s ideas? Was there an additional imposition as to how people were supposed to think and behave which particularly involved the gods, those basic elements of knowledge which largely defined how the Egyptians made sense of the world?

Personal names were one way by which individuals could indicate a deferential preference to a god or to a king, although many either did not do this or went through life with a name so abbreviated that the connotation (usually to a god) was effectively lost. Huya, Tiy, Tutu and Yuya (various spellings) are examples. In the case of the name Huya, for example, we can tell from some examples that it is an abbreviation of Amenhetep (‘Amun is content’, specifically Amenhetep I as god),104 but evidently in its shortened form it had become so accepted in its own right that the continued use of this name at Amarna by one of its bearers, the steward of Queen Tiy (and owner of Amarna rock tomb no. 1), caused no offence. The name of Akhenaten’s chief of police Mahu was likewise an abbreviation of Amenenheb (‘Amun is in festival’).105 Akhenaten signalled the new alignment in his thoughts by changing the second of his formal names from Amenhetep (‘Amun is content’) to Akhenaten (‘devotee of Aten’), although his first formal name (‘beautiful are the forms of Ra, the chosen one of Ra’) gave priority to Ra, the sun god, of whom the Aten was its visible manifestation. The most important members of his family also took or were given names which honoured the Aten: Nefernefru-aten Nefertiti (his wife), and Meritaten, Meketaten and Ankhsenpa-aten, his three eldest daughters. This preference had little obvious influence on the senior officials and courtiers at Amarna, however. Of the owners of the rock tombs and known owners of houses only the vizier Nakht (whose full name was Nakhtpa-aten, house K50.1 and tomb 12), the royal scribe and general Pa-atenemheb (tomb 24) and the chief bowman and master of horse Nekhuempa-aten (original house uncertain) used a name in which the Aten is recognizable, although several had names honouring the sun god Ra. The ‘chief of seers’ Meryra is one, although Panehsy and Pawah, both senior figures in the cult of the Aten, were not. The sculptor who may have made the painted head of Nefertiti was called Thutmose (or Thothmose), the name of the god Thoth written with the ibis-headed sign for the god.106 It would be wrong to conclude, however, that to some individuals what their name expressed did not matter. For a few did change their name. A figure at the Amarna court, for whom we have both his house (P47.19) and his tomb (no. 11), was a royal scribe and general (and steward for Amenhetep III). When he moved to Amarna he had the name Ptahmes (‘Ptah is born’) and this was recorded on a limestone door frame (which perhaps he had transported from his former house). The hieroglyphs for Ptahmes were filled with gypsum and had the name Rames/Ramose (‘Ra is born’) carved over the top.107

Of the citizen body in general we have very few names. A wooden coffin from one of the general cemeteries had belonged to a woman who alternated the name Hesyenaten with Hesyenra (‘one praised by Aten’/’one praised by Ra’), a revealing alternation in itself. A stela from the Workmen’s Village (see further below, p. 369) gives us the names of one fairly lowly family: a man, his wife, one son, four daughters and a married woman (perhaps the son’s wife). Despite calling himself ‘one praised by the living Aten’ (an interesting sign that ordinary people saw the Aten as having a personally benevolent aspect), he had kept his name which honoured the god Ptah, Ptahmay (short for Ptahemheb, ‘Ptah is in festival’ or Ptahemhat, ‘Ptah is at the fore’), and had given two of his daughters the name Bakist (‘servant of Isis’, one of them perhaps having died before the birth of the other). The remaining names record no divine associations.108 It is reasonable to think that some at least of the children may have been born at Amarna. Ptahmay himself seems to have felt a particular affinity to Isis but his stela also shows a person making his own adjustment to the times, modifying his personal pantheon to take in the Aten. This kind of evidence suggests a widespread pragmatic attitude to the times: the Aten had gained greater recognition than before, but not particularly at the expense of family custom. Officials, who would have been born before Akhenaten’s changes, generally did not alter their names out of respect for his ideas despite their dependence upon him and their protestations of loyalty.

A published list of names of men on inscribed objects found in the city (many of them involved in the production of commodities and written on the shoulders of pottery amphorae) must include a proportion from outside Amarna, particularly those working in vineyards in the north. Out of 86 names, only three (or five) use the name of the Aten, roughly the same number as names built around Amun. An example of the latter is a man responsible for producing wine for the ‘House of the Aten’ whose name was Amenemipet (‘Amun is in Luxor’). The name Nebamen (‘Amun is my lord’) appears three times in the list, perhaps for the same man.109 Another source is two fragments of accounts papyri (provenance unknown) which record deliveries of commodities to a river boat at places in Upper Egypt, possibly the Theban area.110 Each person making the delivery is identified by name and parentage, providing a sample of 46 personal names. Four of the names are compounds using the name Aten: Nebpa-aten (‘The Aten is lord’, a father), Baketpa-aten (‘Servant of the Aten’, a daughter), Pa-atenemweskhet (‘The Aten is in the Broad Hall’, the name appears twice for a female but linked with different husbands and so perhaps there were two women with this name) and Pa-atennakht (‘The Aten is strong’, a father). The riverine villages had regular contact with an institution and thus would have heard about what was happening in the wider world. The news of Akhenaten’s ideas and actions seems to have been received with positive interest amongst at least a modest proportion of the people concerned. It might signal no more than a pragmatic adjustment by powerless people to a new regime, but in its tiny way it cautions against thinking that Akhenaten’s moves caused national outrage. The Aten names appear to cover three generations and it is even possible that the document dates to after the Amarna Period, perhaps as late as the early Nineteenth Dynasty, thus some 40 to 50 years after Akhenaten’s death.

Unanimity of view is not a natural characteristic of human groups. Some individuals will hold to one opinion, others to one that is antithetical, and most will have a weak interest somewhere in between. The pattern of personal names of the Amarna Period is really what we should expect, particularly since their owners were living in a society which was only just beginning to discover partisanship based on ideas (as distinct from family and dynastic considerations).

Positive interest to a more significant level is illustrated by two papyrus family letters which were sent from Amarna to Thebes and, for reasons we do not know, were buried unopened in a tomb.111 The sender, Ramose, had the profession of ‘oil boiler’ or ‘preparer of unguent’ in the household of princess Meritaten, probably a lowly position (although one letter was addressed to his brother who was a scribe of the treasury). The letters (conceivably written for Ramose by someone else) begin with formal greetings in which only the Aten is mentioned as the bestower of blessings. One greeting reads: ‘Now here I am calling upon the Aten … in the city of Akhetaten … to keep [you] healthy each day …’ In both letters Ramose speaks of family problems which are now hard to understand (in part because of damaged passages) but which involved possible legal proceedings. Evidently to fortify himself he either appeals to the Aten for guidance or expresses thanks to the Aten for guidance received: ‘“May the Aten [provide] me with guidance”, so said I. And so he (the Aten) has provided [me with guidance]’; and ‘Now here I am saying to the Aten (life, prosperity, health!), “How wonderful!” See, [I am] fine. I have been provided with guidance.’ These are probably the clearest expressions we have of the inner thoughts of one person of no particular standing at Amarna (although probably living at the North Palace and so part of the royal household). They show what it meant to be a devotee of the Aten.

In communities large and small, in earlier and later times, individuals found opportunities to identify places where they could contact imagined beings, usually those who could be appealed to for help and who satisfied the basic urge which most people have to express deference and to humble themselves before authority from time to time. The places could be distinctive features in the landscape, could be tombs where contact was sought with the imagined presence of a dead relative, a location within a house or, once a cult had become established, a separately built shrine. At the Workmen’s Village, where isolation allowed a distinctive culture to flourish, families built their own chapels just outside the village walls (Figure 8.18, p. 366). Their cemetery lay a short distance further back, and memories of the dead were probably stimulated in the minds of the living by visits to the chapels. But their first function was to serve as places where families could meet and eat meals in an atmosphere which was calm and private, and also rarified through painted wall decorations and the furnishings of cult.112

At the back of each chapel stood small waist-high alcoves in which objects could be placed which people wished to honour and also use as channels of communication with transcendental beings. Only a few relics of this practice were left behind. They included a limestone stela depicting the god Shed, ‘the Saviour’, who offered protection against scorpions; a second stela (Figure 8.19) decorated on the front and sides with scenes of the man named Ptahmay (mentioned above, p. 368) who, although not given an earthly title, is called ‘one praised by the living Aten’ but who still kneels beneath figures of Isis and Shed and, on the sides, is accompanied by depictions of his family; a wooden sun-disk provided with horns (perhaps from a wooden statue of Hathor as a cow); a wooden base bearing the name of a man, Nehemmaatiu, described as a ‘servant of the Place’ (a title similar to that borne by many men who lived at Deir el-Medina) and perhaps to support a statuette of him; a small wooden plaque painted on both sides and probably the top of a standard or staff of office, depicting a man kneeling before a canine god (Wepwawet?) on one side, and two running figures who appear to be policemen on the other. The walls and door frames of the chapels had been decorated in a style that is typical for the late Eighteenth Dynasty but pays no heed to the subject matter characteristic of Amarna. In three places the name Amun or Amun-Ra was invoked in prayers, and described in one of them as ‘the good ruler eternally, the lord of heaven, who made the whole earth’. Just outside the village entrance and not far from the chapels someone had discarded an irregular rounded stone which, by the application of painted lines, had been turned into an image of a falcon, presumably the god Horus (Figure 8.19).



Figure 8.19Other gods of Amarna. Top. An image of a falcon god (presumably Horus) fashioned from a rounded, unworked stone with a painted design added. Found just outside the entrance to the Workmen’s Village. The painted lines are in black which, within the outlines of the body and legs, have been drawn over a coat of yellow paint. Maximum length 14 cm; maximum height 15.5 cm. Object no. 1919, from square J19 level (7). Drawn by B. Kemp, inked by A. Boyce. Bottom. Stela honouring both the goddess Isis and the god Shed, protector from scorpions. Shed is depicted as a boy warrior, with sidelock of youth, bow in left hand, mace in right hand, quiver for arrows over his right shoulder. The central panel is painted yellow with a blue surrounding band, curved at the top. The details were originally picked out in red, blue, green and yellow, with the hieroglyphs in blue between incised lines painted in red. The owner’s family is depicted on the sides of the stela. From the Workmen’s Village, chapel 525. After Peet and Woolley, COA I, 96–7, Pl. XXVIII.3; hand copy of texts in the EES archives; personal photograph. Now in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, JdE 46954. Height 44.4 cm.



The excavators who first encountered this material, which seemed to contradict the general understanding of Akhenaten’s intentions, concluded that it belonged to the short interval between Akhenaten’s death and the abandonment of the city in the reign of Tutankhamun.113 This cannot be disproved. Nevertheless, the chapels themselves seem to be an integral part of the overall layout of the village and not additions, although this applies primarily to the building fabric and less to the portable objects. Moreover, the alternative picture, that Akhenaten’s set of ideas expressed a preference which did not deny the validity of others, finds support in widespread evidence of a similar kind from across the city. Individual instances might post-date Akhenaten’s death; that all of them do is implausible.

There is no sign that the items found in these chapels that were not part of the decoration of walls and doors were fixed in place. They seem to have been set up temporarily for moments of devotion, with the rear alcoves being the location that would give them most prominence. Otherwise they could have been stored in the chapel or kept at home, perhaps wrapped in a piece of linen. Objects of this kind act as portals to the imagination. A person talks to imaginary beings through them or with their aid, sometimes reinforcing deference with gifts, primarily in Egypt in the form of food and pure water poured from a vessel. More of this material – quite varied in its nature – has been found throughout Amarna. Some is in the form of flakes and small slabs of limestone bearing designs in ink or in rough carving.114 The subject matter includes figures of divinities: the baboon god Thoth (patron of writing), Ptah (particularly associated with Memphis), a sacred ram and Taweret (Thöeris), a goddess who offered protection, especially at childbirth; and representations of the process of gaining attention: a figure of a man making offerings before an altar, and crudely painted depictions of ears by which the god’s hearing was aided. If we look for concentrations of this kind of material in the hope of identifying actual shrines in the city, the results are disappointing. A stela showing a man before an altar came from a collection of rooms beside one of the public wells in the North Suburb (T36.67), but the plan of the walls tells us little: they have neither the character of a house nor of a shrine.115 Evidence from the Main City is a little better. Again beside a public well the excavated plan of a little building (P47.10, Figure 8.12, p. 350) looks like a shrine, although no distinctive material accompanied it.116 Not far away, apparently in the same open space although the context had been largely destroyed by denudation, the same excavation uncovered a small building which is, from its plan, the strongest candidate for a shrine in a public place (P48.4, Figure 8.12, also marked ‘C’).117 Apart from its plan, a well-made limestone stela was discovered, which depicted a man adoring before a table of offerings, and above him a group of three deities: Khnum, Satet and Anukis, the family of gods of Elephantine.

Most of the material that can be considered as portals to the world of the gods comes from areas of housing and workshops. Many houses were equipped in one of their rooms with a small platform that could act as the point of contact.118 As with the chapels at the Workmen’s Village, there is no sign that significant objects, even small ones, were fixed in place. One must assume that such things, including small stelae, were kept separate and put in place only as the occasion demanded. One collection of material that served this end and which was found in an undisturbed position (house N49.21) came from the tiny room beneath the stairs.119 It consisted of a stela showing a woman and girl before Taweret, and parts of two female figurines and two model beds, all made in pottery. The last items represent a more numerous category: the spirits behind which might have been more appropriately invoked in other parts of the house. The figurines, in the shape of their heads and hair, sometimes resemble the goddess Hathor, and, taken with the model beds, suggest a means to create an ambience suited to womanhood and the danger and mystery of childbirth.120 It embraced the goddess Taweret and the dwarf and demonic god Bes (who had a ‘trickster’ role not dissimilar to various figures, including Mr Punch, in European folklore). At the Workmen’s Village Bes and Taweret appear in wall paintings, and there is some evidence that an upstairs room with special wall paintings supplied the focus for domestic femininity.121 Other statuettes and figurines moulded into the bottom of pottery bowls depict a cobra. A slightly later magical text (not from Amarna) contains the words to be spoken over pottery models of cobras placed in the bedroom to ward off night terrors.122

Night was the time when malevolent forces were abroad, which could be spirits of the dead seeking to bring disease and death. One of Akhenaten’s maternal grandparents (thus Yuya or Tuyu) possessed a finely made bed which was found in their tomb in the Valley of the Kings (Figure 8.20). Although buried a few years before Amarna was created, the bed illustrates the motifs that could be employed to ward off the night’s imagined dangers. Both sides of the head board were decorated with low-relief figures of Bes and Taweret covered with gold leaf. The heads of the two legs at the foot end bore images of the Wedjat-eye also in gold leaf. This was an ancient design in which the shape of the human eye was combined with details of the plumage surrounding the eye of a falcon, the whole representing the ‘good’ Eye of Horus. It stood for wholeness and wellbeing. The sleeper was thus assured of protection by what, to judge from their popularity at Amarna as small and cheap items of personal adornment, were the three most potent protective forces at that time: Taweret, Bes and the Eye of Horus.



Figure 8.20Means of protection. (1) Wooden bed from the tomb of Yuya and Tuyu, parents of Queen Tiy, wife of Amenhetep III. The three gilt-stucco panels on the head board depict (left and right) the god Bes, wearing lion’s mask, flanked by the goddess Taweret (Thöeris) and (centre) the goddess Taweret, twice with crocodile head and once (middle) with the head of a lioness. The design of the Eye of Horus (wedjat) is outlined on a gold-leaf cover over each of the two legs at the foot end of the bed. After J.E. Quibell, Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du Caire, nos. 51001–51191. Tomb of Yuaa and Thuiu, Cairo, IFAO, 1908, Pl. XXVIII; T.M Davis, The Tomb of Iouiya and Touiyou, London, Constable, 1907, p. following 36; plus personal photographs. The bed is in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo. Drawing by M. Bertram. (2) The Eye of Horus motif on a domed-back bead made in glazed steatite, which had been attached by thread to the left hand of a woman (individual 114) who had an imperfectly healed fracture of her left upper arm and had been buried in the South Tombs Cemetery at Amarna. Object no. 39449. Width 1.5 cm. Facial reconstruction of the original owner in Kemp, City, 225, Fig. 6.32. (3)–(5) Designs on the bases of three scaraboid beads with hippopotamus backs found in the grave of a woman and child (individuals 188A and B) at the South Tombs Cemetery. (3) Bes. (4) A seated goddess (probably Isis). (5) Taweret. Objects nos 39933a, b, c. Length of Taweret bead 1.5 cm. Drawn from photographs by M. Bertram. (6) Figure painted in white with red lines on a black background on the outside wall of a wooden coffin found at the South Tombs Cemetery, coffin (13438). It depicts a canine-headed protective deity, one of the Four Sons of Horus. Height of image as preserved c. 20 cm. Drawn (by B. Kemp) from a photograph taken by L. Skinner.



Figurines required a particular act to bring out the power to help and to protect that the user desired, an act performed, it would seem, within the house. The same person, however, could also carry the same symbols wherever they went, worn as jewellery, often cheaply made in brightly glazed faience and in the form of delicate rings or strung beads to be worn on the finger, or strung in large numbers to form a broad collar, perhaps to be worn on special occasions. Bes and Taweret were popular motifs, the sign for maat also occurs, but the most popular of all was a version of the Eye of Horus (the Wedjat-symbol; Figure 8.20), widely worn as a finger ring made of faience. Similar items accompanied some of the individuals buried in the South Tombs Cemetery. (These symbols also had their place in the spells and illustrations of the Book of the Dead, although so far no copy has been found at Amarna.) Amidst these tokens of popular interest in benign powers are also to be found rings where the design is the name of the reigning king, Akhenaten himself and his two successors, Ankh-kheperura (who, to begin with, took Smenkhkara as his other name) and Neb-kheperura (Tutankhamun). Although the twin names of the Aten also appear on faience pendants, it is noticeable that the image of the Aten itself, the sun-disk with rays, had no place in this little world of protective images with which the people of Amarna adorned their bodies, in life and in death.

The evidence supplied by the cemeteries as well as by certain pictorial representations none the less suggests that changes were taking place. Many people seem to have become reticent about or felt the need for avoidance of the area of interest which centred on Osiris, namely Osiris himself, the Four Sons of Horus and Anubis, although the picture is sufficiently inconsistent as to suggest that (as one might expect) people were not uniform in their views. A few pictures of funerals show that people at least aspired to keeping to the traditional forms: the gathering of mourners, the grand feast in which cattle were slaughtered, the presentation of offerings, the Opening of the Mouth ceremony in front of the prepared body, the burial of funeral equipment. Yet in the main example (in the tomb of Huy, no. 1) Osiris is conspicuously absent.123 In the general cemeteries there was perhaps a tendency to bury fewer items (though the lack of completely excavated cemeteries from other sites of the period, in which all graves no matter how disturbed were examined, makes a numerical comparison difficult). So far, in the general cemeteries, no example has been found of a ushabti-figure, the statuettes which acted as substitutes for the deceased if called upon to perform conscripted labour and also linked him to Osiris (and with a section of the Book of the Dead, ‘Chapter’ or ‘Spell 6’). If this appears to be the deliberate avoidance of an Osiris feature, how can we explain – except through a tolerance of inconsistency greater than ours – the presence of at least 248 figures of this kind, many carved from granite, in Akhenaten’s own tomb (some of them manufactured in a workshop area near the Great Palace)?124 Excavation in the main cemetery has recovered fragments from 40 wooden coffins, of which 20 were decorated, although in only 8 cases can something of their decoration be reconstructed. Their overall shape is traditional. Three of them continue the pre-Amarna style which placed the deceased in the role of Osiris supported by the figures of the Four Sons of Horus (at least one of which was given the head of a canine, Figure 8.20, p. 373). Three others, however, replace the funerary deities ‘by figures of male offering-bearers and women in the mourning pose. Rather than the recitations by the old gods, the texts on these coffins contain prayers for offerings and other benefits in the afterlife.’125 ‘One of the coffins showing traditional gods was buried close to two others in the new “godless” style, suggesting that they were interred not far apart in time, and perhaps owned by people who knew each other in life.’126 These ‘godless’ coffins are one of the clearest pointers to a change of outlook by at least some of the citizens of Amarna, evidence of a positive response to Akhenaten’s seeming questioning of traditions. But whether this was a source of contention amongst people we cannot tell, nor whether the suppression of old ideas at the personal level was part of Akhenaten’s plan, nor whether the variety of people’s responses reflects choices that people felt they had or the result of only partially understanding what was expected of them. We have no idea whether Akhenaten sought to disseminate his ideas widely or whether they trickled down, with the risk of distortion and misunderstanding.





The quality of life and where do we go from here?


The letters of the ‘preparer of unguent’ Ramose bring us closer than anything else to the inner world of one of Amarna’s inhabitants (see p. 369). The letters are mostly about domestic matters, some of which were contentious. He had a specific complaint about his own situation, too: that he was living in the ‘house’ of the princess Meritaten (probably the North Palace) without a woman (is he referring to his wife?). He pleaded with his relatives to solve this problem. Nothing in his letters suggests unease with the times in which he was living or any bodily afflictions. He might have remained at Amarna until the end, returning to Thebes where, so we learn from his letters, several members of his family lived. Or he might have been one of the thousands who died at Amarna. In that case, he would have eventually become one of the anonymous individuals reduced to a skeleton in the large cemeteries on the desert floor behind Amarna.

At the time of writing excavation of the two main cemeteries at Amarna has yielded over 500 sets of human bones (though in varying degrees of completeness). Thanks to the application of forensic skills developed in recent decades, we can learn far more from them than was the case in the earlier days of archaeology. Much analysis has been carried out and more is to come. It presents a sombre picture of physical life at Amarna.

Both the southern and the northern cemeteries show evidence of dietary deficiency, disease, and heavy workloads. Vitamin C deficiency is attested in the presence of skeletal lesions of scurvy, while porotic lesions of the eye orbits and skull (known as cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis) point likewise to diets deficient probably in iron or Vitamin B12, among other micronutrients. An insufficient diet during the growth period can lead to overall lower population mean stature, which is also seen at Amarna. We do not yet have many well-excavated skeletal assemblages from other sites with which we can compare the Amarna skeletons, especially sites of a similar date. However, the Amarna population is noticeably shorter than those comparative populations that are available for study from earlier Egyptian cemeteries, and sites of a broadly similar date to Amarna and later in neighbouring Sudanese Nubia. Childhood years therefore seem to have been particularly tough at Amarna.

Signs of heavy labour are also widespread at the cemeteries. Individuals of all ages above 7 years old (the approximate end of non-working childhood) exhibit skeletal lesions of degenerative joint disease (arthritis), spinal trauma, and fractures typical of occupational accidents. Spinal trauma is of particular interest, in that the fractures identified are those often associated with extremely heavy labour.127



Lives could be short. At the northern cemetery (from the first season of excavation in 2015), out of 77 sets of bones to which an age determination could be given, all but one were from people who had died before the age of 25.128 The northern cemetery, in fact, presents us with results from which it is hard to escape the conclusion that child labour was being extensively used. Child labour, like slavery, is an emotional topic. In traditional societies, it can be normal and not necessarily damaging for children to work as members of the family in agriculture or domestic manufacturing. It becomes harmful when they are pressed into working excessive hours at heavy and sometimes dangerous tasks. The industrial revolution in Britain in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries relied heavily on child labour, including in mines and textile mills, until legislation and changing attitudes to the suffering that resulted led to the decline of the practice. At Amarna (and this would be generally the case in ancient Egypt) the heavy and dangerous tasks must have centred on stone-working: in the quarries, in the transport trains and at the building sites. The standardized stone blocks at Amarna, each of them (when of limestone) weighing between 60 and 70 kg, were made to be carried singly by individuals, which was a loading likely to cause skeletal damage especially on the bodies of the young. It is worth noting that the northern cemetery is located not far from the main quarries at Amarna itself. Even so, the generally low age at death is startling. Perhaps the simplest explanation is that, from a weakened start in life, hard labour so reduced their resistance to infection that they died at an unusually high rate, a possibility heightened by written sources from countries to the north that refer to an epidemic around this time. The fact that they appear to have been buried not within a family cemetery but one specifically for them also carries the implication that they had been conscripted and kept from their homes.

Despite the grimness of life which this evidence is revealing, when choosing to show who they were, some of the Amarna people still produced positive images. The man Ptahmay, who regarded himself as ‘honoured by the Aten’ yet held warmer feelings for Isis, celebrated happy times with his family on his stela (Figure 8.19, p. 370). The most graphic illustration we so far have from the cemetery excavations at Amarna is a stela on which a couple (presumably husband and wife) are shown seated side by side, the man relaxing easily in his chair and turning towards the woman whose shoulder he clasps with an outstretched arm (Figure 8.15, p. 357). At the same time, another man (a son?) pours water for them at a table of offerings. All three are very likely to have lived lives that are defined for us by the conditions recorded on the excavated skeletons and the same could well have been true for Ptahmay and his family who lived at the Workmen’s Village. Hard lives do not necessarily extinguish love and hope.

The people of the cemeteries illustrate the paradox of civilization. Civilization is the outcome of behaviour which, when personally encountered, can be nasty, but when distant we forgive because we approve of the end product: architecture, art, interesting ideas and the stability that comes from the exercise of absolute power. The fact that I am writing and the reader reading, instead of both of us gathering wild cereal grains, is possible only because in past times kingdoms and empires carved out oases of leisure for the gifted and the learned at the expense of the many, who had to foot the bill. Without the will to coerce others, by conscription to labour and by warfare, humanity would live in a perpetual Stone Age (which, even if it seems superficially attractive, cannot in any case be recreated). If we dare to accept that the progress of civilization is to be measured in the rise of those factors which inhibit or humanize the exercise of the power which started the process in the first place, what does make us different?

At the two poles of our lives – our intuitive personal strategies to survive, and our direction by the ideologies and instruments of our states and communities – we remain largely as we have been since complex society first emerged. We still live in the shadow of the Bronze Age. The societies of the distant past, such as that of ancient Egypt, reveal this starkly. We can see in them the bare bones of existence ever since. What is different is our ability to make ourselves the object of rational study, to explore the deep roots of our condition and to recognize the infinite ability of the mind to invent what seem to be realities but are in fact myths. Myths are that by which we live, but more than ever we can choose to follow rational, humanitarian myths, the ideas that we create (embracing the concept that ‘human rights’ should be universally valid), that allow us to move on from the cruelties that underpinned past progress. The true study of ourselves and how we have become as we are is a subversive subject.





Notes

1The first source for Akhenaten and Amarna should be the collected translations, Murnane, Texts. Recent treatments of king and city include: Laboury, Akhénaton; Freed, Pharaohs of the Sun; C. Tietze, ed., Amarna: Lebensräume, Lebensbilder, Weltbilder, 2nd edn Weimar, Arcus-Verlag, 2010; M. Gabolde, Akhenaton: Du mystère à la lumière, Paris, Gallimard, 2005; Arnold, Royal Women; Kemp, City; Seyfried, In the Light; Manniche, Colossi.

2Kemp, How to Read is my attempt to confront the weirdness of something which I can see ought at the same time to be respected for its daring and its atttention to detail.

3Piankoff, Litany.

4In the ‘Salle des Litanies’: J-Cl. Goyon and H. El-Achirie, Le Ramesseum VI, Cairo, Centre de documentation et d’études sur l’ancienne Égypte, 1974, 23, Pl. VIII.

5Lichtheim, Literature II, 89–100; Simpson, Literature, 278–83.

6P. Bulak 17 = P. Cairo 58038: Pritchard, Texts, 365–7.

7Sections of the book are illustrated in Z. Hawass, The Royal Tombs of Egypt: the Art of Thebes Revealed, Cairo, AUC Press, 2006, 132–4.

8Martin, Royal Tomb II, 20–7, Pls 18–33.

9Wb. II, 20.5 and 6 (with Belegstellen); Laboury, Akhénaton, 72–3, 184, 207–8.

10Murnane, Texts, 111–12, 192; Kemp, City, 29–30.

11Petrie, Abydos I, 30, Pls LXII–LXIV.

12J.-F. Carlotti and P. Martinez, CdK 14 (2013), 231–77, esp. 251, Figs 18, 19. The mass of Karnak material from Akhenaten’s reign is presented in Smith and Redford, Project I; D.B. Redford, The Akhenaten Temple Project II, Toronto, Akhenaten Temple Project, 1988; J. Gohary, Akhenaten’s Sed-festival at Karnak, London and New York, KPI, 1992; Blyth, Karnak, 119–26; R. Vergnieux and M. Gondran, Aménophis IV et les pierres du soleil: Akhénaton retrouvé, Paris, Arthaud, 1997. Whilst at Amarna the statues of Akhenaten and his family were thoroughly broken up, his many colossal statues at Karnak mostly suffered damage which is more consistent with demolition and the wish to reuse parts of them rather than with a desire to obliterate his existence, although some do seem to have been attacked with a desire to disfigure. This is documented and discussed in Manniche, Colossi, 19–22.

13Murnane, Texts, 240–1.

14W.J. Murnane and C.C. Van Siclen III, The Boundary Stelae of Akhenaten, London and New York, KPI, 1993; Murnane, Texts, 73–86.

15Murnane, Texts, 83–4.

16Murnane, Texts, 78.

17F. Hagen, ‘On some movements of the royal court in New Kingdom Egypt.’ In van Dijk, Mouthful of Dust, 155–81, p. 166.

18G. Roeder, Amarna-Reliefs aus Hermopolis, Hildesheim, Pelizaeus-Museum, 1969; R. Hanke, Amarna-Reliefs aus Hermopolis: Neue Veröffentlichungen und Studien, Hildesheim, Gerstenberg, 1978; Cooney, Amarna Reliefs.

19Murnane, Texts, 77–8; H.W. Fairman, in Pendlebury, COA III, 189–212. Some of the key names for buildings in the Amarna Period referred to buildings that seem to have existed in more than one location. There was even more than one place named Akhetaten, others being at Thebes, Memphis and perhaps Heliopolis (Wegner, Sunshade Chapel, 117–21, where the phrase ‘an essentially multivalent toponymic identity’ is used, p. 117).

20B. Kemp, CAJ 10 (2000), 335–46.

21Principally a scene in the tomb of May (no. 14) and another in the tomb of Meryra (no. 4), Davies, Rock Tombs V, 3–4, Pl. V; Davies, Rock Tombs I, 34–5, Pls XXV–XXIX.

22Kemp and Garfi, Survey, 48, Fig. 10.

23E. Schauer, Ungeplante Siedlungen. Juval Portugali, Self-organization and the City, Berlin, Springer, 1999 is a far more theoretical and intensive analysis of the underlying mathematics, as they can be applied to modern cities. See also B. Kemp, ‘How the city of Amarna came into being.’ Akhetaten Sun, 22 (2) (2016), 2–13.

24Kemp, City, 161–80.

25Peet and Woolley, COA I, 5–9, Pls III, IV, V, VIII.1.

26F. Ll. Griffith, JEA 10 (1924), 302, Pl. XXXIII; Kemp, City, 44–5, Figs 1.15, 1.16.

27Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser, 238–42, Abb. 34–5, St. V, Hp. 74, 75, Taf. 18A.

28Kemp and Garfi, Survey, 47–9, Fig. 10.

29Kemp and Garfi, Survey, 39–44, esp. Fig. 7; Kemp, City, 151–3.

30Davies, Rock Tombs V, 3–4, Pl. V.

31Pendlebury, COA III, 33–85, Pls XIIIA–XV, XXXIII–XLIV; P. Vomberg, Das Erscheinungsfenster innerhalb der amarnazeitlichen Palastarchitektur: Herkunft, Entwicklung, Fortleben, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz 2004; Kemp, City, 135–40; K. Spence, ‘Royal power in New Kingdom Egypt: the palaces and gardens of Amarna.’ In J. Ganzert and I. Nielsen, eds, Herrschaftsverhältnisse und Herrschaftslegitimation: Bau- und Gartenkultur als historische Quellengattung hinsichtlich Manifestation und Legitimation von Herrschaft: Symposium 22.–24. Oktober 2014, Berlin, Lit, 2015, 13–33.

32Weatherhead, Palace Painting describes and illustrates the painted surfaces found in all of the Amarna palaces.

33Pendlebury, COA III, 60–1, 150, Pls XIIIC, XLIV.1, 2, LXXXIII.III; A. van der Perre, JEH 7 (2014), 92–3.

34F.G. Newton, JEA 10 (1924), 294–8; T. Whittemore, JEA 12 (1926), 4–9; Frankfort, Mural Paintings; Kemp, City, 135–7, 146–51.

35C. Speiser, Offrandes et purification à l’époque amarnienne, Turnhout (Belgium), Brepols, 2010.

36Pendlebury, COA III, 5–20, Pls III–X, XXIV–XXIX; Kemp and Garfi, Survey, 50–3, Fig. 11; Kemp, City, 87–95; P. Vomberg, Untersuchungen zum Kultgeschehen im Großen Aton-Tempel von Amarna, Göttingen, Hubert, 2014.

37Pendlebury, COA III, 92–100, Pls XLVI–XLVII; Kemp, City, 86–7.

38M. Mallinson, ‘Excavation and survey in the Central City, 1988–92.’ AR VI, 169–215, esp. p. 215, Fig. 5.26.

39B.J. Kemp, JEA 62 (1976), 91–2; R. Stadelmann, MDAIK 29 (1973), 221–42.

40E.g. Davies, Rock Tombs I, Pls XI, XXVIII, left side.

41E.g. Davies, Rock Tombs I, Pls XI, XXXIII; Rock Tombs II, Pl. XIX, right side.

42Pendlebury, COA III, 11, 12; M. Shepperson, JEA 98 (2012), 19–26; M. Shepperson and M. Hill, Horizon 11 (2012), 4–6; Seyfried, In the Light, 230–1, Cat. no. 20 illustrates fragments of the stela.

43B. Kemp, M. Bertram, D. Driaux, A. Hodgkinson and S. Kelly, JEA 100 (2014), 1–14; B. Kemp, Horizon 15 (2014), 6.

44See note 43, together with B. Kemp, M. Bertram, D. Driaux, A. Hodgkinson, S. Jędraszek and S. Kelly, JEA 101 (2015), 5–15; Horizon 15 (2014), 2–5; 16 (2015), 2–3; B. Kemp, Horizon 17 (2016), 5–6.

45B. J. Kemp, ‘Outlying temples at Amarna.’ AR VI, 411–62; Kemp, City, 119–21; Wegner, Sunshade Chapel, 77–88.

46Because the site no longer exists we are very largely dependent upon the excavation report, Peet and Woolley, COA I, 109–24, Pls XXIX–XXXIV, XXXVI–XL; the painted pavements are reconstructed in Weatherhead, Palace Paintings, 273–343. For a recent discussion, see Wegner, Sunshade Chapel, 85–8.

47J. Williamson, Nefertiti’s Sun Temple: a New Cult Complex at Tell el-Amarna, 2 vols, Leiden, Brill, 2016. This develops the idea that these separate sun temples served the mortuary cult of the elite members of Amarna’s society, as does J. Williamson, JEA 103 (2017), 117–23.

48Pendlebury, COA III, 28–32, 86–142, Pls I, XI, XII, XVI, XVIII–XXIV, XXVIII, XXX–XXXIII, XLVI–LVI; Kemp, City, 123–5.

49P.J. Rose, ‘Report on the 1986 Amarna pottery survey.’ AR IV, 114–29; P.J. Rose, ‘Report on the 1987 Amarna pottery survey.’ AR V, 102–14; Kemp, ‘Food’, 141, Fig. 14.4; Kemp, City, Pl. XXXV.

50Davies, Rock Tombs IV, 23–4, Pls XXXVI, XXXVII, XLIII.

51Kemp, ‘Food’, 146–9.

52His tomb: Davies, Rock Tombs II, 9–32, Pls II–XXIII, XXVI, XXVII; his Main City house: see note 26; his official residence: COA III, 26–7, Pls XI, XXX, XXXI.

53P. Payne, JEA 92 (2006), 45–52; P. Payne, EA 30 (2007), 18–20; Kemp, City, 129–30, Fig. 4.5; C. Simpson, JEA 102 (2016), 2–6; C. Simpson, Horizon 17 (2016), 2–5.

54Pendlebury, COA III, 10.

55H.W. Fairman, in Pendlebury, COA III, 169–75; Kemp, City, 110–12.

56Kemp, ‘Food’, 138–45; Kemp, City, Pl. XXXV.

57Kemp and Garfi, Survey, 51, Fig. 11.

58Murnane, Texts, 31.

59Murnane, Texts, 151.

60Murnane, Texts, 173.

61J. Jacquet, Karnak-Nord VII: le Trésor de Thoutmosis Ier. Installations antérieures ou postérieures au monument, Cairo, IFAO, 1994, esp. 141–3; H. Jacquet-Gordon, Karnak-Nord X: le Trésor de Thoutmosis Ier. La céramique, 2 vols, Cairo, IFAO, 2012, I, 143; II, 64, Fig. 64, d–f.

62L. Green, ‘Some thoughts on ritual banquets at the court of Akhenaten and in the ancient Near East.’ In G. Knoppers and A. Hirsch, eds, Egypt, Israel and the Ancient Mediterranean World: Festschrift Donald B. Redford, Winona Lake, IL, Eisenbrauns 2004, 203–22; Kemp, City, 145–6.

63Pendlebury, COA III, 113–30, Pls XIX, XLVIII–L; Kemp, City, 122–31.

64Two ostraca bearing extracts from the book called Kemyt have been found in houses within the Great Palace, Pendlebury, COA III, 162; others with a fragment of another Twelfth Dynasty ‘instruction’ warning against treachery have been found in a private house, R.B. Parkinson, ‘The Teaching of King Amenemhat I at el-Amarna: BM EA 57458 and 57479.’ In A. Leahy and J. Tait, eds, Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honour of H. S. Smith, London, EES, 1999, 221–6. Ostraca with quotes from the same text have been found at Amenhetep III’s palace town at Malkata: Hayes, JNES 10 (1951), 241–2; Leahy, Malkata, 27–8.

65Pendlebury, COA III, 122–30, Pls XX, XLIX.4; Kemp, City, 129–31. I. Shaw, JFA 22 (1995), 223–38 discusses the status of this ‘Central Village’ in some detail, expressing scepticism about its workplace identification.

66Van den Boorn, Duties is a detailed study of the text of the ‘duties of the vizier’. It was to the vizier at Amarna that the chief of police, Mahu, reported the arrest of men found in the desert, Murnane, Texts, 149–50. At the end of the New Kingdom it was the vizier who took a prominent role in the trial of the robbers of royal tombs and temples at Thebes, McDowell, Jurisdiction, 126, 168–9, citing especially P. Abbott, 7 = Peet, Tomb-robberies, 42; P. Turin 2021, 4, 1ff.

67Pendlebury, COA III, 86–92, Pls XVI, XLV, XLVI; Kemp, City, 131–5.

68A.R. Schulman, JARCE 3 (1964), 51–69.

69Pendlebury, COA III, 131–8, Pls XXI, L–LIV.

70Davies, Rock Tombs IV, 12–18, Pls XIV–XXIX, XXL–XLII. Pl. XXVI documents responsibility to the vizier; Darnell and Manassa, Tutankhamun’s Armies, 194–6.

71Building P49.16: Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser, 279–80, St. V, Hp. 92.

72B. Kemp, Horizon 3 (2008), 8–9; Kemp, City, 154–61, Pl. XI; Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers, 69–80.

73Seton Lloyd, JEA 19 (1933), 1–7 is a presentation, by an architect who worked at Amarna, of a fine model of one of the larger houses. A coloured drawing based on it is H. and R. Leacroft, The Building of Ancient Egypt, London, Penguin, 1954, 8–9. Other studies which look more at the housing as a whole are P.T. Crocker, JEA 71 (1985), 52–65; A. Koltsida, Social Aspects of Ancient Egyptian Domestic Architecture, Oxford, Archaeopress, 2007; Tietze, Amarna, 98–117; K. Spence, ‘Settlement structure and social interaction at El-Amarna.’ In Bietak et al., Cities, 289–98.

74Frankfort, Mural Paintings; Kemp and Stevens, Busy Lives I, 110–85, 625–7 (colour plates); Horizon 4 (2008), 8–9; Kemp, City, Pls XXV–XXIX.

75K. Spence, JEA 90 (2004), 123–52.

76P. Anastasi IV = Caminos, Miscellanies, 137–8.

77F.G. Newton, JEA 10 (1924), 291, Pls XXV, XXVI.1; Kemp, City, 186–7, fig. 5.27.

78Davies, Rock Tombs I, 41–2, Pls V, XXXII, left side.

79Do. Arnold, ‘The workshop of the sculptor Thutmose.’ In Arnold, Royal Women, 41–83; F. Seyfried, ‘The workshop complex of Thutmosis.’ In Seyfried, In the Light, 170–86.

80M. Eccleston, ‘Crucibles’. In Kemp and Stevens, Busy Lives II, 361–99; A. Stevens and M. Eccleston, ‘Craft production and technology.’ In T. Wilkinson, ed., The Egyptian World, London and New York, Routledge, 2007, 146–59; Horizon 2 (2007), 7.

81S. Ikram, JEA 75 (1989), 89–101; Stevens, Religion, esp. 133–8, 253–4.

82B. Kemp, A. Stevens, G.R. Dabbs, M. Zabecki and J.C. Rose, Antiquity 87 (2013), 64–87; A. Stevens, G. Dabbs and J. Rose, Current World Archaeology 78 (2016), 14–21; B.J. Kemp, ‘The orientation of burials at Tell el-Amarna.’ In Z. Hawass and J. Richards, eds, The Archaeology and Art of Ancient Egypt: Essays in Honor of David B. O’Connor, Cairo, Supreme Council of Antiquities Press, 2007, I, 21–31; regular reports since 2006 in JEA and Horizon.

83A. Stevens, Horizon 17 (2016), 7.

84Davies, Rock Tombs II, 3, Pls XXIV and XLII.

85Peet and Woolley, COA I, 8, Fig. 1; Kemp and Stevens, Busy Lives I, 116–29; B. Kemp, Akhetaten Sun 22 (1) (2016), 12–31, where the case is made for seeing Akhenaten’s successor as a male king one of whose names was Smenkhkara.

86W.M.F. Petrie and G. Brunton, Sedment II, London, BSAE, 1924, Chs VII and VIII.

87K.P. Kuhlmann, MDAIK 35 (1979), 165–88.

88Frankfort and Pendlebury, COA II, 63, 109, Pl. XXIII.4; Kemp, City, Pl. XXX.

89Original calculations in B.J. Kemp, MDOG 113 (1981), 81–97.

90Demarée and Valbelle, Les registres; McDowell, Village Life, 51–2; Muhs, Economy, 107–8.

91Janssen, Village Varia, 23–6.

92For the chapels themselves, see Nelson and Hölscher, Work, 101–6; U. Hölscher, The Excavation of Medinet Habu IV. The Mortuary Temple of Ramses III, Part II, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1951, 22–5. It is thought that sandstone blocks, belonging to the mayor of Thebes Paser of the time of Rameses III and found reused in the western gateway of the Medinet Habu enclosure, had originally been part of one these nearby chapels, thus giving it an identity: S. Schott, Wall Scenes from the Mortuary Chapel of the Mayor Paser at Medinet Habu, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1957. Paser was mayor of Thebes proper on the east bank and not to be confused with the mayor of Thebes Paser who was the colleague of the mayor of western Thebes, Paweraa in the time of Rameses IX, see M.J. Bierbrier, JEA 58 (1972), 196.

93U. Hölscher, Excavations at Ancient Thebes 1930/31, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1932, 28–36; Hölscher, Medinet Habu V, 5–8. Pls 4–5; Hölscher, Medinet Habu I. Hölscher saw the self-organized town that developed as a village of ‘peasants and craftsmen of the surrounding district’ constructed following a violent destruction of the original town, but this was a common reaction by archaeologists of the time to encountering unplanned settlements, namely, that they represented a decline from a period of order rather than a natural process of adaptation, from a rigid layout to one which reflected personal circumstances. The dates of the various parts are impossible to fix closely, except that one of the replacement houses had belonged to a named individual from the very end of the Twentieth Dynasty, the scribe of the necropolis Butehamun (Figure 8.17, p. 362). Some walls also pre-dated the tomb chapels of the God’s Wives of Amun of the Twenty-fifth Dynasty, but this still leaves a wide margin of uncertainty.

94Peet, Tomb-robberies, 93–102; Muhs, Economy, 108. For the date see, e.g., Janssen, Prices and Wages, 68 and n. 118; and McDowell, Jurisdiction, 90 and n. 307; Haring, Divine Households, 279–80.

95One of the scribes, named Iufenamun, belonged to the ‘necropolis’, thus to Deir el-Medina and was thus an immediate predecessor of Butehamun, whose house is the only identifiable one in the town; see note 93, and McDowell, Jurisdiction, 90–1 for Iufenamun. By this time the Deir el-Medina community had been dispersed although its members could still be assembled, McDowell, Village Life, 239–43.

96Kemp and Stevens, Busy Lives II, 255–69, 294–340.

97J. Harrell, EA 19 (2001), 36–8; Kemp, City, 60–3.

98H. Willems and R. Demarée, RdÉ 60 (2009), 224–8; A. Van der Perre, ‘Quarry marks of the Amarna Period. The limestone quarries of Dayr Abū Hinnis.’ In J. Budka, F. Kammerzell and S. Rzepka, eds, Non-textual Marking Systems in Ancient Egypt (and Elsewhere), Hamburg, Widmaier, 2015, 69–80; A. van der Perre, JEH 7 (2014), 92–3.

99Murnane, Texts, 29–30.

100This sequence is suggested in B. Kemp, Akhetaten Sun 21 (2) 2015, 2–13.

101Peet and Woolley, COA I, 51–108, Pls IX.2, XII, XIV, XVI–XXVIII; AR I–IV; B. Kemp, JEA 73 (1987), 21–50; D. Samuel, World Archaeology 31 (1999), 121–44; C.J. Stevens and A.J. Clapham, ‘Botanical insights into the life of an ancient Egyptian village: excavation results from Amarna.’ In C.J. Stevens, S. Nixon, M.A. Murray and D.Q. Fuller, Archaeology of African Plant Use, Walnut Creek, Left Coast Press, 2014, 151–64. Whether the Deir el-Medina community had actually moved to Amarna, to occupy the Workmen’s Village, is still open to debate, M. Müller, ‘Deir el-Medina in the Dark – the Amarna period in the history of the village.’ Deir el-Medina Studies, 154–67.

102Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers; A. Stevens, JFA 36 (2011), 100–18.

103M. Müller, Review of A. Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers: the Amarna Stone Village Survey, 2005–2009. London, 2012. AJA 117 (2013), www.ajaonline.org/online-review-book/1671 DOI:10.3764/ajaonline1174.Muller; see also J. Toivari-Viitala, ‘Workmen’s huts in the Theban Mountains Project.’ Deir el-Medina Studies, 191–8.

104Ranke, Personennamen I, 234.12; 233.18; II, 127, 218–19, 239. The main source for personal names in the Amarna period is Robert Hari, Répertoire onomastique amarnien, Aegyptiaca Helvetica 4, Genève, Éditions des Belles-Lettres, 1976.

105Ranke, Personennamen I, 163.13; II, 127.

106R. Krauss, Jahrbuch Preußischer Kulturbesitz 20 (1983), 119–32; Kemp, City, 234, fig. 7.5.

107Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser, 342–5.

108For the coffin, A. Bettum, JEA 101 (2015), 30, table 2; for Ptahmay’s stela, Peet and Woolley, COA I, 96–7, Pl. XXVIII.1–3; Ptahmay as being short for Ptahemheb (‘Ptah is in festival’) or Ptahemhat (‘Ptah is at the head’), Ranke, Personennamen II, 98, 144.

109Pendlebury, COA III, 176–9. Amenemipet is no. 11 of the list. In the two uncertain ‘Aten’ cases it is not clear if Ra or Aten is meant.

110V. Condon, RdÉ 35 (1984), 57–82; J.J. Janssen, VA 1(3), 109–12; V. Condon, VA 2(1), 23–9; M. Gabolde, D’Akhenaton à Toutânkhamoun, Lyon, Université Lumière-Lyon 2, Paris, Boccard, 1998, 21, 14–15, n. 92; Zingarelli, Trade, 44–7. The papyri are Brooklyn 35.1453A, B.

111P. Robert Mond 1 and 2: T.E. Peet, LAAA 17 (1930), 82–97; Wente, Letters, 94–6. The likelihood that Ramose lived at the North Palace comes from his demand at the end of the first letter that someone (male) be brought to him ‘that he may stay with me at the house of Meritaten’. What exactly he did as an ‘oil boiler’ cannot be further determined. The word translated ‘oil’ was a broad category of oils and oil-based mixtures; see Nicholson and Shaw, Materials, 406, 409, 462. For other evidence of private contact with the Aten, see S. Bickel, Journal of Ancient Egyptian Religion 3 (2003), 23–45. As for Ramose’s words, whilst the precise meaning is hard to catch, their familiarity in respect of the Aten is striking.

112Peet and Woolley, COA I, 92–108, Pls XXIV–XXVIII; AR I–IV; F. Weatherhead and B. Kemp, The Main Chapel at the Amarna Workmen’s Village and its Wall Paintings, London, EES, 2007.

113Peet and Woolley, COA I, 95–9.

114Stevens, Religion provides a comprehensive review of the evidence.

115Frankfort and Pendlebury, COA II, 61, 88, Pls IX, XXXV.5.

116Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser, 111–12, St. III, IV, Hp. 28.

117Borchardt and Ricke, Wohnhäuser, 222, St. II–IV, Hp. 64, Taf. 28; S. Seidlmayer, MDAIK 39 (1983), 204–6.

118Stevens, Religion, 219–34.

119Peet and Woolley, COA I, 25, Pl. XII.2, 4, 5. The original field notebook lists parts of two figurines rather than one; Kemp, City, 241, Fig. 7.13.

120G. Pinch, Orientalia 52 (1983), 405–14; Pinch, Votive Offerings, 197–234.

121Peet and Woolley, COA I, 59–60, 75, Pl. XVIII.3; B.J. Kemp, JEA 65 (1979), 47–53; B. Kemp, EA 34 (2009), 18–19; Kemp, City, 239–41, Fig. 7.11.

122K. Szpakowska, JARCE 90 (2003), 113–22; Stevens, Religion, 100–3, 175–6, 292–3.

123Davies, Rock Tombs III, 16–17, Pls XXII–XXIV; Kemp, City, 250–2, Fig. 7.22; 254, Fig. 7.25.

124Martin, Royal Tomb I, 37–74; II, 57–60. The total includes 11 unfinished examples, found in an area of sculpting debris north of the Great Palace. Nefertiti is represented by one ushabti-figure from an uncertain provenance.

125A. Bettum, JEA 101 (2015), 29–32, the quote being from p. 31.

126A. Stevens, G. Dabbs and J. Rose, Current World Archaeology 78 (2016), 14–21, p. 21.

127Ibid., 19–20.

128G.R. Dabbs and J.C. Rose, JEA 102 (2016), 7–11, p. 7. A second season of excavation, in 2017, has confirmed this pattern of early death after hard lives for samples of burials across a wide extent and applying to a buried population in the low thousands.





