4

The bureaucratic mind



The material achievements of ancient states – pyramids, conspicuous wealth, palaces, temples, conquests – depended on a particular skill: administration of resources. Although its basic purpose was to manipulate the economic environment for the benefit of the elite, in so doing benefit was incidentally spread to a significant sector of the population. This was achieved essentially through taxation to bring in resources and then through their redistribution as rations to an element of the population – probably a large one – engaged temporarily or permanently on work for the state. The first part of this classic resource cycle of early states – taxation – is best illustrated for Egypt by material from the New Kingdom, reserved for Chapters 6 and 7, although traces of such a system are present in much earlier written sources (Figure 2.2, p. 62, contains reference to a biennial enumeration of Egypt’s wealth from the Second Dynasty). This chapter is more about bureaucracy as a shaping force in society and the consequences of large-scale ration distribution for the relations between state and population. From here, the following chapter illustrates, largely through archaeological examples, the impact of this kind of thinking on the shaping of the settlements where many Egyptians lived.

A developed bureaucratic system reveals and actively promotes a specific human trait: a deep satisfaction in devising routines for measuring, inspecting, checking, and thus as far as possible controlling other people’s activities. This is a passive and orderly exercise of power in contrast to direct coercion. It draws upon a particular aptitude, as distinctive and important for a society as the genius of its artists and architects, or the bravura of its military men. When dealing with ancient Egypt we call a member of this class a ‘scribe’. It is a fair translation of an Egyptian word that means simply ‘one who writes, a writing man’. There is a tendency in modern societies where literacy is widespread to denigrate the junior official or clerical worker. But this is a luxury inappropriate to less developed societies. Where most are illiterate the writing man holds the key to the power that administration bestows. In Egypt scribes were not only amongst the elite, they knew it, and said so plainly. ‘Be a scribe’, ran the advice of teachers, ‘it saves you from toil, it protects you from all manner of labour.’ ‘Be a scribe. Your limbs will be sleek, your hands will grow soft. You will go forth in white clothes, honoured, with courtiers saluting you.’1 And many a senior figure in the state included ‘scribe’ amongst the accumulated titles of his curriculum vitae. The reader of this chapter should suppress any feeling of disdain associated with words like ‘bureaucracy’ and ‘scribe’. In the Egyptian world both attracted a very different set of values. At the same time, although ‘scribes’ defined themselves as an elite and extolled the virtues of the written word, the workings of Egyptian administration depended heavily upon a broader group of people, whose grasp of conventional writing was more limited. Archaeological evidence implies that they played their part through recognition of visual cues, particularly as contained within seals and sealings. They blurred the boundary between scribes, as they defined themselves, and the rest of society.2





Entering the scribal mind


Large numbers of administrative written sources have survived from ancient Egypt. We will begin with a set of early texts which reveal vividly the bureaucratic scribe’s concern with system and detail. It is the papyrus archive from the pyramid temple of King Neferirkara of the Fifth Dynasty at Abusir.3 It dates mostly to the reign of King Isesi (c. 2340–2312 BC), thus to at least 50 years after the death of Neferirkara (in c. 2363 BC). In layout and purpose it is also very similar to an archive (found at a Red Sea port, Wadi el-Jarf) which, in being dated to the end of the reign of Khufu (c. 2447 BC), is the earliest example of its kind from Egypt (see further below, p. 181).

By the beginning of the Fourth Dynasty a standard royal tomb layout had developed. Burial was within or beneath a pyramid. The offering-cult for the king’s eternal wellbeing was performed in a mortuary temple attached to the pyramid’s east face. A causeway linked this temple with a separate one on the valley floor (the Valley Temple) which, so it has often been thought, accommodated the rites over the king’s body prior to burial. Central to the cult was the presentation of food and drink offerings. Staff were needed for this and for other ceremonies, and further members were required to protect the building and its equipment. All were paid in kind, in commodities, which included a basic ration of bread and beer and grain, and additional items such as meat and cloth. The receipt of income and its subsequent distribution as rations set in motion its own administrative cycle. Although the income could be supplied by the palace of the living king, a greater security of source was obtained by establishing a separate foundation in perpetuity. This consisted essentially of agricultural estates (or domains), nominally owned by the spirit of the dead king. In practice, the estates sent their produce to the palace which then allocated it to the royal mortuary cult (its proper owner) and also to other temples and government departments, a sign already of a pragmatic approach to what, at first sight, seems to be sacred property. In the New Kingdom the balance changed somewhat, with temples (including royal mortuary temples) having a more direct role in managing not only their own lands but also lands that belonged to the king (see below, p. 255).4

The papyrus sheet illustrated in Figure 4.1 is a table of daily income written in an early style of hieratic which still maintained many of the outlines of the original hieroglyphic signs. We can recognize instantly a sensible tabular format, ruled in red and black ink. Each horizontal line is set aside for one day in a 30-day month, and contains mainly numerical entries in vertical columns. Each column bears a concise two- or three-tier heading, covering the supplying institutions, the kind of foodstuffs involved and (for the three right-hand columns) the status of the delivery.





Figure 4.1Sheet of accounts of daily income over the period of one month, from the administrative archive of an Old Kingdom pyramid, that of King Neferirkara of the Fifth Dynasty at Abusir; see also Figure 4.3, pp. 170–1, for another part of the archive, and Figure 5.6, p. 205 for site plan. After Posener-Kriéger and de Cenival, Abu Sir Papyri, Pl. XXXIV.



The supporting foundation, composed of individual estates, was cleverly incorporated into the formal decorative schemes at pyramid temples, illustrating once again the Egyptian genius for deft symbolic presentation of humdrum reality. Few peoples have turned the collection of rents and gathering of taxes into subject matter for court art. Each funerary estate, or domain, appears as an offering-bearer, individually named. We do not have a set for Neferirkara’s temple. For comparison we can turn to the Valley Temple of King Sneferu at Dahshur (Figure 4.2).5 They occupied a strip at the base of some of the internal walls. Each estate is personified as a woman bearing an offering-table. On the head is a sign-group reading: ‘The town: Mansion of Sneferu’. In front of each is the name of the place, compounded from the name of Sneferu in a cartouche, with further signs to designate the nome (province). Altogether 34 estates belong to Upper Egypt, distributed amongst ten nomes (with the record of eight nomes missing). In Lower Egypt the record is fully preserved for only a single nome, and numbers four estates. This scattered pattern of landholding is typical for ancient Egypt. No details are given of the size of these holdings, but 2 arouras (16.4 ha) is cited in a few sources for other foundations although they could be larger.6



Figure 4.2Part of a list of estates providing the income for the pyramid temple of King Sneferu of the Fifth Dynasty at Dahshur. Each estate is personified as a female bearer carrying a tray of food offerings. The name of each estate is written over and in front of each figure, in each case honouring the name of Sneferu. They are grouped according to nomes (administrative districts). In front of the second figure from the left is the heading ‘Oryx nome’, the area of Beni Hasan, with a picture of an oryx on a standard. After Fakhry, Dahshur Reliefs, Fig. 16 (redrawn by B. Garfi).



The temple staff was organized into groups for which the conventional modern term is ‘phyle’ (a Greek term meaning company, tribe). This was the common form of temple organization, with five phyles in the Old Kingdom, each one subdivided into two divisions, which apparently worked at different times. Each subdivision, of around 20 men, served for only one month in ten.7 Presumably for the extended leave periods they reverted to agricultural or other work in their villages, so that the undoubted benefits of temple service – payments as well as prestige – were widely spread. Whatever ancient reasoning lay behind the system, the practical consequence was a sharing out of jobs by the state. The number of employees required was multiplied by many times, hugely increasing the numbers of people receiving partial support from the state. Because most of the jobs were only part-time the system itself was not clogged by the presence of unnecessary personnel.

In the course of its duty, each phyle undertook a complete inspection of the temple and its property. From the Neferirkara archive we know that the inspection included the seals on all doors and every item of temple equipment. The sheet illustrated in Figure 4.3 is an example of an inventory of this kind. Again a sensible tabular format meets the practical requirements. The items are not listed haphazardly. They are arranged according to an overall scheme of classification that includes an element of progressive subdivision to create subclasses within broader categories, so displaying a basic grasp of taxonomy of the kind that underlies modern knowledge. By the time of this archive the temple equipment was becoming worn. Exact details of damage are listed underneath each item, together with the numbers of items present. The fragment of table illustrated also reflects some kind of double-entry procedure which is not properly understood, for the space for each set of inspections is itself subdivided by double lines ruled in red to accommodate two sets of observations if necessary.





Figure 4.3Sheet of equipment inventory, from the same source as Figure 4.1, pp. 167–8. After Posener-Kriéger and de Cenival, Abu Sir Papyri, Pl. XX. The width of the portion illustrated is 18 cm.



One set of sheets covered an activity that the ancient Egyptians rated very highly: sealing. Instead of sealing-wax the Egyptians used a very fine grey clay which took the impression of a seal and then set very hard around a binding of cord. In the Old Kingdom the seals themselves were little stone cylinders bearing incised hieroglyphs that could be rolled across the clay. In the Middle Kingdom they were replaced by stamp seals carved in the shape of scarab beetles, the design or inscription scratched into the flat base, and later by bronze finger rings into which the design for creating a seal was incorporated. Seals were fixed to rolled-up letters and other documents, around the knobs on wooden chests to secure the lids, around the necks of sacks and jars, and over the wooden bolts which closed doors. The relevant sheet from the Neferirkara archive deals with the seals on doorways of rooms in which sacred boats were stored.8

The physical barriers to theft in ancient Egypt were not very strong. No ingenuity was displayed in inventing locks. Breaking and entering would have been quite simple, and the long history of tomb robbery in ancient Egypt shows that some people were strongly motivated towards theft. The great fuss that was made over sealing, including the repeated inspection of seals, was a psychological ploy. It concentrated the minds of those responsible on a specific point of security, laid security open to bureaucratic control, and the link between sealings and the keeper of the seal became a bond of responsibility. The system was probably more effective than one might think at first. It created a little field of symbolic power around storeroom doors, as well as around boxes, sacks and sealed documents. The elements used in the designs of seals could also be recognized (without necessarily being ‘read’) by people within the administrative system who were not fully literate.

Much of the Neferirkara archive reflects methodical routines – inspections and duty rosters – where the units recorded were single and indivisible, namely human beings and manufactured objects. But many units of administration (land and commodities), in being divisible, required exact quantification as well. Many texts reveal how arithmetical procedures were developed to facilitate this.9 At the risk of deterring the reader a few examples will be cited to convey the flavour of this kind of work, which occupied a significant number of those who ran the ancient Egyptian state. One feature of ancient Egyptian mathematics that is a major obstacle to understanding should be noted at the outset: with the sole exception of 2/3, no fraction was ever written which had a numerator greater than one. Thus the fraction 3/4 was written by them as 1/2 + 1/4. The fraction 6/7 was written as 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/14 + 1/28 and so on. Although we find it cumbersome because of its unfamiliarity, it is a mathematically respectable method, and Egyptian scribes used it fluently and to great practical effect. Furthermore, at moments of uncertainty they could refer to arithmetic manuals. These often deal with problems that are quite complex, but it reflects the Egyptian mentality that each problem is dealt with as a specific and individual case rather than as an application of general mathematical principles. Practised scribes must have developed a degree of mathematical intuition, but the idea of pursuing this as an end in itself – to create the subject of mathematics – did not occur to them.





Rations


An important area of arithmetical administration was food supplies: rations. The word ‘rations’ has a special significance. No one had yet invented money. In the modern world money has become such a basic part of life that it is easy to conclude that a world without it would be a simple place. Where there is no money people have to barter rather than buy and sell, and the word ‘barter’ is itself stamped with a colonial image of beads and trinkets changing hands in savage lands. This is one of the comfortable myths by which modern people distance themselves from the past and regard their world as being not only much better but a different kind of place altogether.

Money does, indeed, provide an easy way of doing business at every scale. Electronic commerce takes away the need even to carry notes and coins, let alone beads and trinkets. But non-money systems have, in the past, managed remarkably well. They exemplify a general characteristic of cultures: that systems tend to be adequate for the demands placed upon them. People cope. The ancient Egyptian economy supplies a good example. The Egyptians managed large economic operations over long periods of time with a moneyless system that was adequate. They were able to do this partly because in the ancient world in general people remained in far closer handling contact with real material wealth – commodities – than we do, and partly because they had developed an accounting system that was halfway towards the abstraction of ‘money’. It was halfway in the sense that its language was that of commodities – loaves of bread, jugs of beer, hekats of wheat and so on – but its procedures allowed for the manipulation of quantities which was not necessarily matched by the movement, or even existence, of the substances themselves. It was a typical ancient compromise: abstraction disguised by concrete terminology. We will meet it again in Chapter 7, in looking at the way that goods were priced and how they were bought and sold (Figure 7.6, p. 310). It is also another lost world of the mind. For it is now very difficult to reconstruct the whole system in a way that pays suitable heed to the niceties of the ancient documents and satisfies modern common sense. This will become apparent in the next few paragraphs.

Rations administration lay at the heart of the system. In the absence of money people were paid in kind, in commodities. In effect this was a ‘wage’, but on account both of the commodity-based nature of the recompense and of the modern connotations of personal economic freedom of the word ‘wage’, the term ‘rations’ is preferable. But the distinction is somewhat artificial.

The basic cereal food cycle from harvest to ration distribution involved a series of points of scribal intervention. The initial yield of grain was measured at the threshing-floor by means of wooden scoops of a given capacity, which gave quantity in terms of a hekat, estimated to have been 4.78 l. Transport, frequently by river, to the granary involved scribal checking to ensure no theft took place en route. Another group of scribes receiving the delivery at the granary checked it again. They or their superiors would already know the maximum capacity of the individual silos, even if they were circular, by calculation:

A circular container of 10 by 10 cubits.

Take away 1/9 of 10, thus 11/9; remainder 82/3 + 1/6 + 1/18.

Multiply the 82/3 + 1/6 + 1/18 by 82/3 + 1/6 + 1/18 (i.e. square it); result: 791⁄108 + 1⁄324.

Multiply the 791/108 + 1/324 by 10; it becomes 7901/18 + 1/27 + 1/54.

Add a half to it: it becomes 1185.

Multiply the 1185 by 1/20, giving 59¼. This is the amount that will go into it in quadruple-hekats, namely 59¼ hundreds of quadruple-hekats of grain.10



The interest of this model calculation is that the container is circular. The first two steps involve squaring 8/9 of the diameter, which yields a very fair approximation to the correct answer that we would find by using a formula involving the constant, pi (π).

The next points of scribal intervention were at the beginning and end of the milling, and at subsequent stages in the production of the staple elements of the Egyptian diet: bread and beer. Ancient beer, readers should note, was not only mildly alcoholic but also nutritious. Its prominence in Egyptian diet reflects its food value as much as the pleasurable sensation that went with drinking it. Its centrality to life is represented by the fact that well-constructed breweries provide some of the earliest evidence in Egypt for communal organization within settlements (Figure 4.4 (1)).11 Baking and brewing came near the end of the whole cycle of cereal production. For the scribes who painstakingly followed the progress of cereals from fields to ration payouts the essentially messy and labour-intensive processes of baking and brewing presented a challenge, and it was met by a simple but ingenious solution.



Figure 4.4Brewing and baking: an early industry. (1) Reconstruction of a predynastic brewery, based on an example found well preserved at Abydos. After T.E. Peet and W.L.S. Loat, The Cemeteries of Abydos. Part III. 1912–1913, London, EEF, 1913, 1–2, Figs, 1, 2; Pl. I. (2) The model bakery/brewery from the tomb of Meketra at Thebes, early Twelfth Dynasty. After Winlock, Models, Figs 22, 23, 64, 65. The two pots (3) and (4) are from the mortuary temple town of Amenemhat III at Dahshur. After Do. Arnold, MDAIK 38 (1982), 29, Abb. 5, 31, Abb. 7.



For the background – the realities of brewing and baking – we are very well supplied with evidence, in the form of detailed tomb pictures of the Old and Middle Kingdoms, and wooden models from the latter period. Both brewing and baking began with raw cereals and so had a common origin. It used to be widely thought that an essential part of the brewing process was the soaking and straining of lightly baked loaves rich in yeast, but the study of beer residues by microscopy has shown that this is unlikely. Instead it now seems that Egyptian beer relied upon malting (allowing the grains to begin to sprout and so release their sugar) and, crucially, the mixing and blending of uncooked malt with cooked grains or malt.12

The model building illustrated (Figure 4.4 (2), from the tomb of Meketra, a high official of the early Twelfth Dynasty)13 exemplifies a common subject of Egyptian art, the making of bread and beer seemingly side by side. It has two major parts, each with a subdivision. The outer door leads to a vestibule, to the right of which is the brewery and straight ahead is the bakery. The bakery is subdivided by a low partition wall, reflecting two different methods of baking, one to produce flat loaves, the other to produce cylindrical loaves baked in pottery moulds. On the floor lie several flat circular objects which must represent circular limestone mortars set into the floor, as are sometimes found in excavations. In the brewery part a man wields a long, wooden pestle to crush grain in one of them. This is an operation preliminary to grinding, which loosens the husks that tightly encase the grain (modern free-threshing wheat would not require this step). In both the bakery and brewery stand paired grindstones set in quern emplacements. Excavated evidence shows that the normal grindstone was an oval piece of quartzite or granite, rough underneath but with a smooth and slightly curved upper surface. Each stone was set into a mud-brick construction, sometimes built against a wall and then having the plan of a letter ‘B’. The stone was set into the top of one half, with sloping surface, and the coarse flour and husks fell into the little trough formed by the mud-brick curb of the other half of the ‘B’. The Meketra models lack the collecting trough, but are otherwise of this design. The miller stood behind the higher end and leant forwards over the stone, using a smaller stone for the crushing. The millers were normally women. The ground product would not have been an evenly textured flour, but a crushed mixture of flour and husks which needed to be sieved. Modern experiments have demonstrated that a reasonably fine flour is possible and that the idea that ancient bread as eaten (as distinct from loaves left at tombs and made by people who knew that no one was actually going to chew them) was gritty is a myth. In each of the bakery compartments are also two large kneading vats. In the inner compartment, they stand next to two low tables on which individual open loaves are made.

Not all bread came in the form of hand-formed loaves, however. A common practice was to bake some bread in pottery moulds. In the Old Kingdom the moulds were large and heavy and designed to produce solid conical loaves (Figure 4.6, p. 184). By the Middle Kingdom they had evolved into long narrow tubes, still hand-made, rough on the outside, but with a fine smooth inner surface (Figure 4.4 (4)). They occur in large numbers on Middle Kingdom sites, and the practice continued into the New Kingdom, during which time the production of mould-baked loaves seems to have become restricted to shrines and temples, as if the loaves had become something special. Beside the doorway that connects the two compartments stands a square basket filled with loaves of just this shape. Each compartment also contains two ovens, but of a different design in each. In the inner compartment, they are of a standard cylindrical type with a hole in the ceramic wall near the bottom for inserting the fuel. The other two, however, are rectangular. Excavated evidence shows that these were used either for baking the bread in pottery moulds or for the initial firing of the moulds themselves.

The interpretation of the brewery equipment is not quite so certain. Cereal-processing by mortar and querns is catered for at the back of the room, and the large jars in a row against the partition wall are most likely to be for storing the finished beer. In terms of the Middle Kingdom pottery repertoire, the beer jars must have been a well-known type, also illustrated in Figure 4.4 (3). Some of them are shown with a broad low stopper made from mud. Opposite them stand five large cylindrical tubs presumably also made of pottery. On one rests a wide tray containing lumps. This is likely to be a sieve or screen through which the mixture of grain and malt, liberally watered, had to be pressed. A cloudy liquid ready for fermentation passed through, leaving behind in the sieve damp, chaffy lumps which were themselves edible and, from the malt, may have had a sweet, caramel-like taste. Just inside the door of the brewery-half of the model is a tall pottery vat. A man stands waist deep in it, holding on to its rim, as if mixing something by treading it with his feet. Could this be the two batches of malt and grain now combined with warm water? And the flat square tray close by: is this for spreading out the grain to allow malting to take place?

Baking and brewing contained elements that unavoidably thwarted a simple control of quantities as they passed from one stage to another. Water was added, dough rose, and a proportion of inedible matter was lost through milling and sieving. Loaves emerged in a variety of shapes, and the strength of beer was affected by the amount of water squeezed through the malt and grain mixture. The scribes’ approach was to treat the whole operation as a kind of ‘black box’: it was possible to measure what went in (either neat cereal grains or already milled flour), and what came out at the other end as quantities of loaves and vessels of beer. Ignoring what went on inside, input and output bore a simple relation to one another: the number of loaves and jugs of beer that came from a given quantity of grain or flour. This scale of values the Egyptians called pesu (or pefsu), which we can translate as ‘baking value’, and it represented a stage on the road towards mathematical abstraction. The pesu scale was set for the number of loaves or jugs of beer that could be obtained from one hekat of grain or flour (the milling of grain to produce flour increasing the volume of the active material).14 The higher the value the smaller the loaves or the weaker the beer (or the smaller the jugs). Pesu enabled the scribe to calculate equivalences between loaves and jugs of different sizes and strengths. ‘155 loaves of baking-value 20 are equivalent to how many loaves of baking-value 30? You express the 155 loaves of baking-value 20 in terms of flour: thus 7½ + ¼ hekats. Multiply by 30: result 232½.’15 In other words, divide 155 by 20 and multiply the result by 30.

Many ration lists and commodity accounts have survived. They tend to ignore pesu values.16 They assume standardized jugs of beer, and the various kinds of bread can be grossed together as ‘mixed’ loaves. This assumes standardization, a reasonable step in thinking in view of the scale and ubiquity of the operations, in which those involved, including potters making beer jugs, would tend naturally to produce standardized shapes from a lifetime’s practice. We do actually have an opportunity to check for ourselves. Although very few actual loaves have survived, we have substitutes. The commonest are the pottery moulds in which bread was baked. Thousands have been found on excavations. As already noted, they went through an evolution over time. In the Old Kingdom they turned out loaves that were in the shape of a squat cone, characteristically about 16–20 cm across the base. By the Middle Kingdom the cones had evolved into tall thin cylinders (see Figures 4.4 (4) and 4.6, pp. 174 and 184). Although so many have been discovered, they have never been examined from the point of view of how the loaves they turned out compare with ancient accounting practices and dietary needs. Photographs of some large finds do give the impression of reasonably standardized capacity within that particular group, which could have been maintained if, as has been suggested, they were themselves formed over reusable moulds (perhaps of wood).17 Nevertheless, examples from different sites and dates vary by quite a lot. There is no hint that they met a standard officially laid down. The scribe presumably performed his pesu-calculations periodically to test whole batches. This was not, however, the end of the story. Not all bread rations were in the form of mould-baked loaves. Soldiers at one of the Middle Kingdom Nubian fortresses (Uronarti) possessed wooden tallies in the shapes of their bread rations, with amounts of wheat and barley carved on them in hieroglyphs (Figure 4.5).18 Some represent mould-baked loaves (of barley), but others flat round hand-made loaves (of wheat). These tallies look like the recipient’s (a soldier’s) own check on the value of his rations, calculated in terms of the grain allocation behind them rather than on the actual number of loaves received. They could have formed the basis of a demand to the scribe to check the pesu-value of a batch of mixed loaves issued as rations.



Figure 4.5Soldiers’ bread-ration tokens, made from wood, plastered and painted. Each one is in the shape of a particular kind of loaf, and bears a short incised inscription, difficult to translate. (1) A cylindrical loaf of the kind baked in pottery moulds, height 24.7 cm; the hieroglyphs refer to 75 loaves for a soldier. (2) A round flat loaf with raised centre, diameter 12.8 cm; the hieroglyphs refer to 90 loaves from 1 hekat of wheat. (3) An oval loaf with flat base, length 12.7 cm; the hieroglyphs refer to 60⅔ loaves. From the late Twelfth Dynasty fortress of Uronarti in Nubia. After Dunham, Uronarti, Pls XXVII, XXVIII, and pp. 34–5.



Beer-jug capacity is more difficult for us to check. We know which was the common shape of Middle Kingdom beer jugs, and although most pottery from excavations is too broken to enable capacities to be calculated, many complete ones have been found. As with bread moulds, however, little study has been done to measure actual capacities with this question of standardization in mind. However, modern drawings of such vessels found in different tombs in a single cemetery certainly look as though they reflect a range of sizes and only roughly met a standard.

It is typical of the ancient lack of interest in the idea of efficiency that standardization does not seem to have been a conscious goal. Scribes and potters (and bakers) were worlds apart. The gulf of status kept the scribe from breaking out of the limits of his own art, that of procedure and calculation, and his procedures arose from an acceptance that a crucial part of the operation was virtually beyond his control.

Real ration lists show that the regular wage or ration was calculated in terms of so many loaves of bread and jugs of beer, with extras sometimes appearing, such as cakes or wine.19 A standard daily basic wage consisted of ten loaves and a measure of beer that could fluctuate between a third of a jug to one or even two whole jugs. This was what was thought fit for an ordinary labourer. Ration lists also show that as one moved upwards through the ranks of officialdom the distributions increased by multiples of the basic ration. This was sometimes expressed by listing those of higher rank as if they were more than one person: perhaps five, ten or even twenty men. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (a scribe’s reference manual from the Middle Kingdom) helped the scribe cope with the consequences.

Method of distributing 100 loaves of bread amongst 10 men, if the skipper, the crew-leader and the doorkeeper (receive) double.

Its procedure: you add up the people to receive supplies: thus 13.

Divide the 100 loaves by 13. That makes 7 + 2⁄3 + 1⁄39 (i.e. 7  9⁄13).

Then you say: (this) is the consumption of the 7 men, (while) the skipper, the crew-leader and the doorkeeper receive double.20



Thus the ten men with unequal shares are temporarily converted into thirteen fictitious ‘recipients’ with equal shares. The seven ‘one-man’ shares are each 79⁄13; the three ‘two-man’ shares for the three officials amount to twice that quantity, that is, 155⁄13.

The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus also, however, envisaged more complicated cases of distribution where the scaling by rank was not done in simple multiples of one basic ration. ‘100 loaves for 5 men. 1⁄7 of the rations for the three superiors goes to the two inferiors. What is the difference in the shares?’ To answer this question (Rhind Problem 40), the author provided tabular calculations which show that he was really asking for an arithmetic progression of shares for the five men, each one 1⁄7 smaller than the next. The answer is correctly found: 38⅓, 291⁄6, 20, 10⅔ + 1⁄6 and 1⅓. The difference between any two is 91⁄6.21

Documents about rations create a problem that tells us that we are dealing not just with a pragmatic earthy business of feeding people, but with an economic system of more ambitious scope having a greater notional or abstract content than at first sight seems to be the case.

If a basic minimum daily ration consisted of ten loaves, a senior official could be credited with anything up to 500 per day. This would have exceeded the most gargantuan of appetites. Was the extra to support his staff? Some texts make separate reference to staff payments and so help to rule this out. In any case, some of the ration lists relate to expeditions sent to mines and quarries in uncomfortable desert locations, such as Sinai and the Wadi Hammamat. These were hardly suited to taking along one’s family or household, or to bouts of high living. But then there are the fractions to consider. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus is not alone in considering awkward fractions of loaves and jugs of beer. The same occur in real lists. Equally arresting is the accounting system of a provincial Middle Kingdom temple, that of the god Wepwawet at Asyut.22 Some staff were paid according to the number of ‘temple days’ allotted to them. A text explains:

As for a temple day, it is 1⁄360 part of a year. Now, you shall divide everything that enters this temple – bread, beer and meat – by way of the daily rate. That is, it is going to be 1⁄360 of the bread, of the beer, and of everything that enters this temple for (any) one of these temple days which I have given you.



Each staff member was entitled to two temple days, except for the most senior of them, who received four. The real entitlement was thus 2⁄360 (or 4⁄360 in the case of their chief) of every loaf and jug of beer that the temple received by way of its income. Part of the income was meat. The archive of another temple (at Kahun) deals with fractions of cattle.23

Commonsense tells us that we are not dealing with a system that distributed breadcrumbs and minced meat in finely weighed portions, and piled up uneaten surpluses around high officials. The system must have combined a distribution of real and of notional rations, the latter being, in effect, credit, in which a ‘paper’ accumulation of undistributed ration allocation was exchangeable for something else. The loaves and the jugs were measures of value, or units of account, as much as they stood for actual amounts of foodstuff in hand, waiting to be carried off and consumed. The pesu-system allowed the interchangeability of bread and beer to be calculated, as well as the keeping of a record of just how much wheat or barley lay behind them. The implication, however, is that a wider range of equivalents in value would have been needed, where, for example, the grain or bread equivalent of linen cloth was expressed. But it is here that the documentation runs out. Neither the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus nor administrative documents cover such a wider field of value exchanges. For the New Kingdom we have ample records of village barter transactions which display a broad range of values of commodities expressed in terms of hekats of grain or weights of metal (mostly bronze; see Chapter 7). A feeling for relative values seems from this material to have been part of the basic mental equipment for living that Egyptians possessed from an early age. But at an official level the gap in the texts remains. Either we are missing some key element in the system, or the ‘cashing’ or redeeming of one’s accumulated surplus of rations was done unofficially, by barter and out of the scope of normal record keeping.

The lack of standardized bread and beer strengths lets us down in another respect. We cannot jump immediately to the actual figures for the average wheat and barley allocations which lay behind the basic ration, and so answer the question: how much cereal did the ancient Egyptians normally consume? How nutritious was the diet of those who dragged stones from quarries to pyramids? For convenience rations were normally expressed in simple numerical form, leaving it to the pesu system and the wooden tallies to satisfy any doubts or queries. There must, nevertheless, have been an average quantity that we can attempt to establish, or perhaps more realistically we can aim to set maximum and minimum figures.

It is possible to use the short inscriptions carved into the Uronarti tallies as a source. They are, unfortunately, cryptic and any results therefore somewhat tentative. One study leads to the figure of two-thirds of a hekat of barley and one hekat of wheat per soldier as a ten-day ration.24 How feasible is this in reality? Modern estimates of the size of the Egyptian hekat vary slightly. One reasonably reliable figure is 4.78l. One hekat of wheat is thus 0.00478 cu2. A cubic metre of wheat is reckoned to weigh 790 kg. One hekat of wheat should thus weigh around 3.78 kg. An equivalent amount of barley is reckoned to be lighter: 600 kg per cu2. Thus, one hekat of barley should weigh around 2.87 kg, and two-thirds of a hekat 1.9 kg. When added together, 5.68 (let us say 6) kg of grain per ten-day period is involved, or 0.6 kg per day. By the standards calculated for the Roman world this seems a somewhat meagre portion. According to another scholar, figures given by Polybius, writing around 140 BC, imply for an infantryman, whether legionary or auxiliary, 0.94 kg of grain per day, although Roman records from Pselchis (modern Dakka in Nubia) can be interpreted to produce the smaller figure of 0.80 kg.25 For both Egyptian and Roman societies there is another unknown factor: the amount and variety of dietary supplement to a grain ration. In the case of Egypt this was probably fairly small. The impression derived from many sources is that bread and beer from wheat and barley formed the staple diet.

The discussion can be taken at least one stage further by estimating caloric values. One hekat of wheat represents about 12,474 calories (330 per 100 g) and of barley about 10,160 (354 per 100 g). One hekat of wheat and two-thirds of a hekat of barley thus would yield 19,247 calories for the ten-day period, or 1925 per day. How realistic is this figure? A report on prison diet in Egypt published in 1917 gave the following energy values required in daily diets: 1,800 calories for subsistence, 2,200 for no work, 2,800 for light labour, and 3,200 for hard labour.26 These figures derived from the regime laid down for prisoners in the Egyptian army. (They should be compared with modern medical opinion that, for men and women between 19 and 30 following a sedentary life, 2,400–600 calories are recommended for men, 1,800–2,000 for women; for those with an active life, the figures rise to 3,000 and 2,400 respectively.) We may thus take, with some confidence, the figures from the Uronarti tallies as representing a minimum ration, and expect that in reality more was consumed by each man. If the tallies stand only for actual loaves we have to add the grain content of the separately issued beer and this may have brought the overall level into line with bodily requirements. But we should still accept that the pyramids were built on a modest but adequate health-food diet.

Apart from a general interest in ancient diet this discussion also serves a more specific archaeological enquiry concerning the capacities of ancient granaries and the number of people dependent on them that will surface in the next chapter.

Cereal administration was not confined to human foodstuff. The obliging Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (Problem 82b) includes the following:

Amount of what a fatted goose eats:

ten geese 1¼ hekats (of flour made into bread)

in ten days 12½

in 40 days 50 hekats

which represents grain in double-hekats: 23½ + ¼ + ⅛ hekats, and 4¼ + 1⁄6 ro

(1 ro = 1⁄320 hekat).27



The essence of this problem, somewhat cryptically laid out, is to calculate the volume difference between grain and flour. For this a tenth of two-thirds is subtracted – presumably a rule-of-thumb ratio – and the result halved to reduce it to double-hekats. The answer is not quite correct, although the scribe has aimed at great exactitude by using fractions of hekats.





Management and labour (and did slaves build the pyramids?)


A similarly intense scrutiny was applied to building projects, another major goal of administration. All concerned, whether officials and architects in charge, or the army of workers and craftsmen, became part of a system in which their work and their rewards were measured and scrutinized. A typical task was the precise measurement of materials to be moved and used, whether cut blocks of stone, sun-dried mud bricks, straw and earth for making bricks, rubble or sand. A conscientious scribe would measure (or write down the measurements called out by another) in the full standardized notation of Egyptian linear measure: cubits (523 mm), palms, fingerbreadths and fractions thereof, as well as in halves, thirds and quarters of a cubit. He would then calculate the volume of material. The multiplication of fractions and subdivisions of a cubit involved considerable calculating skill, and the scribe may have referred to ready-made tables. From the volume, he could calculate the number of labour units that would be required, using standard ratios. In one example the daily labour norm for one man was to transport 10 cubic cubits. From these figures, the scribe could estimate the rations that would be required and produce work figures that could later be compared with the actual work done (an example of the last stage might be present in the markings in Figure 4.7, p. 185). It has been pointed out that this reveals a disciplined approach towards the value of a working person’s time that is more familiar in modern societies imbued with a positive work ethic.28 In this way the supply of the three essentials for major building projects – materials, labour and rations – could be constantly monitored. It was the scribe’s pen as much as the overseer’s lash or the engineer’s ingenuity that built the pyramids.

Who did build the pyramids? Modern answers vary between slaves and seasonally employed labourers who perhaps felt a sense of fulfilment in participating in a national task. The subject of slavery remains emotional. The recent historical experience of Black slavery in the Americas still causes outrage, and hidden forms of what is said to be slavery are from time to time identified around the world, amongst those employed in ‘sweat shops’, for example. Because overt slavery has been officially abolished it is easily condemned. Yet people tend not to see military conscription (otherwise known as national service or the draft) in the same light, even though it is marked by loss of liberty backed up by extreme punishments, by frequently harsh conditions, by separation from family and by only token payments. Slavery and conscription can be said to rest upon different concepts, upon outright ownership of the person as a piece of property in the former case, as distinct from a temporary claim to total service by the state. Something of this distinction was present in ancient Egyptian terminology.29 If we keep to the niceties of legal language then we must admit in the Egyptian case a lack of evidence that the large labour force for pyramid building consisted of people who were owned as pieces of property by the king and to whom a term translatable as ‘slave’ was applied. As actual experience, however, the two categories – of slavery and conscription – overlap. When we speak of slave labour camps in modern oppressive regimes, populated by citizens deprived indefinitely of their normal freedoms by the state and often worked to death, we are unlikely to be troubled by the thought that we are using the term ‘slave’ loosely. We know what we mean. Conversely, if we say that the pyramids were built by people doing national service it does not seem nearly as bad as if we say that they were built by slaves. What we really want to know is whether the conditions of service were a lot harsher than those of life at home, and whether they were largely resented.

Over the years a clearer understanding has grown of the particular system that the Egyptians developed for mustering and deploying labour for large projects.30 It was based upon the sense of obligation to others higher in the chain of authority (the king at the top) that was instilled in an individual from birth, together with a liking for organizing people into groups each of which was given a name and thus a sense of identity and a basis for bonding. Prominent amongst these groups was the phyle, the same unit used in the organization of temple staff. They took their names from the positions which groups of sailors would occupy when forming the crew of a boat, thus ‘starboard’, ‘port’, ‘bow’, ‘stern’ and one of uncertain translation. There were both larger and smaller units of organization. The former used the word for a full boat’s ‘crew’. The names of some of them (such as ‘Friends of Khufu’) occur daubed in red paint on cut blocks of stone used, for example, in the construction of the pyramids at Giza and on the blocks used to seal the underground storerooms at the Wadi el-Jarf seasonal port on the Red Sea coast (see below). The smaller units, possibly of ten men, took names such as ‘strong’, ‘first’, ‘noble’ and ‘rising’. The system (or at least the way it expressed itself in writing) developed over time. After the Fourth Dynasty and the building of the Giza pyramids the crews tended to take their names from those of prominent people, not only high officials but king’s wives and daughters. Detailed studies have concluded that such crews belonged to these named individuals who were thus donating labour that was under their control to the projects of others. To what extent these crews returned after each assignment to a life based in their own homes, perhaps cultivating their own fields, is not known.

Whilst on duty they came under scribal control. In the Middle Kingdom, as stone blocks made their way from the quarry to the current pyramid site, scribes wrote labels on individual blocks within a particular consignment to help them keep a check on the progress of the whole convoy. ‘Delivered to the ramp by the overseer of work, Mek’ is an example, presumably written as Mek signed off his responsibility.31 These labels incidentally inform us of the places that were supplying the labour for the crews. They include private estates and households of officials, the temple of Ptah at Memphis, a pyramid town, and many local administrative districts primarily in the area around Memphis, parts of the delta and Middle Egypt. One has the impression that a large part of Egypt’s population will have lived knowing that their names were written on lists controlled by rich landowners and senior officials (the two categories largely overlapping) who, as part of their own dependence on the king, from time to time were required to summon them (via their scribes and other dependants) and send them off to work on someone else’s (normally a royal) project.

The first step in the process appears to be illustrated in papyri from the Upper Egyptian site of Gebelein and dated to the Fourth Dynasty.32 They list persons – to a total of some 300 and from two settlements – by occupation: bakers, brewers, craftsmen, boat makers, sailors, metal-workers, grain measurers, hunters and so on, together with wives, children and parents. One of the papyri also lists persons with a title that appears to designate serviceable young men (neferu). Having a literal meaning approximating to ‘beauties’, one possible English translation is ‘lads’; shabáb is an equivalent in colloquial Arabic.

As for what such people could find themselves doing, in 2013 part of a papyrus archive was found at the site of an ancient port on the Gulf of Suez portion of the Red Sea coast, Wadi el-Jarf, opposite Sinai. It is dated to the twenty-seventh year of the reign of Khufu, the highest known of his reign (c. 2447 BC).33 It does not, however, deal with the affairs of this remote outpost. One group of fragments has the familiar form of tables which list daily or monthly deliveries of food from various areas including the Nile delta and clearly intended for a destination that is within the Nile valley. Another group of fragments comes from a logbook also in tabular form that records daily activities of a team of around 200 workmen led by a Memphite official, the inspector Merer. Its entries cover several months. Many of them relate to the construction of the Great Pyramid at Giza and to work at the limestone quarries at Tura, across the river, and to the transportation of stone blocks to the pyramid construction site using the Nile and connected canals. Whilst in transit the work teams stopped at an administrative centre which was under the authority of Ankh-haf, half-brother of Khufu and also vizier and ‘chief of all the works of the king’. The archive, one might suppose, belonged to the working papers of an official (Merer himself perhaps) who had been despatched from his usual duties in the pyramid area to lead an expedition to the Red Sea coast, presumably to make the short sea crossing to Sinai to obtain copper from the local mines. When he and his team returned to Giza a sheaf of papyrus documents was left behind, wedged between large stone blocks used to close cave-like galleries used for long-term storage between expeditions. The archive illustrates the utility of the crew system, providing a group of men used to working together and probably from the same neighbourhood. Under temporary centralized control it could be ordered to undertake any of several tasks, at the pyramid building site itself or on a remote procurement assignment.

As for the numbers of people who were managed on large projects we can turn to quarrying and mining records. In the thirty-eighth regnal year of King Senusret I, an expedition went to the quarries in the Wadi Hammamat. It was under the leadership of a ‘herald’ called Ameny.34 Under him were 80 officials, roughly 18,660 skilled and unskilled workers (who included 30 hunters and a contingent of soldiers), plus a train of millers, brewers and bakers (20 of each). Amongst the officials were 20 ‘mayors’ of towns, presumably because it was their responsibility to supply most of the crews through networks of obligation which they controlled. Interestingly the whole enterprise was looked after by only eight scribes. A modern engineering estimate for the numbers who might have been needed for building the Great Pyramid at Giza has produced a similar figure: a maximum of 10,000, to whom should be added the labour for ramp construction, procurement of materials and other kinds of logistical support. Other estimates are lower and higher, the largest being 36,000 for the Great Pyramid.35 Even the highest of these figures will have represented less than 4 per cent of the estimated total population of Egypt at the time of pyramid construction. When seen in this light, even the building of the Giza pyramids represents a level of conscription, organized on a basis of group obligation to local patrons, that could have been easily borne.

One aspect of the labour force that would influence our views of pyramid building could we but know it is its age profile. The Gebelein lists of people apparently being enrolled for work, mentioned above, included a group of ‘young men’ (neferu). But how young? Chapter 8 (pp. 374–5) cites evidence that the building of Akhenaten’s city of Amarna could have involved the extensive use of child labour. The evidence comes from the fact that many of them expired whilst still young and were then buried in a cemetery which has now been located and partially excavated. But if they had survived to a more normal adult age we would not know of their early recruitment. More on this subject will be said in Chapter 8. For now, the possibility of child labour should be held in mind when considering any major construction project from ancient Egypt.

Obligation is not an absolute feeling. In any human group, there will be some who do not like being told what to do, although their resistance beneath a dominance hierarchy is more likely to be indirect and passive – the weapon of the weak – than to take the form of outright disobedience. The idea of rejecting imposed labour is expressed in a text which we first encounter perhaps a century after the end of the Old Kingdom. At this time, a set of protective spells became available to those who could afford to have them painted on their coffins (hence the modern term ‘Coffin Texts’). One of them was unambiguously intended to enable a substitute statuette (called a ushabti) ‘to carry out work for their owner in the realm of the dead’.

If N be detailed for the removal(?) of a block(?) to strange sites(?) of the desert plateau, to register the riparian lands, or to turn over new fields for the reigning king, ‘Here am I’ shall you say to any messenger who may come for N when taking his ease(?).36



The text and, as they later developed, the specially made statuettes proved to have enduring value and became a distinctive feature of the ideas and practices surrounding death. Fear of conscription, it seems, could pursue a person even of high rank beyond death. There is no mistaking the psychology of unwillingness, the sense of the inner self seeking to avoid, by a trick, sudden demands for labour which cannot be challenged. Perhaps ‘trick’ is too strong a word since the sending of ‘substitutes’ (primarily relatives) to fill the place of a conscripted person is documented from real-life situations.37

Those in service were ‘paid’, in that the supply of rations was part of the system, so they did not have their labour taken from them for nothing. But the postings were typically arduous. Some did try to escape, and then the state revealed its punitive side. A document from the late Middle Kingdom, a prison register, opens for us a little window on the fate of those who chose not to co-operate.38 One typical entry reads:

The daughter of Sa-anhur, Teti, under the scribe of the fields of the city of This: a woman. An order was issued to the central labour camp in year 31, 3rd month of summer, day 9, to release her family from the courts, and at the same time to execute against her the law pertaining to one who runs away without performing his service. Present [check mark]. Statement by the scribe of the vizier, Deduamun: ‘Carried out; case closed’.



This sounds very much as though her family had been held hostage until her arrest.

It is possible for an authority to order its people to do such-and-such a task and leave them to get on with it as best they can. Faced with incentives or punishments people can organize themselves quite effectively (in the New Kingdom, much of the city of Amarna was probably built in this way; see p. 333). Once you decide to take control of every detail of the operation, however, the burden of administration rapidly mounts and in the modern world easily gets out of hand. ‘Less government’ has become a modern political rallying cry. The Egyptians, with clear (if ambitious) goals and no dissenting philosophies to divert their energies, got away with it. In part they did so also because the systems which kings and scribes used were more limited than at first sight appears to be the case. The friction or drag inherent within the systems of pre-modern societies can with hindsight appear as something of a blessing.

Bureaucracy is an attitude of mind, an aptitude that we encounter with most immediacy in original documents. It can easily appear to be a cosy self-contained world of order, particularly as the documents tend to be studied in isolation by experts in ancient language working in quiet studies or libraries and equipped with dictionaries and manuals of grammar. For the ancient scribe, however, the order belonged to his inner mental world. When he rested his pen and looked up from his sheet of papyrus the scenes that met his eyes may well have been a good deal less orderly. Indeed, the essence of the act of writing (and of drawing) is to reduce a complex and often chaotic reality to a comprehensible order.

Ancient documents lie at an interface of reality: the far side is available to us only through archaeology. This has already intruded in the description of baking and brewing. These messy and smoky processes were the reality behind the precisions of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus. We can move even closer by examining a find of well-preserved bakeries in a large establishment connected to the pyramids at Giza.39 Figure 4.6 is a plan of one sample room, measuring roughly 5 × 2.5 m. The free working space, however, is much less, around 1 m in width. The left side (as one entered) was given over to preparation, with dough-mixing vats at the back. Current understanding of the Old Kingdom baking process (somewhat different to that of the Middle Kingdom, as illustrated in Figure 4.4, p. 174) sees the heavy bread moulds used in pairs: the lower one containing the dough which will bake to become a heavy conical loaf, the upper one, heated separately in a stack on an open hearth, creating a miniature oven when inverted over the lower one. Just inside the door on the right stood a low hearth, presumably the place where the upper moulds were stacked for heating. Along the rest of the right side of the room ran two parallel rows of circular depressions where (there seems no reason to doubt) the paired moulds (now miniature ovens) had stood, able to produce just over 20 large loaves. The whole room, when first found, was buried in fine wood ash that reached the rim of the vats and to avoid which the bakers had built the hearth higher and higher. The accounting system, however, removed from the scribes the need to enter these dirty crowded places. All they needed to do was to stand outside and count the sacks of flour going in and the numbers of loaves being carried out. Figure 4.6 also illustrates an abiding characteristic of most archaeology, made more pointed by being associated with the Giza necropolis, home to the only surviving ‘wonder’ of the most popular list of seven compiled in classical times, and the source for some of the finest and most sensitively carved statuary ever produced in Egypt. That characteristic is the utter lack of grandeur in the living and working conditions of most people of the past.



Figure 4.6A bakery from the Heit el-Ghurab workers’ town of the Fourth Dynasty at Giza. After M. Lehner, The Oriental Institute (Chicago), News and Notes 135 (Fall 1992), 8–9, Fig. 8. Shown as an inset is a reconstruction of how the bread moulds were used, the upper mould, preheated, creating a temporary oven. The moulds are after Aeragram (Newsletter of the Ancient Egypt Research Associates) 3, no. 1 (1999), 12–13. The position of this bakery within the town is given in Figure 4.9, p. 190, labelled ‘B’.



The best extant examples of scribes reaching out their hands to the rough surfaces of manual labour are to be found in some of the ancient quarries. Egyptian temples and quarries show that quarrymen and builders worked with blocks of stone that were generally of comparable sizes but, that said, still varied noticeably. Masons on building sites expended considerable effort to achieve close fits of blocks that were almost but not quite of the same size. Scribes wanted to know the rate at which stone was being extracted from the quarry. Since the blocks varied in size, the simple procedure of counting them would not do. Instead they could, as one option, mark the progress of each day or other work period by means of an annotated red line daubed along the final line of chisel cuts on a quarry face, or on the ceiling if the quarry were underground.40 This subsequently became the baseline against which to measure the rate of progress for the next period. When, say, a granite obelisk was needed, particularly close attention could be paid to monitoring the progress of the workmen. In one quarry at Aswan the fruits of their daily poundings of the granite with large balls of the hard stone dolerite were marked in paint, perhaps to ensure that no man received his rations or left the work until he had fulfilled his quota (Figure 4.7).41



Figure 4.7Working practices recorded in red-and-black painted lines on the face of a granite quarry at Aswan, probably New Kingdom. The red lines are here rendered in grey. In two previous projects large granite blocks had been removed. The new project began with the cutting of a trench to separate the intended block from the parent rock, the vertically scalloped appearance preserving the method of removing the unwanted stone, by concentrated pounding with globular balls of hard stone (dolerite). The rock face left over from the previous project was smoothed so that it could be used to record the progress of the workmen, by means of vertical columns of red triangular marks, corresponding to each man’s work position (a pair of the pounding scallops). Many of the intervals are about 7 cms in depth. Is this the amount of stone removed in one day? The variations between the lowest of the marks and the bottom of the trench suggest that progress was marked by the head height of each man (the last day probably going unrecorded). The record at the top suggests that some of the preliminary work was recorded every two working periods (days?) for an unknown reason. Originally the name of each man seems to have been written beside each column of marks (the approximate position of the few that survived are marked by asterisks). Perhaps the payment of rations was dependent upon the removal of a certain amount of stone. The long straight vertical lines helped to keep the workmen evenly spaced. The long horizontal lines are probably part of a survey connected with the fashioning of the block to be removed. If this is a correct interpretation this piece of quarry face would represent the work of around 15 men cutting the trench in under 20 days. After Engelbach, Obelisk, Pl. VI.





Building the pyramids


The Giza pyramids are only part of a gigantic archaeological site mostly of one period (the Fourth Dynasty) which has remained remarkably well preserved. It includes fields of tombs of royal relatives, high officials and others, and extensive remains of houses, storerooms, administrative buildings and structures that represent facilities of various and sometimes uncertain purpose. The various parts, including the pyramids themselves, are the outcome of a huge management operation in which several interlocking lines of administration had to be pursued simultaneously, with the danger that a mistake in one could disrupt others and delay the whole gigantic project. To be successful this required a total managerial overview, the scope of which we can reconstruct using archaeological as well as written evidence from the site (Figure 4.8).42



Figure 4.8The archaeology of large-scale public works: the Giza pyramid plateau, showing quarries and construction debris, plus the hypothetical outlines of the partly ‘spiral’ construction ramps for the first and second pyramids, those of Khufu and Khafra, respectively. For the Khentkawes/Menkaura Valley Temple area see Figure 5.7 (p. 208); for the Heit el-Ghurab town see Figure 4.9 (p. 190). After M. Lehner, AfO 32 (1985), 136–58; Lehner and Hawass, Giza 365, Fig. 15.12.



The desert plateau on which all this happened was not a blank page on which the architects had a free hand to design and to lay out the buildings of their choice. One basic constraint was provided by the site’s geology. Much of the surface of the plateau is the top of a bed of limestone (the Moqatam Formation) that has a general slope down to the south-east. It seems to have been the desire of the pyramid builders to keep to more or less the same level for each of the three major pyramids (of kings Khufu, Khafra and Menkaura), and this could be met only by laying them out along a single line which is perpendicular to the direction of the slope and at the same time at an angle to the north–south trend of the River Nile. The limestone of the Moqatam Formation was also suited to providing much of the stone for the cores of the pyramids, although it was not fine enough for the outer casings. For each pyramid a convenient adjacent quarry was opened.

Convenience involved another major consideration. As the pyramid rose so the stones had to be taken to ever higher levels. Although opinions differ as to the details there is general agreement that much of the stone was raised by dragging it, loaded on to wooden sledges, up huge ramps that had to be raised in phase with the construction work. Keeping the gradient to a minimum as well as minimizing its distance from the quarry was a further consideration of prime importance. Furthermore, the builders of the second and third pyramids had their limits of manoeuvre reduced by the works of their predecessors. Khufu had chosen an area at the far north-eastern end of the Moqatam Formation, immediately above a high escarpment, drawing stone from quarries on the south side, and filling up the ground to east and west with tombs for members of his court. His successors were obliged to move further to the south-west, so that no one was able to use the advantage of the natural slope of the ground by constructing their ramps down its line. All the ramps to some extent must have run up the slope. There was probably, however, a good reason for preferring this arrangement of ramps. Not all of the stone was quarried locally. Originally the pyramids were encased in a layer of fine limestone from quarries across the river, at Tura, supplemented in the cases of the pyramids of Khafra and Menkaura with granite from Aswan. The temples that accompanied the pyramids also required stone from outside, and there must have been, as well, a considerable demand for timber, which was, amongst other uses, laid across the tops of the ramps to provide a suitable surface for the sledges. Transport of heavy materials to the site must have been by boats on a canal or canals, broadening into harbours especially at the time of inundation, requiring docking areas. The natural site for this is towards the south of the site, where the dip of the plateau leaves a depression. If the zone for receiving deliveries of building materials and preparing them for their places on the site was here, the alignments of the construction ramps would need to take this into consideration as well. Site management employing the skills of co-ordination and anticipation was thus the real pinnacle of command in pyramid building, and it is not surprising to find that the task was performed by the most senior figures in the land, close to the king, to the extent of being, in the Fourth Dynasty, normally a son of a king (one such was Ankh-haf, Khufu’s half-brother, whom we have met in the Wadi el-Jarf papyri, above).

The picture of managerial choices and constraints arises from two sources. One consists of direct observations. The locations of several of the quarries are apparent from modern excavations, and certain pieces of evidence point to the existence of an ancient basin towards the south end of the site. The other is the result of putting oneself in the position of the builders and looking for an economical solution within the framework provided by the archaeology. The alignments of the ramps, huge constructions in their own right, can be deduced only in this way since when the pyramids were finished the ramps were cleared away, leaving few direct traces. The need for clear forward thinking and the demarcation of zones of activity to prevent them from spreading too far may have been one reason behind a pattern of rough stone walls which divides the Giza plateau in the areas of the pyramids of Khafra and Menkaura into large zones. They were left as permanent features and, with some additions, would have continued to define the ground that properly belonged to each pyramid.

The construction ramps were major projects in themselves. Each one may have equalled two-thirds of the volume of its pyramid. At the end of the day they had to be disposed of. What were the ramps made of? Some later sources show that ramps could be built up from compartments constructed of mud brick and filled with sand. There is no sign at Giza, however, of huge dumps of mud brick. Instead several parts of the Giza plateau, especially the quarries and the low area to the south, were buried in stone chippings and dust, in vast quantities sufficient probably to account for the ramps. This provides another managerial responsibility: directing the quarrying and the necessary extra labour to put quarry debris and loose desert materials into the right position to create the appropriately graded ramp for the stage of pyramid construction reached, the ramp being a long and broadly based heap of loose material.

The pyramids, their temples and associated private tombs were built to last forever and have remained a well-preserved field of monumental ruins. Over the years, however, the focus of productive archaeology has shifted from the monumental to the remains of buildings which were erected at the same time but never intended to be part of the permanent landscape. As with the long walls which subdivided the Giza plateau, a common building material was rough stone and mud mortar, although in some places mud bricks were preferred. Certain of these constructions were built close to the pyramid sites themselves.

The simplest in form is a block of parallel units which lies to the west of the pyramid of Khafra, built against the western enclosure wall of this pyramid. A set of 75 galleries arranged like the teeth of a comb, each about 3 m wide and some 30 m long, extends towards the pyramid; a further set of 19 lies at right angles. The galleries were largely cleaned out in antiquity, but such remains as have been discovered inside point to them having been workshops (for statuary amongst other crafts) rather than places of accommodation or ‘barracks’ for workers, as had originally been proposed. To the south-east of the pyramid of Menkaura (Figure 4.8, ‘Khafra workshops’) lay another site connected with pyramid building: a collection of small buildings, some of them for accommodation, on either side of a rubble wall that makes a series of sharp changes of direction. The full extent of the site is not known, for it continues unexcavated beneath the desert on both east and west. Across an open area were scattered a large number of rough blocks of alabaster, together with an unfinished alabaster column base. These help to identify this part of the camp as a masons’ workshop. The site was relatively well preserved when found, because it had been buried beneath a vast dump of the stone chippings that occur in various parts of the Giza plateau. The late appearance of this dump – after the camp had been abandoned – is understandable if we see it as the remains of a pyramid construction ramp, removed after the end of building and dumped in the nearest convenient place.

Not all of the ancient dumps at Giza are of limestone chippings and archaeologically sterile, however. East and south of the Menkaura work-camp lies a large bay in the line of the rock escarpment largely filled up. Although at first sight the filling appears to be natural, archaeological soundings have suggested otherwise. Flinders Petrie was the first to note that this was no natural patch of desert: ‘The whole surface is covered for many feet deep with broken stone-chips from quarrying.’43 Between 1971 and 1975 archaeologists extensively probed the eastern edge, where it becomes the western slope of the prominent rock outcrop south of the Menkaura Valley Temple (marked as ‘Kromer excavation’ in Figure 4.8).44 A substantial layered deposit of Old Kingdom domestic rubbish was revealed, which included pottery and other artefacts, but no structures. These two probings, and the record of the Menkaura work-camp, are pointers to the possibility that the whole southern edge of the Giza plateau, which is its lowest part, is the site of a gigantic rubbish infilling consisting in part of ramp debris and in part of the dumped remains of building sites and work-camps that had been cleared away (so adding to our list of tasks that confronted the pyramid builders).

These remains lie interspersed amongst the pyramids themselves, particularly towards their southern limit. They do not, however, represent the place where the bulk of the workforce lived and was looked after. This – a large town of which only a part (not necessarily the largest) has been exposed by excavation – lay below the conspicuous rocky outcrop which defines the southern edge of the pyramid zone and thus also to the south of the low-lying area where harbours were situated. In order to separate it from the pyramid landscape, a massive wall of stone blocks, over 10 m thick, was constructed, joining the northern edge of the town to the steep desert escarpment to the west although leaving a tunnel-like doorway running through it. Although it could not have prevented people from entering or leaving the pyramid plateau, it presumably served as a mustering and checkpoint for the daily comings and goings of those with tasks to perform there, its scale symbolizing the enormity of the building project and of the authority under which everyone laboured. Its modern name, Heit el-Ghurab (Wall of the Crow), is now used as a convenient name for the ancient town itself. The extensive areas of building that have been revealed by excavation belong primarily to the reigns of Khafra and Menkaura. Deeper soundings, however, have shown that at least parts of the town had replaced an earlier period of building which one would expect to have been of the reign of Khufu.

As so far revealed, the plan of the town shows two different faces (Figure 4.9).45 One of them (represented by the Western Town and the Eastern Town) is an extensive spread of interlocking small buildings which looks like a product of self-organization although following a broad similarity of north–south alignment. For access it relied upon narrow paths that constantly changed angle rather than on a predetermined grid of streets. From the plans, it is often hard to distinguish clusters of rooms that could compose a ‘house’ or other unit of common purpose. One exception, which separates the Western from the Eastern Town, has been given the name Royal Administrative Building. The excavated part included a courtyard lined with circular grain silos. Amongst the material culture found were mud sealings from official acts of administration and what appear to be small mud tokens representing food rations. Mud sealings, from papyrus rolls and the bindings on wooden storage chests, are sometimes found in concentrations, and one of these was not far from one of the larger houses in the Western Town, which thus emerges as a possible scribal office. The sealings bore the titles of some of the highest officials of the land, and the names of kings Khafra and Menkaura. Such material shows that this part of the site, despite its dense, informal layout, housed some of the controlling activities for the building of the pyramids.



Figure 4.9Overall site plan of the Heit el-Ghurab worker’s town at Giza. The plan has been obtained through a combination of removing surface sand to reveal the tops of walls and full excavation of selected individual parts. This difference in excavation strategy is reflected in the limited extent of shading of the walls. One of the fully excavated long chambers (labelled ‘A’) is shown inset at a larger scale. The sleeping figures rendered in grey are intended to demonstrate that if this was an accommodation unit it could have housed between 40 and 50 men. The position of the bakery shown in Figure 4.6, p. 184 is also marked, as ‘B’. After M. Lehner, M. Kamal and A. Tavares, Giza Plateau Mapping Project, Season 2005, Preliminary Report, Boston, MA, Ancient Egypt Research Associates, 2016, 8; also Lehner, ‘Labor’, 402, Fig. 1.



The northern part of the site, between these two districts and the great wall, has a different character. The walls are much thicker and they follow a more regular, rectilinear street plan. Covering an area of around 150 ×180 m, a sub-rectangular enclosure is largely filled with long parallel chambers or galleries, each measuring about 4.5 ×34.5 m, laid out in rows and served by straight narrow streets. The interiors of the galleries were subdivided into bewildering clusters of rooms and spaces, constantly differing in detail from one chamber to another. Groups of rooms that look like small houses tended to occupy the further end, and some had been used for the baking of bread (Figure 4.6, p. 184, is an example) and, in one example, for the working of copper. Half or more of the front part contained column bases set into a narrow mud bench running down the centre to support wooden columns for a roofed area. Scattered down the long spaces on either side of the bench were a few low platforms of mud, sloping up slightly towards the side walls. A reasonable interpretation is that they are sleeping platforms. In later periods groups of long, parallel, narrow chambers were the preferred design for the large-scale storage of grain and other commodities (Figure 6.6 and Photograph 6.2, pp. 259 and 260 supply a fine example). Here the internal features suggest otherwise and point towards domestic occupation, thus, that the block of chambers together served as a barracks. It has been experimentally demonstrated that each of the chambers could have slept 40–50 men, leading to an estimate of up to 2,000 for the whole gallery complex.

The site has yielded no written records that could identify for us how the various parts were used. But we know, from a mass of other sources, the general outline of how labour was organized for large projects. As already explained, the system relied upon the deployment of formally constituted crews of men who worked under scribal supervision. Given their own names, the crews would have had a sense of identity. Knowing that many such crews formed the core of the pyramid labour force at Giza, it is a logical step to propose that they were the occupants of these galleries. The estimated 2,000 men would have been only a portion of the labour force that, for at least part of the year, would have been accommodated at the site. We can speculate that there are many more galleries as yet undiscovered that would boost the total. We can also draw a contrast between, on the one hand, crews in the gallery barracks, specialized and, as workmen, an elite, living a regimented communal life, and, on the other hand, a more amorphous population of support personnel, from scribes to providers of food, who occupied the extended village-like settlement that lay beside it. The town as a whole was abandoned after the pyramid building ceased. Few articles of value were left behind. But the irreducible detritus of life has proved to be a valuable source of information. Carefully collected and studied by the archaeologist it has revealed, for example, a varied diet, with a relative of abundance of meat, some of it from the hunting of wild animals (including gazelle), implying varied categories of supplier (recall that hunters were amongst the people listed in the Gebelein Papyri and the Wadi Hammamat inscription cited above).46

These varied constructions at Giza seem to be the product of building the pyramids. The Giza plateau, however, was also home to a second community. Its purpose was to maintain the permanent cults of the kings buried in the pyramids and of the host of people buried in the surrounding tombs. One major area of accommodation for at least a part of this community has been excavated to the east of the pyramid of Menkaura, and will be illustrated in the next chapter (see especially Figures 5.7 and 5.8, pp. 208 and 209). When added to the workers’ town of Heit el-Ghurab, Giza offers us the largest exposure of Old Kingdom settlement remains we have, and so helps us to define the nature of Old Kingdom urbanism, part of the subject matter of the next chapter. From the New Kingdom onwards, the heart of any town or city or village was its shrines and temples which served the cults of kings and gods. At Giza in the Old Kingdom the only buildings which served this end were the pyramid temples and the offering-places attached to private tombs. As architecture we cannot recognize other kinds of shrine. In whatever ways the communities at Giza wished to appeal to protective gods and goddesses, it did not draw out the resources needed to create a distinctive architectural setting. Shrine-building, other than for deceased people, was a low priority for the Egyptian people as a whole at this time.

The various supplementary aspects of pyramid building, the creation and maintenance of the construction sites and then the clearing of them away, are no mean ones. From an administrative point of view, it hardly mattered if the operation in hand involved highly skilled sculpting and engineering or the transportation of mountains of rubbish. The size of the Giza pyramids has, since ancient times, been a marvel, and people have speculated on the numbers of labourers needed and their conditions. But whilst it would be an exaggeration to say that in organizational terms the pyramids that we see are only the tip of an iceberg, we nevertheless have to recognize that administratively the actual piling up of stones into pyramidal shape was only one of several major and pressing tasks. If we had more of the ancient texts (of the kind represented by the Wadi el-Jarf papyri) they would document the devices by which the huge administrative needs were met. But even then we would be unlikely to have the full picture. Looking at the less spectacular aspects of the archaeology of Giza is essential for understanding the total scope of the necessary administration.

Writings from the Old and Middle Kingdoms are, in effect, spot samples from a much larger body of original documents most of which have not survived but from which we still have to deduce the full extent of the system. Within the period of our study, which extends back into the time before writing had been developed, it must have grown from zero. But how rapidly or slowly did it grow? One study of the history of the ancient Egyptian economy makes as its central theme that, as time passed, the writing of documents gradually extended its scope, taking in, for example, private property transfers but not until the Middle Kingdom. This opened the way for more opportunities for taxation (and control) and thus to an expansion of the controlled (or state) economy.47 This approach presumes a degree of intentionality on the part of the administration – seeing an opportunity to increase revenue and acting upon it – which is something not to be taken for granted. And the difficulty with any idea that rests on quantification of written material from such early periods is the fortuitous nature of survival of fragile documents. We know that papyrus was being made by the time of the First Dynasty but we have to wait a long time before we have actual papyrus documents. None the less, ideas which seek a form of development in Egyptian society are to be welcomed and borne in mind as evidence increases.

Bureaucracy in the ancient world was an instrument of prosperity of a kind that has surfaced in modern economic debates, revolving around the following question: are public works entailing massive state employment a good thing? Modern debates mix economics and ideology inextricably, and involve a degree of abstract knowledge and an ability to manipulate economies that is unique to our day. Nevertheless, even if we reject public expenditure as a modern route to prosperity, we must recognize that part of the backcloth of history is the fact that the central direction of resources committed to massive labour-intensive projects was in earlier times the great engine of growth, creating many of the world’s civilizations. For the ancient Egyptians we can reconstruct the system in a quite specific way. We can see that huge numbers of people received a basic ration – a minimum wage – and a not insignificant number did better still. The number of jobs (with ration entitlement) was artificially inflated by an early work-sharing device: the phyle system, in which a person performed his duties for only a limited part of each year. The land and its farmers were obliged by the pressure of demand dictated from above to produce enough. The state had already become the great provider and it produced whatever it is that we wish to call Egyptian civilization. Welfare (as yet innocent of social ideology) arrived early in human history.





Notes

1Both passages are in P. Chester Beatty IV; see A.H. Gardiner, Hieratic Papyri in the British Museum. 3rd series: Chester Beatty Gift, London, BM, 1935, 41. The first passage also occurs in P. Anastasi II and P. Sallier I; see Caminos, Miscellanies, 51, 317.

2Strongly argued in M.S. Pinarello, An Archaeological Discussion of Writing Practice: Deconstruction of the Ancient Egyptian Scribe, London, Golden House, 2015.

3Posener-Kriéger and de Cenival, Abu Sir Papyri; Posener-Kriéger, Les archives; Strudwick, Texts, 39–40, 165–72.

4Papazian, Domain explores this theme in some detail, with a summary on pp. 36–7.

5Fakhry, Dahshur Reliefs.

6Papazian, Domain deals extensively with temple landholdings.

7A.M. Roth, Egyptian Phyles in the Old Kingdom: the Evolution of a System of Social Organization, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1991. Note her thought-provoking hypothesis that phyles had originated in prehistoric times as ‘totemic clans’ and perhaps still retained even in the Old Kingdom something of the nature and status of a guild; also Lehner, ‘Labor’, 416–19, 432–9; Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 131–2, 357–8; A. Spalinger, Orientalia 82 (2013), 157–206; Muhs, Economy, 43. Quirke, Exploring Religion, 92, prefers the translation ‘watch’ to ‘phyle’.

8Posener-Kriéger and de Cenival, Abu Sir Papyri, Pl. XXXI; Posener-Kriéger, Les archives, 429–39.

9On Egyptian mathematics see Imhausen, Mathematics. Pages 52–4 explain ‘Notation of fractions’; Gillings, Mathematics.

10Rhind Mathematical Papyrus Problem 42. Translated in Peet, Rhind, 81–2; also Robins and Shute, Rhind, 46.

11Large predynastic breweries have been found at Hierakonpolis in the south and Tell el-Farkha in the north: R. Friedman, ‘Hierakonpolis.’ In Teeter, Origins, 34–5; K.M. Ciałowicz, ‘The predynastic/Early Dynastic Period at Tell el-Farkha.’ In Teeter, Origins, 55–7.

12D. Samuel, ‘Baking and brewing.’ In Nicholson and Shaw, Materials, 537–76.

13Winlock, Models, 27–9, 88, Pls 22, 23, 64, 65.

14Peet, Rhind, 112–13; Gillings, Mathematics, 128–36. In the New Kingdom, working out how to manage the loss of weight (between 1/8 and 1/10) that happens during the baking process was handled somewhat differently; see A. Spalinger, BIFAO 86 (1986), 307–52.

15Rhind Mathematical Papyrus Problem 75. Peet, Rhind, 120; Robins and Shute, Rhind, 51.

16But not always, e.g. Griffith, Papyri, 65, Pl. XXVIa; Collier and Quirke, Papyri: Accounts, 36–7.

17Experimentally verified at Amarna in 1987; see P.T. Nicholson, ‘Experimental determination of the purpose of a “box oven”.’ AR V, 241–52.

18D. Dunham, Uronarti, Shalfak, Mirgissa, Boston, MA, MFA, 1967, 34–5, Pls XXVII and XXVIII; W.K. Simpson, JEA 59 (1973), 220–2; Allen, Heqanakht, 148. One of the tallies is illustrated in Vogel, Fortifications, 41.

19D. Mueller, JNES 34 (1975), 249–63; A. Imhausen, Historia Mathematica 30 (2003), 3–16; Imhausen, Mathematics, 104–12.

20Rhind Mathematical Papyrus Problem 65. Peet, Rhind, 65; Robins and Shute, Rhind, 41; Imhausen, Mathematics, 107–8.

21Peet, Rhind; Robins and Shute, Rhind, 42–3; Imhausen, Mathematics, 106–7; L. Miatello, Historia Mathematica 35 (2008) 277–84.

22A.J. Spalinger, JAOS 105 (1985), 7–20; Muhs, Economy, 83–4.

23Griffith, Papyri, 45–6, Pls XVI, XVII; Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Accounts, 24–5.

24W.K. Simpson, JEA 59 (1973), 220–2; see also B.J. Kemp, ZÄS 113 (1986), 120–36.

25A.P. Gentry, Roman Military Stone-built Granaries in Britain, Oxford, British Archaeological Reports, 1976, 23–4.

26Cited in B.J. Kemp, ZÄS 113 (1986), 120–36, p. 132; see also P. Garnsey, Food and Society in Classical Antiquity, Cambridge, CUP, 1999, 19–20. Park and Greenberg, Finance, 249–51, 254 argue that my suggested figures for diet and calorie intake are too low. They may well be right. But the results of such calculations are not necessarily the same as the amounts that people actually received. Studies of the large sample of skeletons from excavations at Amarna suggest that many of these people were poorly nourished and had experienced heavy labour. In one cemetery those who died (females as well as males) were mostly under the age of 25 and showed the same signs of inadequate nourishment and hard labour as if they had been child labourers (see pp. 374–5).

27Peet, Rhind, 125; Robins and Shute, Rhind, 52.

28W.K. Simpson, Papyrus Reisner I, Boston, MA, MFA, 1963, 83–5; Papyrus Reisner III, Boston, MA, MFA, 1969, 13–15. G.E. Kadish, ‘Observations on time and work-discipline in ancient Egypt.’ In Manuelian, Studies II, 439–49, discusses the rather strict work ethic that these texts reveal.

29The most comprehensive study remains Bakir, Slavery; also Zingarelli, Trade, 99–109.

30Lehner, ‘Labor’, 397–522; Eyre, ‘Work in the Old Kingdom’.

31Cited in Lehner, ‘Labor’, 422.

32Cited in Lehner, ‘Labor’, 445, drawing on P. Posener-Kriéger, RdÉ 27 (1975), 211–21.

33P. Tallet and G. Marouard, ‘The harbor of Khufu on the Red Sea Coast at Wadi el-Jarf, Egypt.’ Near Eastern Archaeology 77 (2014), 4–14.

34G. Goyon, Nouvelles inscriptions rupestres du Wadi Hammamat, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, 1957, 17–20, 81–5, no. 61; D. Mueller, JNES 34 (1975), 256; Lehner, ‘Labor’, 444–5. Or were the high numbers units of man-days (see the references, Lehner, ‘Labor’, 483, n. 460)?

35S.K. Weir, CAJ 6 (1996), 150–63; Lehner, ‘Labor’, 436, 471; Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 415, 419.

36Faulkner, Coffin Texts II, 106–7, Spell 472; H.D. Schneider, Shabtis: an Introduction to the History of Ancient Egyptian Funerary Statuettes, Leiden, Rijksmuseum van Oudheden, 1977, Vol. I, 54–5. The designation ‘N’ stands for the personal name of the owner of the coffin or statuette.

37S. Quirke, RdÉ 39 (1988), 83–106, esp. 87–90.

38Hayes, Papyrus. The quotation is from p. 64; also translated in Parkinson, Voices, 85, 99–101; Muhs, Economy, 67.

39Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 375–8.

40D.D. Klemm and R. Klemm, Stones and Quarries in Ancient Egypt, London, BM, 2008, 185; S. Nishimoto, S. Yoshimura and J. Kondo, ‘Hieratic inscriptions from the quarry at Qurna: an interim report.’ British Museum Studies in Ancient Egypt and Sudan 1 (2002), 20–31 = www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/egyptian/bmsaes/issue1/nishimoto.html; T. Endo, ‘On the daily amount of excavation for the construction of the rock-cut tombs during the New Kingdom period of ancient Egypt.’ In S. Huerta, ed., Proceedings of the First International Congress on Construction History, Madrid, 20th–24th January 2003, Vol. II, Madrid, Instituto Juan de Herrera, 2003, 811–15; A. Van der Perre, ‘Quarry marks of the Amarna Period. The limestone quarries of Dayr Abū Hinnis.’ In J. Budka, F. Kammerzell and S. Rzepka, eds, Non-textual Marking Systems in Ancient Egypt (and Elsewhere), Hamburg, Widmaier, 2015, 69–80.

41Engelbach, Obelisk, 17–21, Pl. VI.

42Lehner and Hawass, Giza, esp. 42–5, 393–401, 420–61, supply most of the information in this section about the Giza plateau; also Lehner, ‘Labor’.

43W.M.F. Petrie, Gizeh and Rifeh, London, BSAE, 1907, 9.

44K. Kromer, Siedlungsfunde aus dem frühen Alten Reich in Giseh: Österreichische Ausgrabungen 1971–1975, Vienna, VOAW, 1978. A clarifying review is by K.W. Butzer, JNES 41 (1982), 140–1. Also Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 56–7, 386.

45Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 354–88; Lehner, ‘Labor’; Moeller, Urbanism, 126–39.

46Lehner, ‘Labor’, 407–13.

47Muhs, Economy.





5

Model communities



Bureaucracy, although characteristically concerned with minutiae, cumulatively deals with large sections of society and to some degree shapes it. Nowadays this tends to be done through the deliberate pursuit of social goals, and to be part of the processes of ‘planning’ and ‘social engineering’. The modern landscape bears witness to this in the size, nature and distribution of towns and villages, as well as in the appearance of individual buildings. Past societies also have left their stamp, their signature, on the ground. It is this that archaeologists most frequently encounter. The record that they make is inevitably shaped in the visual language of ground plans – a symbolic language of its own – frequently incapable of resolution into the terms of the builders’ original intentions and the users’ continuing adaptations. Even in well-documented societies such as that of ancient Egypt it remains extremely difficult to determine the specific purposes for which individual rooms and sometimes whole buildings were made. But building and settlement plans still remain the most widespread testimony of one particular facet of the creative element in society: its capacity to structure its own environment, and beyond this, its power to create visions of how human society should look. Where people live – shanty town or garden city – is a statement about not only their own personal circumstances, but also their society more generally. To see the shapes of towns, ancient and modern, as microcosms of society gives us the most consistent basis there is for comparing societies across space and time. For whereas the survival of written records owes much to chance, and for some societies may amount to nothing at all, archaeology has a good worldwide record for the recovery of plans and other material information about the places where communities once lived. Moreover, as soon as we admit that the evidence in a particular case points to a clear and consistent ideal, then we are tacitly admitting the existence of an ideology. This is not necessarily one that has been formally conceived and expressed, as in the case of Egyptian kingship, but an implicit ideology of social ordering.

Modern architects initially create their buildings, be they an airport or an entire housing development, as drawings and models on a small scale. The hoped-for harmony of the end product can be seen at a glance and discussed in comfort. We do not know if the Egyptians, even when considering large temples, ever did more than make working sketches for use on the spot (Figure 5.1). What is likely to have been common is that planning and discussion were done directly on site at full scale. Ropes and pegs and simple sighting instruments took the place of scribal equipment, whilst the ground served instead of the papyrus sheet.1 It may have been more laborious, but the supply of labour was never a problem. The plan that first became really visible was the pattern of foundations in the ground. When corrections or alterations were made, instead of remaining only as marks on a plan on perishable materials, they were likely to become permanently recoverable to the archaeologist when exposing the foundations.



Figure 5.1Practical scribal aids to building: (1) A quick sketch with overall dimensions may have been all that was necessary to start the builders off, marking out the ground and digging the foundations. In this case the sketch is on a piece of broken pottery, and dates to the late Eighteenth or early Nineteenth Dynasty. Brief annotations, including measurements, are written in hieratic. The building was evidently a temple way-station open at each end, containing an inner chamber also open at both ends, and surrounded by a colonnade. The outside measurements were 27 cubits (c. 14 m) each way; the inner shrine was to be 14 × 6 cubits. Six columns are shown at the sides (labelled ‘column’ against four of them), but this may not have been the exact number intended. Details were probably worked out on the stonework as the building proceeded. Width 9.5 cm. British Museum 41228, from Deir el-Bahari. After S.R.K. Glanville, JEA 16 (1930), 237–9. (2) A diagram sketched on a flake of limestone showing how to draw an even curve. At regular intervals (of one cubit each, though this is not stated) one should draw a perpendicular line of a stated length. The lengths are given in the cubit notation (here reduced for convenience to digits). When the points at the ends of the lines are joined a curve is produced. From Saqqara, perhaps Third Dynasty and used in the building of the curved top to the Southern Tomb of the Step Pyramid. Width 17.8 cm. Egyptian Museum, Cairo JdE 50036. After Clarke and Engelbach, Masonry, 52–3, Figs 53 and 54; Strudwick, Texts, 153. (3) Limestone tablet from Kahun, perhaps used to mark out the position of an intended group of houses. The inscription reads something like the following: ‘A four-house block – 30 × 20 (cubits)’, i.e. c. 15 × 10 m. After G.A. Wainwright, ASAE 25 (1925), 144–5, and plate; also H.G. Fischer, CdÉ 55, no. 109–10 (1980), 13–16. Also Rossi, Architecture, 101–22.



In the process of creating buildings and especially complete settlements to which some degree of care was to be given three elements came together. The first was the likely system of measuring over long distances, using a rope knotted at set intervals, as was used in land survey. When the ground was relatively flat and the buildings were intended to be rectangular a certain frequency of measurements tended to recur. The second element was the range of functions that each building was to house, expressed on the ground by a pattern of partition walls to create rooms and corridors. It was normal at this stage not to mark the positions of doorways. The third element was the natural sense of proportion and harmony which all of us have and use, for example, in arranging furniture in our living rooms. The result was often a plan that looks as though it were the result of a much greater degree of premeditated planning based on a mathematical knowledge of the harmonies of natural proportion than was actually the case.2

The shape that an individual settlement takes will lie somewhere between two poles of ordering. One is that of the scheme that is fully thought-out before any work is done on site. It requires estimations of the shape and size of the community which will occupy it. An example from Tell el-Faraʾin (Buto) was given in Chapter 2 (Figure 2.13, p. 85).3 Thought to be perhaps a ‘palace’ and dating to the First Dynasty, a rectangular area measuring at least 50 × 45 m (and aligned, it would seem, to the cardinal points) had been partitioned into a series of units contained within an enclosure wall. Each unit was given a dense internal layout of many rooms reached by corridors that constantly turn at right angles. The final compact, interlocking design has needed a particular kind of visualization to make it work. The problem to be solved was that, knowing that a certain number of key destinations of significance (such as personal chambers and places where valuables were stored) had to be made secure by means of an indirect system of access, how to lay it out on the ground with a sufficiently economic use of space and route distance? The answer is likely to have been found by laying out the main building units on the ground, subdividing them and then, only as a last step, with continuous lines of foundations in place, deciding where the doorways would be placed. Convoluted internal plans were seen as a solution to providing privacy and security for a long time, exemplified by the large houses at the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun (Figure 5.11, p. 214).

The opposite pole to full planning is not disorder or randomness. It is that of self-organization. Self-organization refers to the inescapable natural order that, at the human level, arises when people interact.4 It appears as a pattern of mutual comfort zones when families make temporary encampments on a sunny seaside beach; it produces traditional African villages; in Egypt of the New Kingdom it resulted in the large residential areas of the city of Amarna (Chapter 8, Figures 8.7 and 8.12, pp. 336 and 350). For earlier periods, the Fourth Dynasty workers’ town at Giza, the Heit el-Ghurab, seems to be a combination of both processes (Figure 4.9, p. 190). The Western and Eastern Towns look like the product of self-organization (although this is not a sign that its occupants were of inferior status). The sets of galleries, if we understand them correctly as barracks, represent a limited degree of prior thought and of positioning of the units by an external source of authority. That external source of authority did not, however, dictate the appearance of the entire town.





Early town layouts and the ‘village horizon’


The study of towns is somewhat hampered in the English language by ambiguity in the common words available. The Latin ‘urbs’ has given us the adjective ‘urban’ and the abstract noun ‘urbanization’ but not a concrete noun for the larger places where people live. Instead we use ‘town’ and ‘city’ somewhat arbitrarily distinguished. The ancient Egyptians, too, had a pair of words that are conventionally translated as ‘town’ and ‘city’ but their usage, too, offers a poor guide to drawing distinctions. I make this point because in absolute terms places that, in the earlier periods, functioned as towns could in actual size be more akin to what we would see as villages, whilst the capital of a province might not be much larger. This does not mean that ancient Egypt was under-urbanized. Rather it exemplifies the generally more modest scale of Egyptian society compared with what is normal experience in much of the present world, a scale commensurate with the modest size of the population. Archaeologists tend to fall back upon the neutral term ‘settlement’, but this often does not feel right when one is thinking of a place that, whilst it might have been quite small, was nevertheless the centre of local life and administration, and had joined the ranks of places of importance in Egypt’s symbolic geography, homes to the gods, in fact.

During the Old Kingdom (and sometimes before that) at many places towns came into existence. Commonly they were surrounded by a thick brick wall, sometimes following a curving course, sometimes built in straight sections. The lack of conformity in what must have been the town’s major building work – its perimeter wall – implies that they represent local initiatives rather than the result of royal decrees and central direction, but whether true or not, perimeter walls played a significant part in shaping the internal layouts of individual towns. Buildings close to the town wall tended to align themselves by it, perhaps actually using it to prop up the whole structure. The alignment of adjacent streets could be similarly influenced. If the town wall were built as a series of straight sections then the interior would tend naturally to contain a degree of internal regularity. A clear early example is Hierakonpolis (Figure 5.2).5 The Old Kingdom wall enclosed an irregular area, but by means of a series of straight lengths. A broad diagonal swathe of the town has been excavated, together with a few isolated patches. Within these exposures we can see a tendency for walls and the narrow streets to follow similar directions for some distances. At the south end the direction is set by the southern stretch of the enclosure wall. In the central area, however, it was set by an existing but by then ruined wall of an earlier palace (Figure 2.9, p. 79), which seems also to have been matched by the northern stretch of town wall. Similar house alignments taken from the nearest length of town wall can still be seen in parts of the Old Kingdom/Middle Kingdom towns at Tell Edfu and Abydos.6 Town walls require a judgement of how large the town will be. In these examples there is also an implication of prior site clearance that allowed the new houses to reflect the new wall alignments. This in turn points to a measure of local control or mutual agreement sufficient to bring about the remodelling of the whole community. At Hierakonpolis, as far as one can tell, the size of the future town was correctly assessed. At Tell Edfu (and at Elephantine; see below) the expansion that subsequently took place required the walling of additional adjacent areas.



Figure 5.2Urban layout with a degree of regularity dictated by a town wall: the Old Kingdom town of Hierakonpolis (see also Figure 2.8, p. 77, Figure 2.9, p. 79, and Figure 3.9, p. 130). The arrows point to probable streets. After Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Pl. LXXIII; W. Fairservis, JARCE 9 (1971–2), Figs 3, 9–15; also Moeller, Urbanism, 94–6.



The most thoroughly studied early town is Elephantine, the object of regular major excavations since 1969 (Figure 5.3). Allowance has to be made for Elephantine having been a frontier town and therefore requiring an additional measure of protection, even to supporting a garrison, yet it is still possible to interpret its history as an interaction between royal initiatives and local community interests.7 A village had developed on the island in the Predynastic Period (in the Nagada IIC/D phase). In dynastic times it grew into a small walled town, its irregular shape reflecting the underlying granite island. The exposures of the interior made by excavation reveal narrow irregular streets and buildings that were, for the most part, little more than huts, although a more substantial central building developed in the later Old Kingdom, lasting (and being structurally modified) into the late Middle Kingdom. Some characteristics suggest an administrative centre and thus that the building was a residence for the official who was in charge of the town (hence the term ‘governor’s/mayor’s residence’ is appropriate). Other characteristics seem to belong more to places where the spirits of named and revered individuals were honoured. Wooden panels at the main entrance are carved with processions of figures (originally named) which included a high official and probably his wife. The panels are of a type which one would expect to find at a tomb. Other items, including wooden shrines and small statues, are also suited to the performance of cult. As for the people commemorated, two of them were, in succession, the governors Hekaib and Sabni of the Sixth Dynasty. The blurring of commemoration and cult with the practical exercise of power and administration is a valuable lesson in itself, urging us to caution in imposing discrete categories on the past. Deference towards honoured individuals, when alive and when dead and utilizing special places and objects, was part of the continuum of existence, appropriate to an office and to a place of burial as well as to a ‘shrine’.



Figure 5.3Below. The town and fortress at Elephantine, Early Dynastic Period and Old Kingdom. After W. Kaiser et al., MDAIK 55 (1999), Abb. 55. Above. Comparisons of settlement size over time at Elephantine and Aswan. The ‘modern’ settlements (cross-hatched) are those of 1798; see Description de l’Égypte, Antiquités 1, Pl. 31; also H. Jaritz, MDAIK 43 (1968), 68, Fig. 7; C. von Pilgrim, K.-C. Bruhn and A. Kelany, MDAIK 60 (2004), 119–48; Bard, Encyclopedia (entries on Aswan and Elephantine, by E. Seidlmeyer and W. Kaiser).



Also in the Early Dynastic Period a more regular walled enclosure provided with rounded towers was inserted into the north-eastern corner. It has been interpreted as a fortress built under royal control, although again its interior has a strongly village-like character (rather like the interior of the Hierakonpolis palace compound; see Figure 2.9, p. 79). One consequence of this intrusion was the confinement of the early shrine (which became the shrine of the goddess Satet) to a marginal location in the town plan (Figure 3.4, p. 119). As discussed earlier (pp. 116–18), the shrine itself is a good example of a place where people of the town could comfortably commune with imaginary beings, and which eventually attracted royal patronage.

From a little later, some of the varied aspects of life at Elephantine are captured by one excavated neighbourhood of the Middle Kingdom defined by the buildings along a single street (Figure 5.4).8 In even later centuries Elephantine came to be dominated by a colossal temple to the creator god Khnum, personified by a ram. Probings beneath the foundations have so far failed to find an Old Kingdom/Middle Kingdom predecessor, implying that, if it existed, it must have been small. The Satet shrine in its niche had, by the early Twelfth Dynasty (reign of Senusret I), been replaced by a stone temple of finely carved masonry though still of a modest size. The street in question lay separately and may have been a ‘quarter’ with its own character. At the south end a shrine was built (or rebuilt) at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty by the local family of mayors and chief priests (its founder named Sarenput). It honoured not a conventional deity but an earlier governor named Hekaib who had lived in the late Sixth Dynasty, the likely occupant of the ‘governor’s residence’ mentioned earlier (and who had been buried in the desert cemetery on the west bank of the Nile). Hekaib is a fine example of how a figure could attract such respect in his lifetime as to create a cult which could then last for generations. Over the next three centuries (into the Thirteenth Dynasty) members of the Sarenput family and others, including kings, added their own statues and tiny shrines within the confined space of the walled courtyard. Texts speak of Hekaib as a god who could benefit those who served him. Along the street facing the shrine lay houses, what was apparently another shrine to an official named Sebekemsaf, and eventually a building perhaps with a corner tower; this, to judge from the many storage units and from the finding of hundreds of mud seal impressions or sealings, was an administrative building from where rations were distributed. The homogeneity and human scale of the whole neighbourhood is notable. No part seeks to dominate.



Figure 5.4Right. A street in the town of Elephantine in the Middle Kingdom. Note how the shrine of Hekaib (a long-dead governor and now one of the leading local gods) blends with its surroundings. After Elephantine; the Ancient Town, 45, Abb. 9; see also W. Kaiser et al., MDAIK 55 (1999), Abb. 56. Left. A series of plans of houses of peasants, from the landless – (1), (2) and (7) – to the prosperous (9), recorded in Egypt in the early part of the twentieth century AD, after Lozach and Hug, L’habitat, 124–34. The merchant’s house in Alexandria, c. 1798 AD, is from the Description de l’Égypte, État moderne, II, Pl. 91.6. All parts of Figure 5.4 are to the same scale. Although many cover similar areas of ground, they may have risen to different heights to accommodate different numbers of storeys.



Elephantine helps to define the scale and character of Egyptian society in its earlier phases. Alongside the detailed map of early Elephantine (Figure 5.3) I have inset (at a smaller scale) a map of the area that also shows the approximate outlines of settlements at two later periods. One is Late Roman (Byzantine) and the other early modern (as mapped by Napoleon’s expedition in 1798). After the Old Kingdom Elephantine continued to grow until it occupied about three times its former area, but a twin town on the east bank also began to develop in or after the New Kingdom. Under the name Syene (Aswan), it was to overshadow its predecessor. Eventually it reached about six times the area of the Old Kingdom original. The area of settlement recorded in AD 1798 is a little larger still even though it is generally thought that, at this time, Egypt’s fortunes were at a low ebb. On Elephantine itself, the twin modern villages roughly equal the size of the Old Kingdom town, yet the present state of knowledge provides no grounds for thinking that there was a town on the east bank in the Old Kingdom. The population seems to have lived primarily on the island. When island and mainland are taken together, there is thus an even bigger difference between the area of settlement of the Old Kingdom and that of early modern times. This is a commonplace observation for Egypt generally. Places of ancient settlement that we are entitled to call towns were often small even when compared with the villages of the early modern landscape, let alone modern towns. Why should this be so?

One direction in which to look is the size of houses and how far they might differ between those of the poor and the rich across the various periods. As a point of comparison, I have added to Figure 5.4 specimen plans of houses of peasants from Egypt of the early twentieth century AD and a late nineteenth-century merchant’s house. The comparison, though somewhat superficially based, does not suggest that the explanation lies here, for there is a rough comparability. I can only assume that the disparity in settlement size primarily reflects the overall size of Egypt’s population in a landscape containing a roughly similar number of settlements. It is estimated that between the Old Kingdom and Roman times the population grew from just over 1,000,000 to perhaps just under 5,000,000, though the estimate for AD 1798 is around 4,000,000.9 This approximates to the order of magnitude by which the settlement sizes differ.

Egypt’s population at the time of writing has grown to 95,000,000 (2017 census; with a rate of increase of 1,000,000 every six months). Although popular journalism emphasizes the ‘timeless’ quality of the rural landscape of Egypt, it cannot be a good guide to what it was like in Pharaonic times generally, and more especially in the Old Kingdom. The valley landscape, richer in wildlife and with far more lush vegetation, would have seemed oddly deserted and lacking in mechanical noise by comparison with today. And although we are right to talk about urbanization and to see towns as the normal home for a large proportion of ancient Egyptians, those towns, even when walled, actually covered less ground than most villages of modern Egypt. For a long time the Egyptian perception of what a town should look like was determined by a ‘village horizon’, which did not embrace significant public architecture. An appreciation of urban grandeur developed slowly. The best-preserved city from Pharaonic Egypt, Amarna of the Eighteenth Dynasty (Chapter 8), lies only part way along that perceptual journey.

Societies do not necessarily maintain uniformity of scale across the built environment, however. Many that occupy an early position on the timelines of archaeology proved able to direct a degree of organization and skill towards monuments that seem, with hindsight, to be markedly out of proportion to the scale of their general way of life. The megalithic monuments of Europe and Malta, the statues of Easter Island, the large sculptured blocks and statues of the Anatolian society of Göbekli which was still at a hunter-gatherer stage, all are examples of a striving towards an exaggerated scale for significant creations which was not a measure for the rest of life.10 So, too, for Egypt of the Early Dynastic Period and Old Kingdom, where the direction of extra effort was towards tombs, including pyramids, and the statues of kings and nobles which were often placed within them. Cemeteries, including that for Elephantine, seem to have absorbed more of the community’s labour and ambition for social display than either the houses or shrines in their towns.

The later Old Kingdom also supplies an example of a new town built on virgin ground, in the Dakhla Oasis at the site of Ain Asil (Figure 5.5). This is the kind of circumstance where one most expects to see demonstrated the organizing powers of the state.11 What was created was substantial yet piecemeal. At its centre was a well-built mud-brick fortified town, its nucleus roughly 170 m square and surrounded by a stout wall reinforced by semi-circular towers which also flanked one of the entrances. Two later enclosures added to the sides almost doubled its area. One of them contained a palace for the governor, built during the reign of Pepi II, its enclosure measuring 220 × 95 m. Its narrow streets and angled alignments give it a village-like appearance. There was, in addition, a population dispersed over the surrounding territory, some of them living in a separate town (Ain el-Gazzareen, founded in the Fourth or Fifth Dynasty),12 and the whole development was under the control of a line of ‘governors of the oasis’, who bore Egyptian names. They were buried in a cemetery about 1 km from the town, beneath large mud-brick tombs provided with chapels and accompanied by fine grave goods. As is known from places in the Nile valley (the case of Hekaib on Elephantine is a good example), the cult of governors also had a prominent place in the town itself. A group of chapels built for their benefit is so far the only representative of architecture in the service of cult that can be identified inside the town. No separate temple can be identified. The size of the tombs and prominence of the chapels of governors at Ain Asil exemplifies the priority that Egyptians at this time gave to buildings which marked social status through personal statue cults. It contrasts especially with the Egyptian colonial towns in Nubia in the New Kingdom where, illustrating a different order of priorities, stone temples, rivalling in size those built in Egypt at this time, celebrated national gods and the king and dominated the interiors of the towns.



Figure 5.5A late Old Kingdom colonial town: at Ain Asil, in the Dakhla Oasis. The map shows the relationship between the ancient town and its separately lying cemetery, some of the tombs containing rich burials. Balat is the nearest modern town. A more detailed plan of the excavated parts of the ancient town is given as an inset. Note that the only identifiable places of cult are in honour of the governors of the oasis. After C. Jeuthe, V. Le Provost and G. Soukiassian, BIFAO 113 (2013), 217, Fig. 1; D. Laisney, Balat IX. Cartographie de Balat, Cairo, IFAO, 2010, Pl. 1, Fig. 16.



The way of life of the colony at Ain Asil, to judge from the architecture of town and cemetery, the pottery and other artefacts found, and the administrative framework that is visible from texts, seems to have been Egyptian. There has to be a strong presumption that the governors, and perhaps many of the inhabitants, had in the beginning been sent out, or had volunteered to go out, from a home base in the Nile valley. The sense of exile was in this case not strong enough for them to seek repatriation and burial in Egypt proper.

Such of the order that we see in these early towns is likely to have arisen from immediate convenience, and one must be careful in applying to it the term ‘planning’ if, by this, one means a degree of forethought that goes beyond some fairly basic decision-making and even the pursuit of idealized visions of society. Moreover, the uncertainty over who was responsible for initiatives in provincial town developments fogs the question of how far the Old Kingdom state had an interest in determining urban layouts. Fortunately, there is another set of examples that does provide an answer of a kind.





Pyramid towns in the Old Kingdom


Organized life at pyramid sites did not end with the completion of the stone buildings and burial of the king. From Old Kingdom written sources we know of the existence of ‘pyramid towns’, looked after by a hierarchy of officials. Altogether some 42 different titles of officials have been recorded, though many are rare. Where these titles can be ranked, they tend to be headed by a senior priest, or by a ‘director of the town.’ We should recall that, by this time and for some time to come, the leaders of provincial towns generally often bore the twin titles of ‘mayor’ and ‘chief priest’. Being a priest, at least in the earlier periods in Egypt, was not to follow a calling but to have the job of looking after matters related to the cults of ‘gods’; this itself is a wide category which included revered local leaders of society, one of whom was, of course, the king. The Neferirkara archive examined in the last chapter fills in the detail of how one such pyramid town was run. How were they represented on the ground?

The Neferirkara archive introduces us to a community busying itself in detailed daily bookkeeping exercises at one of the pyramids at Abusir. This is a good place to start looking. The most obvious traces of antiquity at Abusir were excavated first by a German expedition between 1902 and 1908 (Figure 5.6).13 There had been, as usual, a mortuary temple built against the eastern face of the pyramid. It had consisted of the normal grouping of cult chambers, storerooms, colonnaded forecourt and entrance from the access causeway. It was a building finished cheaply, the forecourt and most of the storerooms being in brick with wooden columns. One unusual feature came to be added when the causeway was rerouted to serve the adjoining pyramid of King Neuserra: a formal columned entrance portico. This alteration coincided with the building of an inner enclosure wall of mud brick. The spaces between this wall and the stonework of the temple were filled with mud-brick buildings. Some of them appear to be houses. We can have little doubt that they belonged to the official community of those assigned (and paid) to look after King Neferirkara’s mortuary cult. We can recognize from the plan probably no more than nine separate ‘houses’. They must be where those on duty – the serving phyle – resided whilst doing all the tasks so meticulously recorded in the papyri. As an example of a model community it falls into the ‘out of sight, out of mind’ category. The sole element of order was provided by the enclosure wall that fitted in with the pyramid’s monumental exterior, and hid from the outside world the huddle of houses on the inside.



Figure 5.6The decay of a monument and the archaeology of maintenance: the mortuary temple at the pyramid of King Neferirkara of the Fifth Dynasty at Abusir. (1) Thicker lines of the temple represent stonework; the rest was built in mud brick. The hatched portion represents the pyramid ‘town’ built following the completion of the monument. Buildings 1 to 9 are presumably houses; the function of no. 10 is uncertain. (2) The same mortuary temple, a generation or more later. The hatched portions are brick supports and shutterings built by the temple staff to keep up the roof of the colonnade around the forecourt, and the roofs of the eastern and northern corridors of the temple. The columns had been of wood, and there was evidently a danger of the whole front of the temple collapsing. The extra shelter provided by the support walls was utilized where convenient for cooking-fires. After Borchardt, Grabdenkmal, 56, Abb. 63, Blatt 10.



This ‘town’ could have accommodated only a small community, fewer, one would guess, than those who appear in the lists of the Neferirkara archive. Yet it must be remembered that temple personnel put in a month’s work only periodically. The permanent homes of these people may have been elsewhere. Where we lack direct evidence altogether is in whether their permanent homes were in nearby villages that had grown up piecemeal, or whether the state had provided a complete planned town for them all, now buried beneath the fields of the nearby floodplain.

The same site also highlights a problem faced by all states that foster grandiose building, namely, maintenance. By the end of the Old Kingdom Egypt possessed more than 20 major pyramids with their associated temples, constructed with varying degrees of solidity (and not all of them finished). The Neferirkara temple was one of the less well-built examples. During the lifetime of its ‘town’ roofs became dangerous and the wooden columns weakened, no doubt from the attacks of termites that quickly turn their attentions to woodwork in desert locations. The response of those in charge was to shore up the threatened parts with brick walls and shuttering (Figure 5.6 (2)). It badly disfigured the building, shutting off much of the colonnade around the forecourt, but it presumably achieved its purpose.

From this, and from the even more cavalier treatment of Menkaura’s Valley Temple by its community to be described shortly (and the much later replacement of the neat brick town surrounding the mortuary temple of Rameses III at Medinet Habu by an irregular village-sized town, Figure 8.17, p. 362), we may deduce that there was no general policy towards, or means of funding, the maintenance of the stock of historic buildings. At any one time a significant proportion of them would be derelict or shabby. We sometimes read of kings restoring particular temples, whilst Rameses II’s eldest son, the priest Khaemwese, even took an interest in restoring a few of the ancient pyramid sites. But this was a piecemeal process that cannot have kept pace with the decay. The principal improvement came with the New Kingdom, when a general policy was followed of replacing old temples in the towns with new ones of stone. But still the unequal fight against time did not go unnoticed. A poet of the period wrote, with respect to the tombs of famous wise men remembered for their teachings:

Their portals and mansions have crumbled,

Their mortuary-priests have vanished;

Their tombstones are covered with dirt,

Their graves are forgotten.

Yet their name is pronounced over their books,

Which they composed whilst they had being.14



Returning to the Old Kingdom pyramid towns: by the time of the Fifth Dynasty pyramids at Abusir the peak of monumentality in pyramid building had already passed. Can we find more substantial traces at Giza?

The workers’ town, the Heit el-Ghurab, lasted only for as long as the pyramids at Giza were being built; and it lay outside the huge stone wall that closed the pyramid area to the south (Figure 4.9, and p. 190). The broad intention of those responsible for the Giza pyramids and surrounding tombs was to bequeath to an indefinite future a manned offering-cult for everyone buried there, paid for by bequests of land. If it had worked as planned it would have created a daunting schedule of regular performance across a veritable city of tombs. Amongst the recipients were not only the three kings who built the Giza pyramids but queens, princesses and princes, as well as others of lesser status who had gained a place of burial at this most prestigious of sites. As a means of servicing this industry of funerary cults, at least across the southern half of the pyramid plateau, a specially built town was founded and maintained to the end of the Old Kingdom (a span of more than 300 years). Whether one or more further towns serviced the northern half of the plateau, and were located on lower ground now built over, is not known. The focal points of this southern town were two of the large monuments themselves. One was the tomb of Queen Khentkawes I, who died at the end of the Fourth Dynasty and seems to have been particularly honoured. The other was the Valley Temple of Menkaura’s pyramid which stood on the desert plateau rather than on the low-lying edge of the floodplain.15

The layout and position of the town were a compromise which achieved the aim of locating the community on the desert plateau, perhaps straddling one of the main points of access, but at the expense of fitting a determined attempt at a planned settlement on to a highly uneven ground surface. The result was one modest L-shaped town and, set at an angle to the southern part of the L, an extension into Menkaura’s Valley Temple. There was thus no attempt to create one small town or village for each major place of funerary cult. This is most obvious in the case of Menkaura’s huge mortuary temple built against the east face of his pyramid. Although administrative seals and fragments of two inscriptions, probably decrees, bearing the name of King Merenra of the Sixth Dynasty show that the cult was maintained to the end of the Old Kingdom, those who performed it seem not to have lived there. This is one reason for suspecting that the servicing of the myriad cults on the Giza plateau was delegated to one (or two perhaps) professional cult communities. Much of the evidence that we can most easily grasp, such as the physical layouts of cult places and the written evidence for cult performance, leads us to expect several or many separate groups, each with its own identity, hierarchy and places of work laid out to correspond to specific activities. The Giza mortuary cult town suggests that we should lower our expectations.

At its western end the town joined the mortuary temple cut into the face of the rock podium of the tomb of Queen Khentkawes (Figure 5.7; Figure 4.8 (A–B), p. 187, shows the location).16 From this point a long narrow mud-brick compound ran down the slope in a straight east–west line for c. 150 m, ending at a steeply dipping rock face which seems to have been the edge of a basin. Along its south side ran a double street, and on the north a single one. A girdle wall, 2.5 m thick, marked the boundaries on these sides. To the east, an annexe ran southwards, measuring 80 × 40 m, giving to the whole complex an L-shaped plan. Several entrances are visible in the girdle walls. The street running south passed actually beneath the main east–west street by means of a tunnel using a staircase on the north and a ramp on the south. The long northern wing contains a row of 11 separate buildings, most of which are probably houses. In several cases the same plan is repeated with minor modifications. In the centre of the row are six such unit houses of similar plan, each measuring 12 × 15 m. The house plans show a certain resemblance to those at other sites of the Old Kingdom as well as of the Middle Kingdom. Within the interlocking rectangular rooms convenience of access seems often to be subordinated to privacy or security, leading to the use of corridors, anterooms and numerous turns, creating a minor labyrinth. In most of the houses a central room can be identified, which in one case had seen use as a place of sleeping and of food preparation. No signs existed that any of the roofs had been supported on columns. In two houses there were circular grain bins: a single one in the third house from the west; four in the sixth house from the west. Blackening of the walls of the central room at the back (or south) of one house suggests a kitchen. Over time, the occupants made changes to the layouts, blocking doors, making fresh partition walls and even blurring the distinction between one original house and its neighbour.



Figure 5.7Early urban planning: part of the town which probably housed the staff who serviced the funerary cults in the southern part of the Giza necropolis to the end of the Old Kingdom. One part, on the right and attached to the tomb of Queen Khentkawes, seems to have been built specifically for this purpose. The other, on the left, began as the Valley Temple for Menkaura’s pyramid but was converted to dwellings and stores. For more detail see Figure 5.8. For the general location see Figure 4.8 (p. 187). After Hassan, Gîza IV, Fig. 1; M. Lehner, D. Jones, L. Yeomans, H. Mahmoud and K. Olchowska, ‘Re-examining the Khentkaues Town.’ In Strudwick, Old Kingdom, 143–91, p. 148, Fig. 4; 189, Fig. 25; Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 277, Fig. 11.33.



The southern wing of the Khentkawes town contains at least four separate buildings that may have been for residence or administration. On the north side of an open space in the middle lay a group of four circular grain silos. This space was reached by means of a staircase on the west, reflecting the slope down from the desert. To the north of this court lay another, containing only a rectangular basin cut into the rock. Further excavation in the south and south-east of the town was prevented by the existence of a modern cemetery, but deep soundings revealed the presence of brick walls over a considerable area, but at depths of up to 6 m below the modern ground level.

The southern wing brought the town close to the front of the Valley Temple of Menkaura (Figures 5.7 and 5.8).17 Menkaura’s architects had planned that both his mortuary temple and Valley Temple would be built in the prevailing megalithic tradition. The king probably died prematurely, however, and both temples were completed in mud brick. In the case of the Valley Temple the walls of the central courtyard were decorated with niches in the panelled palace-façade style (Figure 5.8, Stage I). Outside the original front a formal addition in brick was made, which turned the entrance to the north, towards the adjacent Khentkawes town. It also faced towards a wide mud-plastered ramp which separated it from the Khentkawes town, a ramp which may have been one of the main routes of access to the Giza plateau. Behind the entrance, a two-columned portico led to a four-columned vestibule. This led in turn to a court which gave access to the interior of the temple. Further corridors and spaces were laid out beyond, to the south. But over this part small dwellings were raised, in places on accumulations of rubbish. Towards the south of these dwellings lay circular brick silos for storing grain.



Figure 5.8The ‘villagization’ of a monument: the Valley Temple of the Pyramid of Menkaura (Mycerinus) at Giza (see also Figure 4.8, p. 187, for location). Above. Plan of the temple as finished after Menkaura’s death (c. 2503 BC). Note the palace-façade decoration of the sides of the main court. The whole is a good example of formal, monumental architecture in mud brick. Below. The same building about three centuries later, in the time of Pepi II. The royal decree on a stone tablet found in the entrance hall shows that the building was still the officially designated pyramid town of Menkaura. As time had passed, the supporting community had moved in and built storage facilities, including granaries (the circular constructions) and perhaps small dwellings partly inside and partly on top of the remains of the temple. Its thick enclosure wall and twin massive gates made it, in effect, a fortified village. After Reisner, Mycerinus, Ch. III, Pls VIII, IX.



Subsequent to the completion in brick of the Valley Temple proper, houses began to spread within the main courtyard. Circular granaries were constructed in some numbers, clustering towards the north side of the original court, as well as many rectangular bins made from mud bricks which perhaps were used to facilitate the distribution of rations. From this point onwards, most of the temple except for the sanctuary was allowed to decay. In places it was actually demolished to make further room for the expanding settlement, which gradually buried the lower parts of the temple. The plan shows walls constructed over thefilled-in ruins, particularly on the south and south-west sides, where houses mounted the old enclosure wall. The excavators also found a good deal of temple equipment still in the original storerooms, buried in the dust and rubble. In this category were the slate triads of the king and other figures which represent some of the finest work of Old Kingdom sculptors. The process of decay had been hastened by a flood from a sudden storm which had broken into the rear of the building. An attempt at renovation followed, but only on top of the debris. This recognized the existence of the settlement and surrounded it with a new wall. A new gatehouse and sanctuary were also built over the sites of the old ones. Anyone approaching the sanctuary, therefore, still had to walk from the gatehouse between two groups of huts and silos.

The new sanctuary had a vestibule with four columns. These had been of wood on limestone bases. On the mud floor, four beautiful life-sized statues of Menkaura were set up, two on each side of the door to the inner chambers. The offering-place of the rebuilt sanctuary was found more or less intact. It consisted of an altar, c. 50 cm high, made from a worn slab of alabaster resting on two rough upright stones. A crude libation basin stood beside it. Nearby lay four unfinished diorite statuettes of the king, lying on their side. They may have actually stood on the altar and been the object of the offering-cult in this last phase of the temple’s existence.

The date and circumstances of this rough-and-ready cult being carried on in a dingy chamber at the back of a tightly packed mud village (within a girdle wall and gateway which made it virtually into a fortified village) are clear from two sources. One is the associated archaeological material, which seems not to extend beyond the end of the Old Kingdom. The other is a decree of King Pepi II of the Sixth Dynasty, found in the floor debris of the inner gateway. The text of the decree exempts the ‘pyramid town’ from certain obligations and appoints an official to it. It demonstrates that this site was officially regarded as part of the pyramid town at a date very close to the end of the Old Kingdom. After this time the site appears to have been abandoned and the cult of King Menkaura to have ceased entirely.

The whole history of this settlement reveals how great could be the gap between intention and practice, between the products of superlative craftsmanship and the way they were treated, and between the inner world of bureaucratic order and the rough reality outside. The two parts of the town, springing from temples for the cults of Khentkawes and Menkaura, began as expressions of imposed architectural order but their subsequent history was shaped by innumerable personal and local interventions which overlaid the original designs with the signatures of self-organization.

Menkaura was not an unusual case. The Valley Temple of King Sneferu of the Fourth Dynasty at Dahshur provides a further illustration (Figure 5.9).18 Here we see the remains of a limestone temple with finely carved reliefs (including the personified offering-bearers of Figure 4.2, p. 169). It stood within a rectangular enclosure defined by a mud-brick wall, leaving a space on the south side of the temple, 15 × 48 m. This was filled up with the houses of the serving community, so creating another pyramid ‘town’. Altogether some 15 houses seem to have been present, offering accommodation for perhaps 100 people if they were occupied by families. As a figure of cult interest, Sneferu enjoyed a lengthy history, seeing a revival in the Middle Kingdom. This seems to have been reflected in a phase of occupation overlying the original Old Kingdom houses. It looks probable that Dahshur also adds an element of wider context missing from other pyramid sites of the Old Kingdom. What are probably the remains of a much larger town have been located beneath the fields to the east of the pyramid.19 It could be that, as one might guess for other pyramid communities, it was the main settlement of which the ‘town’ at the actual pyramid temple was a satellite for short-term occupation by the group fulfilling its monthly period of duty.



Figure 5.9The Old Kingdom mortuary-cult ‘town’ attached to the Valley Temple of Sneferu at Dahshur (see also the reliefs, Figure 4.2, p. 169). Nos 1–11, 13, 14 and 16 are probably houses, no. 15 contains a set of four granaries. After Fakhry, Dahshur Reliefs, Fig. 4.



Bureaucracy begins by imposing order on defined areas of activity. The scope of control can grow, however, and become the prime factor in a community’s existence. If this is harnessed to a tradition of architectural planning, the ‘model town’ comes into being. The available evidence demonstrates that in the Old Kingdom (even possibly in the Early Dynastic Period in view of the strictly planned quarter at Tell el-Faraʾin, Figure 2.13, p. 85) the bringing about of regularity of plan, with straight streets and modular buildings, became a recognized way creating settlements. But the evidence we have for Old Kingdom towns, limited though it is, suggests that the process did not represent a general policy but was something chosen by some agencies close to the king and not by others. It was the Middle Kingdom, which followed the period of provincial assertion, at least in Upper Egypt, of the First Intermediate Period, that for a time made planned settlements the norm.





Planning at its height: the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun


The name Kahun was given in 1889 by Flinders Petrie to a large Middle Kingdom settlement in the vicinity of the modern town of El-Lahun, which stands close to the entrance to the Fayum depression (Figure 5.10).20 It lies on the rising edge of the desert, and part has been lost to the lateral spreading ofcultivated land since ancient times. The basic nature and purpose of the town are evident from its context. Beside it lay a temple, reduced to a ruin down to its foundations even by Petrie’s day, and this, to judge from its position, was the Valley Temple to the pyramid of King Senusret II that stands just over 1 km to the west. No causeway was made linking it to the pyramid, which seems to have remained a monument that, despite its distance, gave meaning to the temple and its town.



Figure 5.10The type site for orthogonal town planning in ancient Egypt: the Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, attached to the pyramid of Senusret II. After Petrie, Illahun, Pl. XIV; Petrie et al., Lahun, Pls II, XXXIII, XXXVIA; additions (in grey) from the work of the Royal Ontario Museum and University of Toronto expedition, as presented in Moeller, Urbanism, plans between pp. 272–88.



The town, following the same orientation as the pyramid, is an unusually large example of a ‘pyramid town’, housing the varied personnel responsible for the perpetual cult of the deceased king. Papyri found in the town confirm this, for they include part of the administrative archive of the mortuary cult. It reveals that, as postulated for Giza after the Fourth Dynasty, a range of mortuary cults from a court cemetery around the king’s pyramid had been consolidated into a series of statue cults of members of the royal family and of officials and their families located within the large stone temple that lay beside the town. The archive also gives us ancient names for the town: Hetep-Senusret (‘King Senusret is at peace’) and Sekhem-Senusret (‘King Senusret is strong’), the latter name perhaps applied to the separate western subdivision of the town.

The size of Kahun is, however, far greater than that of other known pyramid towns, although it has to be admitted that the basis for comparison is small. But on the general scale of ancient urbanism, too, Kahun stands out as an important town in its own right. Its functions may therefore have gone much further than simply housing the workmen who built the pyramid, and the community which kept up the cult of the dead king Senusret II. A good many administrative papyri have come from Kahun, belonging to two main groups, each representing quite separate archives with few points of contact.21 Only in part is this because they date from different periods within the Middle Kingdom. Much more is it because they reflect two different areas of organized life. One group, already mentioned, derives from the temple of the royal cult and is concerned with temple organization and temple personnel; the other comes from within the town and covers the life and business of a broader community involved not only with the original foundation but also with many unconnected areas of interest. A few documents deal with work located actually outside Kahun altogether, on a construction project of King Amenemhat III, possibly part of his own pyramid complex. The dragging of stone by gangs of men is the subject of several papyri, as is the farming and measuring of land belonging to the staff and estates of the temple. Whether Kahun also contained people who followed their own agricultural pursuits is not known. From these sources, from the size of the town and from its long subsequent history of occupation we can deduce that its purpose, perhaps conceived from the beginning, was to develop into a major source of labour and agricultural produce as well as to continue to serve the needs of the cults of statues in the adjacent stone temple. To some degree Kahun was combining the functions of the Heit el-Ghurab and Khentkawes/Menkaura towns at Giza and with greater longevity.

The town was roughly square, its sides measuring 392 m on the north and an estimated 246 m on the east (thus an area of 9.5 ha). The ground slopes gradually from the south-east corner up towards the north-west corner. A thick wall divides the main part of the town from a separate strip on the west. The reason for this division is not known. The surrounding walls (with a thickness of c. 3.25 m) show no trace of fortification. Only one gateway is preserved, that towards the north-east, measuring about 2 m across. An isolated room just inside the gate may have housed a watchman, but no extra protection at the gateway is visible. Within the walls the town displays a grid or orthogonal plan which the builders adhered to far more strictly than had been the case with the Heit el-Ghurab site at Giza. The north side of the main east–west street is subdivided into seven principal units, with three more on the south side. The westernmost stood on a natural eminence of rock that had been sculpted to form a platform with vertical sides rising above the town on east and south. Petrie called this the Acropolis. The scant traces of walls on the summit imply that it was not dissimilar to the other large units. It was reached, however, by an impressive staircase cut into the rock. The other units seem to have been large houses (Figure 5.11). Most of them measured 42 × 60 m. Where the site has lost its archaeological layer to erosion on the south, there is room to reconstruct both more of the large and more of the small houses.



Figure 5.11Large town houses: the plan is a composite derived from Kahun (Figure 5.10, p. 212). The core house – the residential part – is cross-hatched. Two master bedrooms with bed alcoves can be recognized (nos 1 and 2, see Figure 8.13, p. 351, for a New Kingdom example). The remainder of the building must be given over to storage (including a granary, no. 3) and workshops. The perspective drawing is derived from the early Twelfth Dynasty house models from the tomb of Meketra at Thebes. The parts A to D correspond to the similarly labelled parts on the plan. ‘A’ is the façade to the street, ‘B’ is the core house (reduced to the thickness of the wooden end panel in the model), ‘C’ is the portico, ‘D’ is the garden. After Winlock, Models, Figs 9–12, 56–7.



As is usual with Egyptian buildings the focus of interest for these large houses is almost exclusively the interior. To judge from the plan, their exteriors seem to have been a continuous blank façade of brickwork broken only by the door spaces. This would have created a stark effect if left entirely devoid of decoration of any kind. Fortunately, we have another source of evidence for what large Middle Kingdom houses actually looked like. These are more or less contemporary wooden models of houses buried in tombs, and particularly the ones from the tomb of Meketra at Thebes, which date to the early Twelfth Dynasty and provided the baking/brewing model illustrated in the last chapter (Figure 4.4 (2), p. 174).22 The outside of the two models of Meketra’s house (Figure 5.11), as well as the inside wall facing the garden, has three rectangular panels. The central contains the main entrance to the house. It has two pivoting door leaves, braced with horizontal struts, and secured by a central bolt. Above it is an ornate design based on the djed-hieroglyph, a simplified tree trunk, used in the writing of the word ‘stability’, with two bunches of water lilies (‘lotuses’) in the top centre. We cannot tell from the model if this upper part was a carved fanlight, or simply a painted moulding in the mud plaster of the façade. To the right of this on the outside wall is a side entrance, with single pivoting leaf and no surrounding decoration. To the left is another rectangular feature that seems to be a tall, latticed window with narrow openings which would admit air and a dim light, but could presumably be easily sealed during windy spells when much dust blows in the air. We can tentatively add these details to the sides of the Kahun main street and so enliven it a little.

The internal plan of the large Kahun houses is intricate in the way we have already met at the First Dynasty ‘palace’ at Tell el-Faraʾin (Figure 2.13, p. 85).23 The builder has strictly adhered to an unbroken rectangular outline that he has filled with a dense and complex arrangement of interlocking rectangular spaces, often using a labyrinthine solution to the problem of access. Rectangular modules are all-pervasive, and seem to fit the intensely structured and bureaucratic nature of the Middle Kingdom state as revealed from many sources. From careful inspection of Petrie’s plans, we can recognize several basic subdivisions. The residential part – the house proper – seems to be the central group of rooms and courtyards. In the case of the houses on the north side of the street it was contrived that this group was also entered from the north, via a long passage which ran beside it to a garden court on the north side. A colonnade shaded this northern, inner façade of the house. With the houses on the south side of the street this inner court seems to have been more in the centre of the building. If one extracts this core house plus its garden court and colonnade one has essentially what is represented in the Meketra house models: a house with formal entrances at back and front (reduced in these models to a single thickness of wood), adjacent to a walled garden, the inner façade of the house shaded by a columned portico. The Meketra models add further details which include the colour scheme (Figure 5.11): a central pool surrounded by trees, the garden and portico walls painted with a broad black dado, above which is a frieze of blue, yellow and white bands, topped by a wider white band. In the portico are two rows of four slender wooden columns, carved and painted, which rest on bases painted white to simulate limestone. The rear row of columns is carved in the form of a cluster of papyrus stalks, and the front row in the form of buds of water lilies (‘lotuses’) bound together with bands of red and blue. The wooden architraves that they support are bespangled with stars, and the wooden ceiling between them is carved to represent palm trunks split in two, painted with stripes of green and red. The portico itself has a flat roof the low front parapet of which is pierced by three rainspouts, painted white to indicate limestone.

Within the Kahun core house a central reception room can be recognized, its roof supported on four columns. Beside it on the west is a small colonnaded court containing a stone tank set centrally in the floor. Petrie’s plans also depict locations where the walls of a room were stepped back at the far end to create an alcove. Later evidence shows that alcoves like this were for beds in important bedrooms. If this holds true for Kahun, then one such was located within the central house core, but another was on the west, in what appears to be a residential annexe, with its own court. The possible purpose of this annexe will be returned to shortly.

On three sides, the core house is surrounded by groups of chambers and little courts, comprising parts of an urban estate. For only one group can we identify its function directly from the plan. The group of square interconnecting rooms in the north-east with its courtyard in front is almost certainly a granary. Identical granaries occur in some of the Nubian forts dealt with later in this chapter. Their presence reflects the commodity-based nature of the Egyptian economy. The Meketra models include a fine granary evidently designed along the lines of those at Kahun. In this the entrance leads to a long vestibule, accommodating models of one doorkeeper, four seated scribes with document boxes, an overseer and his assistant, and three labourers who measure loose grain with a hekat measure before filling sacks. A door from the side of the vestibule leads to a room containing a staircase rising to a broad walk along the tops of three square interconnecting chambers where the grain is stored.

The combined capacity of the granaries in the large Kahun houses is very considerable. We can, from Petrie’s plans, measure the areas of the various storage chambers. For the height, some of the Nubian forts provide direct evidence: 3.4 m. The Nubian granaries were, however, somewhat larger, so that for Kahun a reduced figure for filled height of 2.5 m can be assumed. How much grain could they hold? Even more important: how many people could they support on the average rations calculated in the last chapter?

Table 5.1The numbers of annual ration units storable in the granaries using minimum and maximum estimates of ration size

Site Capacity of granary (in cubic metres) Minimum annual ration units Maximum annual ration units

Kahun: N. House 337.50 1,164 675

Kahun: S. house 316.40 1,091 633

Kahun: all large houses 2,636.70 9,092 5,723



Table 5.1 summarizes the estimated capacities of the Kahun granaries. These seem to show that all the Kahun granaries together could hold sufficient grain for a population of 5,000 on maximum rations, and 9,000 on minimum rations, assuming five houses only on the north side with granaries. The latter figure of 9,000 is of the same order of magnitude as the total population for Kahun that has been postulated on other grounds, namely between 8,500 and 10,000.24 Even the lower figure implies that a significant proportion of the Kahun population was dependent on the large houses for rations. Moreover, as will be argued shortly, these population figures may themselves be too large.

The Kahun granaries are a key piece of evidence for regarding Kahun as a town not only created by administration but also maintained by administration, with much of the population dependent upon rations held in store by the chief officials. But why several large granaries instead of a single central one? The answer must lie in the social structure of Kahun, which will be looked into shortly.

What of the other parts within the Kahun large houses? The plans themselves and Petrie’s notes have little more to tell us directly. But the range of activities that an important Middle Kingdom official might wish to see accommodated around him is provided again by some of the sets of tomb models. Here the Meketra group is particularly informative. We have already considered three so far: two almost identical ones of the main house, and the granary. There are five more building models. One of these is a cattle shed, a second is a butchery, a third is the combined bakery and brewery described in the last chapter (Figure 4.4 (2), p. 174). The remaining models are a weaving shop and a carpentry shed.

Are all of these models together parts of a large house of the Kahun type? Here we need to jump forward in time and bring in for comparison a typical dwelling for a high official from the New Kingdom city of Amarna (Figure 8.13, p. 351). Here we can recognize the various parts more easily. The dwelling consists not only of a residence but also of a granary, separate kitchen that might have an adjacent bakery-brewery, cattle shed, other outbuildings which we know in some cases were used for craft production (including textiles), and frequently also a subsidiary house. Who lived in the latter is less certain. As a guess we might see it as intended for the eldest son who would gradually be taking over his father’s responsibilities, but it must be admitted that other types of occupant can also be proposed: servants or a steward. All of these parts were arranged informally and rather loosely within a walled compound, with the house usually towards the centre. At Amarna, the hand of the planner was given only limited scope. In particular, it did not extend to laying out the residential areas, which seem to be the relaxed product of individual preferences within prescribed limits, a classic demonstration of the power of self-organization. However, if we try to imagine the ancient planner, faced with the task of laying out a compound containing the Amarna elements, we would find him quite likely producing a tightly organized scheme of interlocking rectangular rooms and spaces: the very kind we find at Kahun. The large Kahun houses are best understood as planned and geometrically more elegant versions of the Amarna estates, containing a series of units that the Meketra models represent, for convenience, as single structures.

The contrast between Amarna and Kahun large houses tells us something important about the two different societies. At Amarna, household and services have been separately perceived, the services belonging to the perimeter of an enclosure in which the house stands as a central isolated feature. The variety of layout and size of compounds also reflects a society with a broad range of personal wealth and status. At Kahun, household and services have been indivisibly regarded as parts of a formally constituted unit. Nor is there much of a social gradient. As a model community it recognizes two main groups of people: owners of big and owners of small houses. The whole reflects the prevailing mentality of the Middle Kingdom, which tended towards an extreme structured view of society, partly reflected in an inclination to devise arithmetic calculations for every facet of economic life, and to seek to control human behaviour and property by means of a strict bureaucratic framework. Amarna reflects a subtly graded society, whereas Kahun reflects a society of distinct levels.

The Meketra models and the large Kahun houses give the impression that they were of only a single storey. Upper storeys are a perennial problem in archaeology where it is rare for walls to stand to sufficient height to provide a clear answer. Even the presence of a staircase is not proof since it could have led to no more than a flat roof. The problem recurs at Amarna although there a solution in favour of more than one storey draws much of its support from artistic evidence. Some models of the Middle Kingdom also show a second storey (Figure 5.12). These belong to a category of baked clay ‘soul houses’ which combined house model with tray of model food offerings for the dead. We do not yet have sufficient evidence to judge whether the prototypes stood in towns or were countryside villas.



Figure 5.12A pottery offering-tray modelled as a multi-storey house. (The modern term for these objects is ‘soul house’, and the model was designed to have water poured over it which flows out through the front door.) Does the building represent a grander town house or a country villa? Note how the upper floor, reached by an external staircase with its own roof, is the more important, signalled by the presence of the formal seat accompanied by a table and also (this being an offering-tray) the carcass of a slaughtered ox (largely hidden from view in this drawing). The high enclosure wall around the court is itself pierced with windows at the front to ensure the maximum benefit to the upper floor from the breezes. The rounded arches of the lower arcade (which fronts a columned hall) could be either a rendering of actual brick arches on the real prototype or a consequence of making the model in slabs of wet clay. The model is in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, and is illustrated in E. Baldwin Smith, Egyptian Architecture as Cultural Expression, New York and London, Appleton-Century, 1938, 200, Pl. LXV.1. The drawing used here is a sketch, only approximately scaled.



A good part of the remainder of the interior of Kahun is occupied by small houses built in rows, frequently back to back. Somewhere in the region of 220 are present on Petrie’s plan, a ratio of 1:20 with the large houses. Recent reconsideration of the plan of Kahun has suggested that it was rectangular rather than square, with a reduced dimension from north to south, and that a few of the larger houses perhaps reappeared along the southern edge.25 The number of houses offers the safest guide to estimating the original population. Even if we assume that three-quarters of the original houses are included in Petrie’s plan, and allow, say, six persons per house, we reach a total population of just short of 2,000, well below the figure of up to 10,000 suggested on other grounds.26

The interior arrangements of rooms in the small houses vary considerably. To some extent this may reflect changes brought about over time by occupants in response to changing individual circumstances (as happened in the Khentkawes town, p. 207). They also show the same complex inner articulation of rooms as is present in the larger Kahun houses (an example is included in Figure 5.13). Characteristically an entrance passage leads to a room which, whilst not conspicuously large, nevertheless acted as a pivotal point within the house, in that several doorways lead from it, frequently to anterooms rather than to terminal chambers. Anterooms sometimes deliberately lengthen journeys, placing security or privacy above convenience. In a few cases it looks as though two or more houses have been knocked together to form a larger house, and columns have been inserted. Examples lie in the west sector, eighth block from the north. In several houses circles are marked on Petrie’s small-scale plan. Smaller ones seem usually to be column bases, which according to Petrie supported octagonal wooden columns c. 25 cm in diameter. In his brief published notes on the architecture Petrie himself describes granaries, circular brick structures measuring between 1.70 and 1.93 m across, plastered inside and out. They seem mostly to have occurred singly, but one pair is present. In the western block of houses, from a total of about 150 houses, 13 contain circles large enough to have been granaries. These would have augmented the grain storage capacity of the town, but their relative infrequency amongst the smaller houses points to significant differences in the wealth of the inhabitants of Kahun.



Figure 5.13The changing size of a Kahun household, belonging to a soldier and his family. From a papyrus archive from the site. The timespan is not known but is probably fairly short. It is presumed that they lived in one of the ordinary houses, as illustrated.



One further building inside Kahun deserves notice. It lies immediately south of the Acropolis. It looks as though it stood in an open space. It may have been an administrative and storage building, but a temple is another possibility. Papyri from Kahun often mention the staff of a cult of the god ‘Sepdu, Lord of the East’ (the bright star Sirius) and it is tempting to locate them in a separate temple within the town. To the south of this building is another which does not resemble either the large or small residences and may, for this reason, have been administrative, whilst across the street to the east lay a court containing three medium-sized circular granaries.

Papyri found at Kahun deal with many aspects of the town’s organization and again reveal the extent to which the scribal class felt that whatever they supervised needed to be documented in a manner that others could check. So the mortuary temple maintained a day-book into which letters to and from the mayor were copied, in one case an order that a piece of leather be given to a shoe-maker sent over from the mayor. The papyri are a guide – albeit a very fragmentary one – to the kind of people whom we must put into the large and small houses if we wish to convert an archaeologist’s plan into something more like its original living reality.

We can, without difficulty, identify a small number of important officials. The town had a ‘mayor’ (hatyʾa), the normal head of an ancient Egyptian town, who himself had a ‘deputy’. It also possessed an ‘office of the vizier’, where legal proceedings took place and oaths were made, and where the vizier himself was sometimes present. We must exclude him as a permanent resident, however. He was a peripatetic figure, based at the capital. An office of the administrative subdivision called the ‘area of the northern district’ (waʾret) was located somewhere, as also was an office for another senior government official, the ‘reporter’ (wehemu). In the latter, trials could take place. The town’s population was caught in the system of labour conscription and so the town possessed a ‘compound’ where people could, if necessary, be held under restraint.27 One text is a census-like household list that deals with a priest of the official mortuary cult of King Senusret II.28 His name was Khakaura-Sneferu. Of his own family one son and daughter are listed. But they are followed by groups of ‘serfs’ from various sources. These included the ones which evidently came with the office of priest, and numbered 13; a group of three given him by another official; and a group of unknown number (but a minimum of five) evidently inherited from the sister of his father. The most striking fact about these serfs is that most are female, and many are children of serfs. Just how extensive this list was is not known because the end of the papyrus is lost; but a document from the same period dealing with the serfs of an official at Thebes (probably the vizier Ankhu) listed originally 95 (see Chapter 1, pp. 30–1), over half of them Asiatics, and with women outnumbering men by about two to one.29 The men bear titles like ‘domestic servant’, ‘field labourer’, ‘brewer’, ‘cook’, ‘tutor’ or ‘guardian’, and ‘sandal-maker’. Most of the women whose profession is listed are cloth-makers, but a ‘hairdresser’ and ‘gardener’ are also included. The Kahun list presumably belonged to one of the wealthier of the Kahun inhabitants, one of those who lived in the large residences in the north of the town. If we convert the Meketra models into the units of one of these residences, the ‘serf’ list presumably covers the figures who fill many of the models with industrious labour, though they need not have actually lived on the premises.

The dependence of many people upon the large residences is also to be read into the enormous provision for storing grain within each of them. A significant proportion of Kahun’s population must have belonged to redistributive sub-centres in the form of the large residences. This in turn reflects a basic modular organization of society. Instead of all being dependent upon a single large granary with a single administration of rations, the population was broken down in this respect into several distinct groups. This team- or gang-organization of dependent populations seems to have been common in ancient Egypt. The temple phyle-groups encountered in the Neferirkara archive and the ‘crews’ of men who worked at the pyramid sites are examples; so Kahun, too, followed this model for the organization of the people who staffed the mortuary temple, whose names and ranks were duly entered into the day-book of the temple when their month-long period of service commenced. Even the dancers and singers needed for festivals were grouped according to their phyle.30 Indeed, one might speculate that the guild-like structure of the temple phyle is the very one around which life at Kahun was organized.

Apart from ‘serfs’ Kahun housed soldiers and their scribes, and temple personnel including doorkeepers and foreign singers and dancers of both sexes. Three more census lists have survived, found rolled up together. They list the members of the household of two soldiers, father (Hori) and son (Sneferu) over an unstated period of time (Figure 5.13, p. 220).31 The father’s household consisted initially of himself, a wife and son (Sneferu); later they are joined by his mother, and five female relatives, who seem to be the householder’s sisters, bringing the total to nine. When the son inherited, the final list was drawn up, and the household then consisted of just himself, his mother, his paternal grandmother, and three of his father’s sisters. It is tempting to regard this as the household of an occupant of one of the small houses. It reveals a second tier of dependence, within the small households, a tier that changed with individual family histories: early decease of wife, marriage of sister and so on. The fluctuation in the size of the household, from three to nine to six, as in other sources cautions against seeking an average household size that can be used for larger populations estimates.32 Other papyri document the legal affairs of the Kahun inhabitants, as they disposed of property ‘in town and country’ and wrestled with problems of debt, in all cases revealing that their dependence upon the state was only partial.33

The variety apparent in Kahun society points to the central problem of all planning, in the past as now: matching reality to an abstract model of society.

Officials of the modern state are, of necessity, at least one step – and often several steps – removed from the society they are charged with governing. They assess the life of their society by a series of typifications that are always some distance from the full reality these abstractions are meant to capture.34



Kahun was laid out by someone who saw only two social levels: top bureaucrats and others. In reality the latter was a diverse category with varied needs and expectations, exemplified by the changing size of the Hori–Sneferu household. The simple twofold division represented a social myth held by the elite. It made no serious attempt to cope with the social and economic differentials within the numerous body of people with an ‘official’ capacity of one lesser kind or another. After the Middle Kingdom the state gave up the idea of planning for communities other than small groups of workmen. The city of Amarna (Chapter 8) will illustrate this vividly.





Urban renewal and colonization


Kahun provides a classic example of the application of bureaucracy to community creation on the scale of a complete town of no mean size by ancient standards. Although the rest of the evidence from Middle Kingdom Egypt is very patchy, it is sufficient to suggest that Kahun illustrates a general preference for rigid large-scale layout of residential and administrative quarters. Furthermore, from the spread of examples we can begin to conclude that the Middle Kingdom state embarked upon an extensive programme of remodelling communities in this regimented fashion. One example – of an integrated temple, storage, administrative and probably residential unit of the Middle Kingdom at Medamud – was briefly illustrated in Chapter 3 (Figure 3.12, p. 136). More sites will now be chosen to spread the picture further, and they will then be considered as aspects of a common policy.

The first is closely comparable to Kahun but lay far from the pyramids, in the heart of Upper Egypt, near the site of Abydos. A small number of kings in the Middle and New Kingdoms went to the trouble and expense of creating special establishments to maintain a cult of themselves on ground dedicated to the god Osiris whose own tomb was by this time thought to be located there. At a distance of 4 km from the then existing town of Abydos, where the temple of Osiris lay, King Senusret III constructed a huge replica tomb accompanied by a temple, and a full-scale new town to go with it. Named Wahsut-Khakaura (‘Enduring are the places of Khakaura’ (Senusret III)), only the rear part has survived to be excavated (Figure 5.14). It consisted of perhaps 16 large houses and one even larger (rather like one of the Kahun mansions) which belonged to the ‘mayor’ of the town, several generations of the office holder having been identified.35 If there were streets of small houses, as at Kahun, they have been lost beneath modern fields and village houses.



Figure 5.14The model town of Wahsut, built as part of Senusret III’s tomb complex at South Abydos. After J. Wegner, MDAIK 57 (2001), 283–4, Figs 1, 2; Moeller, Urbanism, 292–3, Figs 8.30, 8.31.



The geographical spread of planned settlements is well illustrated by Tell el-Dabʾa, in the north-eastern Nile delta, where the river floodplain peters out amidst low sand hills and, beyond them, lagoons and the Mediterranean coast. As the map shows (Figure 5.15), settlement began in the later part of the Predynastic Period and was well advanced by the end of the Old Kingdom, reflecting both the proximity of the area to land and sea routes to the Near East, and probably the propensity of farming populations to colonize suitable land even when somewhat marginal. Early in the Eleventh Dynasty a planned town appeared in a place where so far nothing earlier has been detected.36 Most of what has been revealed comprises streets of small unit houses, mostly arranged back to back and inside an enclosure wall. However, in the north-east corner one set of foundations points to a significantly larger building. Whereas Kahun seems to have maintained much of its plan intact for a long time, here, within a short time, modification to the neat original layout began as people converted the barracks-like dwellings into houses more amenable to personal circumstances. After an occupation estimated to have been no more than 60 years the whole settlement was abandoned (early Twelfth Dynasty). By this time it had become one part of a much larger area of settlement which developed into the leading city of the region (Avaris). Abandonment in this context may have been part of a peaceful process of redevelopment rather than the result of dramatic events.



Figure 5.15Internal colonization: the earliest level at site F/I at the north-eastern delta site of Tell el-Dabʾa, dating to the early Twelfth Dynasty. After Czerny, Tell el-Dabʾa IX, 18, Abb. 2. It is superimposed on a map of the area (the topography is that of the 1920s) showing sites which had already been settled by this time. The details derive from L. Krzyżaniak, ‘Recent archaeological evidence on the earliest settlement in the eastern Nile Delta.’ In L. Krzyżaniak and M. Kobusiewicz, eds, Late Prehistory of the Nile Basin and the Sahara, Poznań, Poznań Archaeological Museum, 1989, 267–85; E.C.M. van den Brink, ‘The Amsterdam University Survey Expedition to the Northeastern Nile Delta (1984–1986).’ In E.C.M. van den Brink, ed. The Archaeology of the Nile Delta; Problems and Priorities, Amsterdam, Netherlands Foundation for Archaeological Research in Egypt, 1988, 65–110, esp. 65–76; also K. Kroeper and D. Wildung, Minshat Abu Omar: Münchner Ostdelta-Expedition. Vorbericht 1978–1984, Munich, Staatliche Sammlung Ägyptische Kunst, 1985, 5, Abb. 1. The uneven distribution of settlements could, in part, be the result of the uneven intensity of modern archaeological survey.

Key to site numbers: 1 Tell el-Rubʾa (Mendes); 2 Tell Samara; 3 Tell Umm el-Zaiyat; 4 Tell Geziret el-Faras; 5 Geziret Sangaha; 6 Tell el-Genidba; 7 Tell Abu Dawud; 8 Tilul Mohammed Abu Hasan; 9 Tell el-Marra; 10 Tell el-Akhdar; 11 Tell el-Dirdir; 12 Tell el-Abbasiya; 13 Tell el-Iswid (S); 14 Tell el-Iswid (N); 15 Tell Umm ʾAgram; 16 Tell Ibrahim Awad; 17 El-Husseiniya (part of Nebesheh); 18 Minshat Abu Omar; 19 Tell el-Ginn; 20 Kufur Nigm; 21 Tell el-Khasna; 22 Tell el-Farkha.



One possible point of modern comparison concerns an institution that spread across the countryside of Egypt in the nineteenth century AD and is still commemorated in a host of village names: the ezba. This was a settlement provided by a land-owner for his labourers. Some ezbas were perfect examples of rectilinear planning applied to the provision of tiny uniform dwellings within a walled compound, which bear a close resemblance to some ancient examples, especially that at Tell el-Dabʾa.37 The parallel misses, however, the element of relative scale. Ezbas in modern Egypt remained small and rural. They were not towns, whereas by the scale of the times the planned Middle Kingdom settlements, including that of Tell el-Dabʾa, often were. They represent a more widely applied remodelling of society.

The final example from within Egypt is the city of Thebes. The most ancient city mound is nothing less than the ground on which the Karnak temple complex of the New Kingdom stands (Figure 6.8, p. 264). Indeed, it seems to have spread well beyond the limits of the later Karnak enclosure wall. The highest point seems to have been the site of the Middle Kingdom temple of Amun which was a natural elevation in the floodplain. Figure 5.16 marks nine locations where excavations beneath the floor levels of the New Kingdom temple complex have found walls and debris (mostly potsherds) from various phases dating between the First and Second Intermediate Periods.38 The exposures are often not over an extensive area. The largest and clearest was made in 1970–1 to the east of the sacred lake, behind the modern seating tiers for the sound-and-light show at Karnak (Figures 5.16 (1) and 5.17). The edge of the lake is on the west. The wall with towers that divides the excavation is part of the Eighteenth Dynasty temple enclosure wall. The walls to the east, however, are at a lower level, and run on beneath the wall and buildings on the west. They have a somewhat different orientation. Although only a fragment of plan is visible, it belongs to a settlement with buildings of markedly different degrees of solidity of construction. All, however, conform to a single grid plan. A 5m-thick enclosure wall crosses the site from west to east almost in the middle. On its south, and separated by a street, is a fragment of what seems to be another example of a large, rectangular, intricately planned building, with columns, for which the term ‘palace’ is probably not inappropriate. The edge of another smaller one lies at the northern edge of the excavation. If this section is at all typical, Middle Kingdom Thebes may have resembled a larger and internally more varied version of Kahun.



Figure 5.16Planning at a prestige location: the ancient city of Thebes. Outline plan of the New Kingdom temple complex (its main components shaded grey), showing nine exposures of the pre-New Kingdom city. Compare Moeller, Urbanism, 303, Fig. 8.38.





Figure 5.17Detail of exposure no. 1 of Figure 5.16, part of the orthogonally planned Middle Kingdom city, after J. Lauffray, Ramadan Saʾad and S. Sauneron, CdK 5 (1975), 26, Fig. 13.



Another exposure (Figure 5.16 (2)), actually outside the Thirtieth Dynasty enclosure wall to the east, was beneath the floor level of a badly damaged building of Akhenaten. It revealed town debris of the Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period, but also included a length of enclosure wall, 6 m wide, running true north–south. At this thickness, we can conclude that it was probably part of the city enclosure wall. Again outside the Thirtieth Dynasty wall, but this time on the north, the foundations of a stone building have been excavated which is aligned not to the main New Kingdom temple but to the general trend of the earlier walls exposed to the east of the sacred lake (Figure 5.16 (4)). The building itself is identified by contemporary texts as a ‘Treasury’ of Tuthmosis I of the Eighteenth Dynasty, but test pits beneath the floor have encountered walls and pottery of the Second Intermediate Period, whilst outside the building similar earlier material occurs at a level higher than the ‘Treasury’ floor. This suggests that the New Kingdom Treasury was built in a slight pit in the debris of the abandoned older city, and that the sides of the pit preserved the outlines of a plot of ground defined by the old city’s general street alignment.

These exposures derive from a city at least 1 km long. Only exposure no. 1 gives us an intelligible plan of any size, so that we cannot judge whether the whole of Thebes at this time was turned into agiant version of Kahun, or only a part of it. We can suspect, however, that, in the manner of some mediaeval European cities that retained outlines of the street plans of their classical predecessors, some of the New Kingdom and later alignments at Karnak reflect those of earlier times. Some of these are marked on Figure 5.16, but the true extent of this will only come from future excavations. We are already entitled, however, to consider Thebes as a major example of a Middle Kingdom planned city.

The limits that the drive for planning reached are represented by a stark scheme for human management at an isolated site, Qasr el-Sagha, on the north-western edge of the Fayum.39 Here a rectangular brick settlement was constructed, its sides aligned to the compass points (Figure 5.18). It seems to have provided 150 identical rooms arranged in groups of five, but we have no way of knowing whether each room was for one occupant or for several. The settlement was part of a spread of remains of the Middle Kingdom which included an undecorated stone temple, a cemetery and a more informally laid-out settlement, all located not far from the then shoreline of the lake which filled a good part of the Fayum. Much further away, to the north-west, lies a major source of basalt. It seems not to have been exploited in the Middle Kingdom, however, so that another explanation is required for this Middle Kingdom phase of activity. There are good reasons for thinking that the drop in the level of the lake which followed the end of the Old Kingdom would have exposed large tracts of cultivable land in the Fayum depression. Qasr el-Sagha could have been one of probably several schemes to import labour into the area which could assist in establishing permanent agriculture.



Figure 5.18Planning applied to a probable labour camp: the settlement at Qasr el-Sagha, northern Fayum. After J. Śliwa, MDAIK 48 (1992), 179, Abb. 1; also Arnold, Qasr el-Sagha, 26, Abb. 14. The inset map, which also shows the greatly increased size of the Birket Qarun lake in the Middle Kingdom, is after Arnold, Qasr el-Sagha, 24, Abb. 13.



The use of settlement creation (and the administration which would, in the Middle Kingdom, inevitably accompany it) as a means of asserting political control of land provides a suitable introduction to the major example of this from ancient Egypt: the Middle Kingdom in Nubia.





The Nubian forts


The experience gained in building pyramids, creating towns and dispatching quarry expeditions to distant regions found a new outlet in the Middle Kingdom: logistics for conquest. Important lessons had been learned. Valour, savagery and successful tactics on the battlefield were less certain if soldiers and commanders were not adequately provided for, and victory had little point if it could not be backed up by permanent control. Fighting in Nubia became only the sharp tip of a huge bureaucratic thrust. Empire-building now involved two very different sets of people, scribes and soldiers.

The Egyptian conquest of Nubia had begun in the First Dynasty.40 In the Old Kingdom the Egyptians took the first steps towards settlement in Nubia. This reflected the attitude that was to become much more marked in later periods, that Nubia was a quasi-province of the Egyptian state. A fragment of an Old Kingdom town at Buhen North is the only site of this earliest phase known from excavation, but a few Old Kingdom sherds from Kubban further north may be a sign that Buhen was not alone at this time. Following the civil war of the First Intermediate Period, the reconquest of Lower Nubia seems to have got under way rapidly, in the reign of the victor of the civil war, King Nebhepetra Menthuhetep II. A further campaign of conquest in year 29 of King Amenemhat I, first king of the Twelfth Dynasty, is recorded in a graffito within the heartland of Lower Nubia. The building policy which was well advanced in the reign of his successor, King Senusret I, is itself evidence of a massive kind that Lower Nubia had been thoroughly subdued. The powerfully bureaucratic attitude that seems to characterize the Middle Kingdom was now directed towards Lower Nubia, and to a renewed phase of settlement creation. This had produced, by the end of the Twelfth Dynasty, a line of forts and of fortified towns, regularly spaced along the 400 km between the First Cataract and Semna at the head of the Second Cataract. Although these constructions reflect specialized local considerations, they also have much to tell us about the scale of Middle Kingdom administration and its determination to create a desired environment in the face of considerable difficulties.

The Nubian forts fall roughly into two groups, representing partly two different types of terrain and partly two major building phases. At some sites, moreover, forts built in the first phase saw major modifications and enlargements, representing probably the initiatives of the local communities active during a period of more than two centuries.

The first group of forts may be termed the ‘plains type’. They were constructed on the flat or shelving banks of the Nile north of the Second Cataract. They were the largest forts built in Nubia, and with their citadels and the even larger areas within an outer perimeter wall they could have accommodated many activities and housed a numerous human and animal population. The fort of Buhen towards the southern limit of this zone provides the type site (Figure 5.19).41 Inscriptions show that it was in existence by year 5 of King Senusret I’s reign. It lay on the desert as it sloped gently down to the river, without significant cultivation in the vicinity. The indigenous population of both ancient and modern times was concentrated on the opposite and far more fertile eastern river bank. Two concentric fortification lines enclosed an inner citadel and an outer area.



Figure 5.19Planning in the service of the military: the Middle Kingdom fortress of Buhen in Nubia. The cellular pattern represents foundations; at ground level there would have been more doorways. After Emery et al., Buhen, Pl. 3.



The citadel measured approximately 150 × 138 m, and was defined by a mud-brick enclosure wall 5 m thick, with external towers. One standing fragment provided an original height of between 8 and 9 m. The river frontage was further protected by two spur walls that prolonged the eastern wall to north and south. Two gates gave access to the waterfront. Beneath the northern one ran a stone-lined passage intended to ensure a safe water supply in time of siege. A single massive gateway on the west, protected by two projecting parallel walls, provided access to the desert side. No direct traces were found of how the upper parts of the wall were shielded, but pictures of forts in contemporary tombs show that crenellations were normal.

The base of the wall was protected not only by a ditch, but also by a narrow, brick-paved rampart with its own parapet wall (Figure 5.20 (1)). This was pierced by loopholes in groups of three, intended for the use of archers. At intervals, and at the corners, the rampart and lower parapet widened to form semi-circular towers, provided with a second set of loopholes. The preserved loopholes on the west pointed down into the ditch, but on the northern and perhaps southern sides an upper row pointed directly forwards. North and south sides differed also in that a special kneeling-step running along the base of the wall for archers was added as well. As for the ditch, it was dry, cut into the rock, and had average dimensions of 7.3 m in width and 3.1 m in depth. A counterscarp had been built up on the outer lip of the ditch to support a glacis.



Figure 5.20The ingenious mind of the military engineer. (1) Reconstruction of the fortifications of the citadel at Buhen; see Figure 5.19, p. 229. (2) Wheeled siege tower in use in the First Intermediate Period, from the tomb of Intef (no. 386 at Thebes). After D. Arnold and J. Settgast, MDAIK 20 (1965), Abb. 2, opposite p. 50; also B. Jaroš-Deckert, Das Grab des Jnj-jtj.f. Die Wandmalerei der XI. Dynastie, Mainz, von Zabern, 1984, Taf. 1(c), (d); 17; Falkarte 1, 3.



The interior of the citadel seems to have been largely occupied by rectangular brick buildings arranged within a rectilinear or orthogonal grid of streets. All buildings, except the one in the north-west corner and some towards the north-east corner, were separated from the main wall by a continuous street. The buildings on the west and north had been relatively well preserved. But destruction and erosion had elsewhere reduced them to broken lengths of foundation walls. The excavator’s plan of this part, in joining up many of these fragments into continuous lengths, creates an impression of a regular cellular design that is to a degree illusory. The walls were far more fragmentary than this and may have belonged to a more varied plan.

The building in the north-west corner seems to have been the garrison headquarters (the ‘command building’ of Figure 5.19). It was built directly against the main wall, and had its own staircase leading to the top. The building itself had possessed at least two storeys. At ground level, it had contained pillared halls and a colonnaded court with stone floor. A square stone tank was sunk into the floor of the main hall. This is a common feature of large Middle Kingdom buildings, and was noted in the large houses at Kahun. The pillars in these rooms had been of wood, octagonal and red-painted, standing on circular stone bases. Doorways had been framed with wooden jambs and lintels. Adjacent to this on the east stood a group of long columned halls that the excavator, W.B. Emery, conjectured was a barracks block (for which support now comes from those found at the Heit el-Ghurab sector of Giza, Figure 4.9, p. 190, Gallery sets I–IV), but could have served another purpose, perhaps storage. Further to the east lay a building with columns and a degree of axial symmetry. It lay beneath the later Eighteenth Dynasty temple of Queen Hatshepsut and from this one can argue that it was a temple of the Middle Kingdom. Yet during the Second Intermediate Period the building was reused for domestic purposes, at a time when texts from Buhen mention building work on a temple of Horus. The ambiguity illustrates, once again, the difficulty that sometimes arises in identifying pre-New Kingdom shrines.42 Along the inside of the west wall of the citadel lay several buildings with layouts of interlocking rooms which exemplify Middle Kingdom domestic architectural practice. Over large parts of the remainder of the site a strict grid of walls was laid out. Much of it most likely served as foundations for houses or workshops of modular design, perhaps comparable to back-to-back modular houses of a few rooms each found in some of the Second Cataract forts. One dense group of rectangular chambers lay in the north-east corner, touching the girdle wall directly, and beside the ‘temple’. The preserved height here was sufficient to show that many must have been cellars entered from above, and some may have been for storing grain.

The outer line of fortifications enclosed an area measuring roughly 420 × 150 m. The citadel lay within it. The outer defences ran as a series of rectangular salients, backed by a brick wall 5 to 5.5 m thick, set with rectangular towers on the outside. The rock-cut ditch had an outer rampart with uninterrupted parapet,and was crossed by a rock causeway opposite the enormous gateway on the west side. The outer defences in this particular form may have been a creation of the late Middle Kingdom, for in places it was found that beneath them lay the remains of a much more lightly constructed brick parapet with rounded towers, perhaps a product of the early Middle Kingdom.

The space between the citadel and outer fortifications has never been fully examined, but it seems unlikely that it was ever built up to any great density. On the west side, the outer fortifications ran along an escarpment, 2 m high. During the Middle Kingdom (probably the late Middle Kingdom) this had been utilized as a cemetery, running almost the full length of the enclosed ground. No traces of housing were found during its excavation, and so the entire western side of the outer enclosure may have remained open space. For the area south of the citadel, we have very little information. But on the north an important construction was found almost immediately against the north wall of the citadel. It was so close, in fact, as to mask and render ineffective the whole northern side of the citadel fortifications. Only the foundations of this building survived, but they belong to a massive block, measuring 64.25 × 31.25 m. Although some of the walls were preserved to a height of up to 1.5 m, they showed no doorways, suggesting a basement or platform to support chambers at some height above the ground. In the early New Kingdom (or possibly during the Second Intermediate Period) this block was partly demolished, and a small mud-brick temple of Horus built over the top. The internal divisions of this building make it a characteristic large pre-planned block of the Middle Kingdom.

The style and strength of the Buhen fortifications seem designed to thwart a fairly sophisticated type of siege. We know from pictorial evidence that by the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty siege warfare using siege engines was known in Egypt, as is shown in a scene from the tomb of the seal-bearer and general Intef of the late Eleventh Dynasty at Thebes, where a wheeled siege tower is in use (Figure 5.20 (2)).43 This poses the question: might the Buhen citadel represent a form of urban fortification developed in Egypt during the civil wars of the First Intermediate Period, which was subsequently transferred to Nubia as an administrative act? Is the architecture itself, therefore, the product of a bureaucratic decision rather than of a local strategic assessment? Nothing comparable has so far been found in Egypt. This could be, however, because forts of this type were built separately from existing towns. This was the case at Elephantine where the old town, despite its strategic location, was not heavily fortified, but we know from texts that a fortress called Senmet was constructed nearby (see Figure 5.3 above, p. 199, for a possible location). Whatever the origin, the strength of the fortified frontier at Semna (described next) constructed late in the Twelfth Dynasty suggests that the Egyptians took seriously the military threat from the tribal societies lying yet further to the south.44





The Second Cataract forts


The second group of forts resulted from an Egyptian annexation of the Second Cataract area in the reign of Senusret III. Despite its name, the Second Cataract is not a single precipitous fall of water but a series of lesser obstructions in two groups, separated by about 35 km of reasonably clear water. The northern end is marked by a dense group of rocky islands treacherous for navigation, the southern, at Semna, by a narrow rocky barrier through which the river gushes in several torrents. In both cases sailing was hazardous when the river was low, but at full flood the obstacles were sufficiently submerged to allow careful sailors safe passage. In the rugged and broken terrain each of the new forts took the form of an irregular polygonal figure designed to fit over an irregular natural prominence. Narrow ridges that ran up to the site were covered with spur walls to render them safe, and in most places the steep natural slopes rendered a ditch unnecessary. They show that, when occasion demanded, the rigidities of grid planning could be sensibly abandoned.

A good example of this type of fort is Shalfak, on the west bank, on the edge of an escarpment overlooking the Nile (Figure 5.21).45 The fortified area is relatively small, measuring 80 × 49 m at the widest point. It was surrounded by a brick wall, 5 m thick, with external towers. The defended ground was, however, greatly increased by spur walls, that on the north running for 115 m. On the north a small gateway led round the walls to a staircase descending the cliff to the water’s edge. The main gateway was defended by a pair of projecting walls. The interior was completely built up except for narrow streets, which ran around the base of the main wall and separated the principal blocks. Opposite the gateway lay the granary, which was well preserved and with a plan like those at Kahun; its grain chambers showed no sign of an external doorway. They must have been reached by ladder and roof entrances. Beside the east wall the command post can be recognized by its thick walls, which could have supported sufficient masonry to turn it into a tower. The other buildings presumably housed the garrison.



Figure 5.21Imaginative adaptation of architecture to topography: the fortress of Shalfak in the Second Cataract area of Nubia, built by Senusret III on a high rocky outcrop above the river. Plan after Reisner et al., Uronarti, Map X.



Shalfak was one of a number of forts built by King Senusret III which cluster around the southern part of the Second Cataract and form an obvious defensive grouping across the narrow Semna Gorge. An inscription of Senusret III from Semna confirms that this was indeed intended as a true frontier.

Year 16, 3rd month of winter: His Majesty made the southern boundary at Heh. ‘I have made my boundary, having sailed further south than my fathers. I have increased what was bequeathed to me.’

‘As for any son of mine who shall maintain this boundary which My Majesty has made, he is a son of mine who was born to My Majesty … But as for whoever shall abandon it, and who will not fight for it, he is no son of mine, and was not born to me.’

‘My Majesty has had a statue of My Majesty set up on this boundary which My Majesty has made so that you might be inspired by it, and fight on its behalf.’46



More will be said about this statue shortly.

At Semna a barrier of crystalline rocks crossed the Nile, leaving a gap of about 400 m. On a rocky eminence at either end Senusret III sited a fortress: Semna, the larger, on the west, and Kumma on the east (Figure 5.22 and Photograph 5.1). Semna fort took an L-shaped plan, the western wing covering a piece of relatively flat ground.47 The principal dimensions are about 130 m from north to south, and the same from west to east. The girdle wall on the landward sides was protected by regularly spaced small towers, strengthened at greater intervals by larger projecting towers. The ground surrounding the wall was flattish, but still no outer rampart or parapet was thought necessary. Instead it was cleared for a distance of up to 29 m, and beyond this, material was heaped up and covered with a stone pavement to form a glacis and counterscarp. At either end of the eastern wing the girdle wall was pierced by fortified gateways that allowed a road to pass entirely through the fort, crossing to the glacis by means of causeways. A narrow gate in the east wall gave access to a stairway running down to the water’s edge. This was protected by means of a substantial tunnel of dry-stone masonry.



Figure 5.22The southern frontier of Egyptian territory in the late Middle Kingdom. The fortress system at Semna not only provided military protection, it also regulated trade and diplomatic traffic northwards.





Photograph 5.1The fortress of Semna at the Second Cataract, looking eastwards, down towards the Nile along the line of the southern enclosure wall. The rocky barrier which forms part of the cataract is just out of sight to the right, behind the tall brickwork. Photograph taken in 1963.



The narrow streets within Semna were paved with irregular slabs of stone. They ran around the base of the girdle wall, and divided the interior into blocks. Unfortunately, we do not have the full plan of the inside. A certain amount was lost or obscured by the Eighteenth Dynasty stone temple built in the middle of the east wing, and a good part of the remainder has never been excavated. In the west wing the ground rose towards the west, and at the highest point in the fort a substantial building stood which was perhaps the command post. The walls were preserved to sufficient height to show the tell-tale marks of the ends of timber beams supporting the floor of an upper storey. Other buildings show the use of an initial modular layout and seem to have been houses, of two or three rooms. No granary has been identified.

The boundary inscription of Senusret III refers to a statue of the king present in the fort to inspire posterity to defend the frontier. The original statue has not been found. But in the reign of Tuthmosis III of the Eighteenth Dynasty a small sandstone temple was built in the middle of the eastern wing. One of the statue cults within it was of King Senusret III, the founder of Semna. On the walls of the sanctuary were carved figures of the statue itself seated inside a portable boat shrine of standard New Kingdom design. No obvious predecessor of the temple has been located and so it remains uncertain where the statue originally stood. Was it within an enclosed space or was it publicly displayed, as Senusret III’s text implies?

Across the river from Semna lay Kumma, much smaller, and built over a steep rocky outcrop.48 So steep were its sides that the walls had in some places to be built on stone embankments. The fort has an irregular quadrilateral outline, with projecting spur walls to cover lesser ridges. A water-gate with stairs lay at the northern corner. Inside was the usual arrangement of narrow streets, like those at Semna paved with irregular stone slabs. Amongst the individual buildings a granary is easily recognized.

The Semna defences included a third fort, Semna South, 1.5 km to the south.49 It lay in modern times on the southern edge of a plain of alluvium, but in ancient times it must have lain on the far side of a bay in the river bank, later silted up. It was small and square, measuring about 52 m along each side. Its isolated position implies that it was a dependency of Semna, either a forward observation post or check point for traffic coming in from the south. A further and striking defensive work was a mud-brick wall, 2.5 m thick and fortified by towers on high points, which ran beside the roadway which, on leaving the north gate at Semna, followed the river through the Second Cataract area.50 It has been traced for a distance of no less than 4.5 km and had actually begun to the south of Semna, skirting round the fort to the west to create a large protected zone. Possibly Semna South marked its real beginning. This wall brings home the seriousness of the threat felt by the Egyptians in the area, and the fact that land traffic played an important role in their strategy. It is also an early example of a linear territorial defensive work (of the Hadrian’s Wall type), which has a probably contemporaneous counterpart at Aswan, as much as 7 km long, protecting the land route around the First Cataract.51

The Second Cataract forts are striking examples of military architecture and illustrate an extension of the urban planning already encountered at Kahun and elsewhere. But in two further respects as well they illustrate Egyptian bureaucracy: the forts stood as centres for administered activity over an extensive open hinterland, and they provide a particularly vivid witness to the scale and importance of making provision for rations.

The Egyptian strategy in Nubia was not confined to static defence behind massive walls. A number of lookout posts were manned in the Second Cataract area. These are mostly known from groups of graffiti of the Middle Kingdom left at suitable points.52 More explicit is a group of papyri from a tomb at Thebes, dated to the reign of King Amenemhat III, which shows that the forts kept in contact with each other and with their base, probably Thebes itself, by means of regular written reports. Known as the Semna Despatches, they reveal that an active policy of desert surveillance was maintained (to which reference was made in Chapter 1, p. 27). This was done by sending out patrols to look for tracks and to bring in any wanderers for questioning. For this the Egyptians recruited desert inhabitants, the Medjay. The policy produced reports such as this: ‘The patrol which set out to patrol the desert-edge … has returned and reported to me as follows: “We have found a track of 32 men and 3 donkeys”.’53 Other despatches deal with trading with Nubians at the frontier fort of Semna itself. The fine detail in these letters, evidently written to be scrutinized at Thebes, is characteristic of the Egyptian urge to record happenings that might be of interest to a superior official, and nicely illustrates the bureaucratic framework of the Egyptian presence in Nubia.

The network of control that the Egyptians threw over the region extended to regulating contacts with the Nubian communities lying much further to the south, beyond the limits of direct Egyptian control. Semna has provided another formal inscription of Senusret III, already quoted in Chapter 1 (p. 27):

The southern boundary which was created in the 8th year under the Majesty of King Senusret III to prevent any Nubian from passing it when faring northwards, whether on foot or by boat, as well as any cattle of the Nubians. An exception is a Nubian who shall come to barter at Iken, or one with an official message.54



Trade and diplomacy with the enemy were to be recognized and properly regulated. Iken was the ancient name for the great fortress site of Mirgissa, lying 40 km behind the fortified frontier area, at the northern end of the Second Cataract (see also Figure 3.3, p. 117, for its New Kingdom shrine). Below the main fort on a hill lay a settlement of stone huts and a few brick houses also protected within a massive wall. This might have served as the trading-post but from the available evidence this remains conjectural.

Many of the forts, including Mirgissa, possessed large, well-built granaries. Since we can identify the granary buildings and measure them – and even find out what their original height was in some cases – we can also take the same tentative steps as at Kahun towards calculating how much grain they might have held, and what this tells us about the Nubian operation in general. Although there are many uncertainties in doing so we must bear in mind the Egyptian passion for measuring and calculating. No granary would have been built without it.55 Table 5.2 lays out the capacities and, applying the minimum and maximum figures used above for Kahun, sets gross population figures. Even taking the lower figures the resulting populations are hugely excessive when compared with the size of garrisons that has been postulated in the past. One excavator, G.A. Reisner, on intuitive grounds, estimated for Kumma a garrison of between 50 and 100 men, for Semna one of between 150 and 300, and for Uronarti one of between 100 and 200.

Table 5.2The numbers of annual ration units storable in the granaries using minimum and maximum estimates of ration size

Site Capacity of granary (in cubic metres) Minimum annual ration units Maximum annual ration units

Shalfak 389.28 1,342 779

Uronarti (block VI only) 444.34 1,532 889

Uronarti (VI plus IV) 770.37 2,656 1,541

Mirgissa 1,063.69 3,668 2,127

Kumma 574.31 1,980 1,149

Askut 1,632.18 5,628 3,264

Semna [1,000?] [3,448?] [2,000?]



The activities of the Nubian forts are only sketchily documented. In addition to serving as static points of defence we know from the Semna Despatches that a desert surveillance system was operated from them, using Medjay people from the deserts who were presumably paid in grain; some grain may have been needed for the donkeys who must have formed an important element in transport; we also know from the same texts that some of the forts engaged in trade in which bread and beer were given out by the Egyptians. If this last factor was a significant one, however, we might have expected the largest granary to have been at Mirgissa, which we know from Senusret III’s boundary inscription quoted above to have been the officially designated trading-post for Nubians from the south, the place called Iken. This is not so.

The Nubian forts in the Second Cataract south of Mirgissa were built by Senusret III to defend a frontier newly established by him. However, the military measures undertaken at this time also involved campaigns into areas lying yet further to the south. Armies need rations, and although there would doubtless have been hopes of seizing defeated Nubians’ grain stores, the Middle Kingdom administrative machine was not one to leave supplies and rations to chance. From the texts mentioned in the previous chapter we can imagine the preparations: calculating the numbers of men, the length of time, the size of rations, and thus the maximum size of the stores. We can best understand the size and location of the Second Cataract granaries if we see them as part of an integrated military strategy of defence and attack. The granaries belong to a carefully planned chain of supply. Their importance in military thinking is amply demonstrated by the island fortress of Askut, located well back from the Semna frontier and therefore the most secure of the group.56 The granary occupies so much of the interior space as to suggest that the whole fortress was really a fortified grain store acting as an emergency or rear supply depot.

The care taken with all preparations is evident from two other excavated sites, where the ‘ghosts’ of two temporary Middle Kingdom palaces have been discovered. One is the ‘Administrative Building’ at Kor, the other is the ‘Palace’ on Uronarti island (Figure 5.23).57 Both were occupied for only a brief period and were laid out with such a care for northerly orientation, ignoring the lie of the land, as to suggest a founding ceremony based around astronomical orientation. A tempting interpretation is that they were temporary residences thrown up for the king during his leadership of campaigns into the regions lying beyond the frontiers and were thus ‘campaign palaces’, but this is only a conjecture.



Figure 5.23Two short-lived buildings in Nubia, carefully aligned to true north against the natural trend of the ground, at Uronarti and Kor. Were they the king’s temporary headquarters during major campaigns? After Dunham, Uronarti, Maps II, VI, and J. Vercoutter, Kush 3 (1955), Plan D, Pl. VI.



The archaeological evidence from Middle Kingdom Nubia projects into this military frontier region a massive application of Middle Kingdom administration. Behind the forts must lie a hidden mountain of scribal effort. We can only marvel at the excess of zeal and energy that the whole operation reveals.





The prescriptive society


The circumstances in which planned settlements were built in the Middle Kingdom varied greatly. The Nubian forts represent colonization of a limited sort on newly conquered territory. Their elaborately fortified perimeter walls tell us, in themselves, that these places were, in the first instances, fortresses. Thebes, in this respect, offers the greatest contrast. At some point in the Middle Kingdom at least one of its districts containing buildings fitted with columns (and hence prestigious) was rebuilt according to a strictly gridded design, which suggests, more so than at any other site, that this was a preferred style of city design. The geometric mud-brick towns could represent an attempt at remodelling society that was seen as progressive in its day. The other examples – Kahun, Abydos South, Tell el-Dabʾa and Qasr el-Sagha (as well as others not described here) – all appear to be new foundations on previously unoccupied ground. In the case of Tell el-Dabʾa and, even more so, Qasr el-Sagha the gridded settlements seem to represent internal colonization of land being made productive for the first time. In the cases of Kahun and Abydos South, although they were built on unoccupied ground, they supplemented an existing town not very far away (in the case of Abydos South, Abydos itself, seat of a mayor; in the case of Kahun the nearby town was El-Lahun, known from hieroglyphic sources to have been in existence by this time). In neither case, however, do we know whether the existing towns at Abydos and El-Lahun were also redeveloped in the Middle Kingdom along geometrically gridded lines. In both cases the old towns survived long after the Middle Kingdom, whereas their new counterparts faded away during the New Kingdom.

Although both Kahun and Abydos South were given a prestigious reason to exist, through their service to royal statue cults, their size suggests that they were the means to bring together large labour units which the king could direct to various ends. Written sources of the Middle Kingdom identify a word (khenret), which can be translated as ‘labour camp’.58 Although it is impossible to link the word to any particular archaeological site, Qasr el-Sagha in particular is just the kind of place one might expect a labour camp to resemble. The evident redirection into new housing of probably quite a large sector of the population thus raises the question, was there a punitive intention – a policy of forced resettlement for whole communities – prompted perhaps by the conflicts of the First Intermediate Period? If this were so, the examples we have are spread over a significant period of time, which would suggest that such a policy, if actually formulated, became entrenched in the mechanisms of government.

The archaeological evidence also sheds light on the position of ‘mayors’. They were, by the Middle Kingdom, already established figures in local government (sometimes keeping the title ‘nomarch’, literally ‘great chief of a nome’) and for a long time (through the New Kingdom) they remained the local centre of stable administration (e.g. responsible for tax collection, Figure 7.1, p. 299). The office was frequently, perhaps normally, hereditary. In what must have been an unusual case, at Thebes during the Second Intermediate Period, a highly placed man, Kebsi, son of the vizier who was also mayor of El-Kab, surrenders the office of mayor to a ‘kinsman’, Sebeknakht, to settle a debt of 60 deben of gold which he cannot repay. The sum is a large one (see Chapter 7, p. 304) but still, from a modern perspective, seems considerably to undervalue an office which gave the incumbent considerable local control and patronage.59 A measure of this is provided by the huge size of the tombs of some of them (at least in Upper Egypt) and their command of large numbers of men (even soldiers in private armies). Kahun and Abydos South show that, when a new town was to be established, it was put under the control of a mayor who was provided with a large residence within the walled community. At Elephantine their base was a mud-brick building in which administration and a cult of deference to the office holders were both to be found (see p. 197). It occupied a central position within the town, but neither the residence nor the town shows signs of having been subject to a period of redevelopment along geometric lines in the Middle Kingdom.60 A somewhat different policy is to be seen at Tell Basta (Bubastis) in the north-eastern delta (Figure 5.24).61 Excavation has uncovered a large mud-brick residence (a ‘palace’, in fact) for the mayor with an intricately laid out plan to accommodate many functions but within an overall grid alignment. As with the governor’s/mayor’s residence at Elephantine, deference to the holders of senior office was expressed by objects (in this case statues of the mayors) to which the presentation of offerings would have been a natural response. That the mayors were also simultaneously officials of the king to whom deference was due in turn was marked by means of a finely carved stone-lined doorway which celebrated King Amenemhat III. Large parts of the ancient town, of all periods, have been lost to sebakh- (or fertilizer-)digging and to burial beneath the adjacent modern town. But what survives of the surrounding area suggests that the palace and its adjacent mayoral tomb complex stood on a piece of open ground beside the town (of the appearance of which we know almost nothing), a piece of ground which had formerly been the town’s cemetery and, in part, continued to be so for a long time afterwards. It could be that the town developed according to its own dynamic and (as at Elephantine but not at Thebes) was not flattened and rebuilt along fully planned lines but, at the same time, the mayor’s position in the community was reaffirmed by creating a new residence, presumably a lot larger than before, close to but outside the town limits. As in other areas of Egyptian life, generalizations have to accommodate local differences, often revealed by archaeology.



Figure 5.24A mud-brick ‘palace’ at Tell Basta (Bubastis) in the Nile delta. After C.C. Van Siclen, ‘Remarks on the Middle Kingdom palace at Tell Basta’, in Bietak, Haus und Palast, 239, Fig. 1.



The history of town planning offers a paradox in value judgements. Today we regard planning as a basic responsibility of civilized government; thus, a good thing. We are therefore inclined to applaud it when it makes its appearance in antiquity. However, ancient planning inclined towards a form – the grid or orthogonal layout – against which modern planners have reacted. Garden cities, with sweeping curves to their plans, have been one reaction; some planners have returned to the roots of pre-modern community life and have attempted to distil principles from unpremeditated ‘organic’ or self-organized communities, such as mediaeval Italian hill villages. This being the case, we can choose to regard early grid plans as bureaucratic impositions and question whether they are really a civilized virtue. Most modern city dwellers, none the less, both poor and rich, live in fairly regimented flats and houses and seek individual expression and identity by other means. The question is very much to the fore in considering the greatest city that has survived from ancient Egypt: Amarna of the New Kingdom (Figure 8.12, p. 350). Most of it was built around a rejection of, or an indifference to, a social prescription and a geometric aesthetic. The organic harmonies and discords of personal decision-making prevail instead, and reflect a mentality very different from that behind Kahun.

The paradox mirrors something more fundamental still. In the texts considered in the last chapter and in the archaeological sites considered in this one, the Middle Kingdom takes on a distinctive character: it was motivated by a vision – fragmentary and incomplete perhaps – of a bureaucratic Utopia, an unformulated ideology which acted as a pattern in the making of decisions. We find it in an inclination to devise arithmetic devices for regulating economic life, we see it in documents attempting a centralized control and direction of work and property, it lives at Kahun in a prescription for how a complete city should be arranged. It may seem crude in many respects, but it could have had a future. Better systems are built by improvements to older ones. But the resources of the state, and by this we mean in the end its human resources, proved unequal to the task. As the remaining chapters will show, the bureaucratic tendency of the Middle Kingdom made no further headway. The New Kingdom state, although successful for nearly five centuries in creating and distributing wealth and honours, was a less rigid system holding temporarily in check a great many individualistic ambitions.

Why did ancient Egypt fail to endure? The same answer applies as to all civilizations: too great and too prolonged a rejection of systematized life in favour of freedom of manoeuvre by ambitious individuals, and a general acquiescence in, or preference for, muddle, shortcuts, and, when it comes to the built environment, the sense of familiarity and personal identity that arises from something with an element of personal idiosyncrasy which announces to its owner that, no matter how insignificant and irregular it might be, it is ‘home’. If the work of Middle Kingdom Egypt – and of equivalent periods of bureaucratic dominance in ancient China, the Indus Valley, Mesopotamia and pre-Columbian Central and South America – had been pursued as a peaceful continuum, converting all who encountered it to enthusiastic support for order and the beauty of logical systems of government, then by now a Utopian world order might well have been achieved. ‘The spirit of discord is, however, perpetually on the watch for a chance to put an end to prosperity.’62 Anarchic love of disorder and rejection of authority are equally parts of the human personality. History is a record of the struggle between the two polarities of the mind – order and disorder, acceptance and rebellion (as the ancient Egyptians themselves perceived). Both the rise and the fall of civilization are present in each one of us.





Notes

1Rossi, Architecture; D. Arnold, Building in Egypt: Pharaonic Stone Masonry, New York and London, OUP, 1991; Clarke and Engelbach, Masonry.

2This is the approach of A. Badawy, Ancient Egyptian Architectural Design: a Study of the Harmonic System, Berkeley, CA, and Los Angeles, CA, UCP, 1965. See the discussion in Rossi, Architecture, 32–56.

3Moeller, Urbanism, 103–7.

4Schauer, Ungeplante Siedlungen explores the dynamics involved. I thank Mark Lehner for bringing this study to my attention many years ago.

5To be appreciated by comparing the plans in J.E. Quibell and F.W. Green, Hierakonpolis II, London, 1902, Pl. LXXIII with the results of the 1967 and later American excavations, particularly W.A. Fairservis, JARCE 9 (1971–2), 14–21 and accompanying plans and sections, Figs 3, 9–15; Moeller, Urbanism, 94–6.

6Moeller, Urbanism, 226–32; 239–41.

7Moeller, Urbanism, 76–8, 108, 164–74, 305–17; S.J. Seidlmayer, ‘Town and state in the Early Old Kingdom: a view from Elephantine.’ In J. Spencer, ed., Aspects of Early Egypt, London, BM, 1996, 108–27.

8Moeller, Urbanism, 305–17; L. Habachi, Elephantine IV. The Sanctuary of Heqaib, Mainz, von Zabern, 1985; D. Franke, Das Heiligtum des Heqaib auf Elephantine: Geschichte eines Provinzheiligtums im Mittleren Reich, Heidelberg, Heidelberger Orientverlag, 1994.

9On population estimates for Egypt over the ages see Butzer, Hydraulic Civilization, 81–92; J.C. Russell, JARCE 5 (1966), 69–82; J.A. McCarthy, Middle Eastern Studies 12, 3 (Oct. 1976), 1–39; D. Panzac, Asian and African Studies (Haifa) 21 (1987), 11–32. There is growing evidence from archaeology that settlements in the Old Kingdom were considerably more numerous than previously thought, and that Butzer’s estimate should be increased. Should we double it?

10For Göbekli Tepe (or Köbekli) see, e.g., M. Beile-Bohn, C. Gerber, M. Morsch and K. Schmidt, Istanbuler Mitteilungen 48 (1998), 5–78; S. Mithen, After the Ice: a Global Human History, 20,000–5000 bc, London, W&N, 2003, 65–7, 89–90.

11G. Soukiassian, M. Wuttmann and L. Pantalacci, Balat VI. Le palais des gouverneurs de l’époque de Pépy II. Les sanctuaries de ka et leurs dependences, Cairo, IFAO, 2002; C. Jeuthe, Balat X. Ein Werkstattkomplex im Palast der I. Zwischenzeit in Ayn Asil, Cairo, IFAO, 2012; C. Jeuthe, V. Le Provost and G. Soukiassian, BIFAO 113 (2013), 203–38; Moeller, Urbanism, 174–82, 241–4.

12A.J. Mills, ‘Another Old Kingdom site in the Dakhleh Oasis.’ In Friedman, Egypt and Nubia, 74–8; O.E. Kaper and H. Willems, ‘Policing the desert: Old Kingdom activity around the Dakhleh Oasis.’ In ibid., 79–90; A.J. Mills and O.E. Kaper, ‘ʾAin el-Gazzareen: developments in the Old Kingdom settlement.’ In G.E. Bowen and C.A. Hope, eds, The Oases Papers 3. Proceedings of the Third International Conference of the Dakhleh Oasis Project, Oxford, Oxbow, 2003, 123–9; Moeller, Urbanism, 182–6.

13Borchardt, Grabdenkmal; in general and with many examples of similar places, Moeller, Urbanism, 117–57; also R. Bussmann, MDAIK 60 (2004), 17–39.

14P. Chester Beatty IV = P. British Museum 10684; Lichtheim, Literature II, 175–8.

15Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 305–11, 394–7; M. Lehner, D. Jones, L. Yeomans, H. Mahmoud and K. Olchowska, ‘Re-examining the Khentkaues Town.’ In Strudwick, Old Kingdom, 143–91; Moeller, Urbanism, 144–53.

16For the houses of the Khentkawes town see also Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 396–7; Moeller, Urbanism, 196–200.

17The primary source is Reisner, Mycerinus, Chapter III; Hassan, Gîza IV, adds a further part of the plan; for the Pepi II decree, Strudwick, Texts, 106–7. See also Lehner and Hawass, Giza, 271–81, 398–401; Moeller, Urbanism, 150–3.

18Ahmed Fakhry, The Monuments of Sneferu at Dahshur I. The Bent Pyramid, Cairo, General Organisation for Government Printing Offices, 1959, 114–17; Vol. II, Part II. The Finds, Cairo, General Organisation for Government Printing Offices, 1961, contains a record of the pottery, largely Old Kingdom in date. See also Moeller, Urbanism, 141–4.

19N. Alexanian and S. Seidlmayer, EA 20 (2002), 3–5; N. Alexanian and S.J. Seidlmayer, MDAIK 58 (2002), 1–28.

20W.M.F. Petrie, Kahun, Gurob, and Hawara, London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1890, Ch. III; Petrie, Illahun, Chs II and III; Petrie et al., Lahun, Ch. XIII; Moeller, Urbanism, 271–90; R.A. Frey and J.E. Knudstad, JSSEA 35 (2008), 27–81; Quirke, Lahun Studies; S. Quirke, Lahun: a Town in Egypt 1800 bc, and the History of Its Landscape, London, Golden House Publications, 2005.

21The group discovered by Petrie is fully published in Griffith, Papyri; many of them appear in Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Letters; Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Religious. U. Luft, ‘Toponyms at Lahun.’ In Quirke, Lahun Studies, 1–41; U. Luft, Das Archiv von Illahun I. Hieratische Papyri aus den Staatlichen Museen zu Berlin–Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Akademie Verlag, 1992.

22Winlock, Models. For the date see Do. Arnold, MM Journal 26 (1991), 5–48.

23Moeller, Urbanism, in which Chs 6 and 9 look in detail at the plans of houses of the Old and Middle Kingdom, including those at Kahun.

24A. Badawy, JARCE 6 (1967), 103–9. Vogel, Festungen, 132–8 has pointed out (in connection with the similar granaries at the Nubian fortresses of the Second Cataract) that granaries could store not only cereal grains but also dried fruit, such as figs and dates, thus leading perhaps to a reduction in numbers of people supported.

25Moeller, Urbanism, 273–6.

26Reasons for lowering population estimates for Amarna, including consideration of family size, are discussed in Chapter 8, pp. 359–61.

27S. Quirke, RdÉ 39 (1988), 83–106, esp. 87–90.

28Griffith, Papyri, 25; Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Religious, 117–19; Muhs, Economy, 65.

29Hayes, Papyrus, 87–109, 148–9; Quirke, Administration, 148–9.

30Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Accounts, 101–4; Quirke, Exploring Religion, 98–9.

31Griffith, Papyri, 19–24; Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Religious, 110–15; Muhs, Economy, 65–6; also the discussion by D. Valbelle, ‘Eléments sur la démographie et le paysage urbains, d’après les papyrus documentaires d’époque pharaonique.’ Cahier de Recherches de l’Institut de Papyrologie et d’Égyptologie de Lille 7 (1985), 75–87.

32The farmer Hekanakht arranged a regular food allowance for a household of at least 18 people, but this included the dependants of some of the relatives as well as servants, and they might as a whole have been accommodated in more than one house. Allen, Heqanakht, 16–17, 39–40, 107–17, 145–9; Parkinson, Voices, 106; Wente, Letters, 61. House lists from Deir el-Medina suggest quite small households, see Figure 8.16, p. 360. The widowed but remarried Naunakht of the same place had eight children, but some of them were ‘workmen’ and must have had their own houses. J. Černy, JEA 31 (1945), 29–53.

33Griffith, Papyri, 29–38; Collier and Quirke, Papyri, Religious, 100–6, 118–19; Muhs, Economy, 68–72.

34J.C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed, New Haven, CT, and London, YUP, 1998, 76, from a chapter entitled ‘Cities, people, and language’.

35J. Wegner, JARCE 35 (1998), 8–32; J. Wegner, MDAIK 57 (2001), 281–308; Moeller, Urbanism, 290–6; J. Wegner, Expedition Magazine (Penn Museum) 48.2 (July 2006), 31–6.

36Czerny, Tell el-Dab’a IX; Moeller, Urbanism, 252–9. A second planned town nearby, at the site of Ezbet Rushdi, has also left traces, E. Czerny, ‘Fragments of information. Observations concerning the architectural layout of the Middle Kingdom settlement at ʾEzbet Rushdi.’ In Bietak et al., Cities, 69–80.

37A brief illustrated account of ezbas can be found in Lozach and Hug, L’habitat, 49–52. The authors comment upon the demoralizing effect of the uniformity of those built like barracks, and the attempts by a few enlightened landowners to do better by providing larger individual houses, more widely spaced.

38Charloux and Mensam, Karnak, 183–5; M. Millet, CdK 12 (2), 2007, 681–743; Moeller, Urbanism, 300–5.

39J. Śliwa, MDAIK 48 (1992), 177–91; Moeller, Urbanism, 262–71.

40Good general histories of ancient Nubia and of Egyptian involvement are Adams, Nubia; B.G. Trigger, Nubia under the Pharaohs, London, T&H, 1976. The subject is related to more theoretical studies of imperialism in Smith, Askut. Also Moeller, Urbanism, 296–300; Vogel, Festungen; Vogel, Fortifications.

41Emery et al., Buhen.

42H.S. Smith, The Fortress of Buhen: the Inscriptions, London, EES, 1976, 76–8, suggests that the brick temple rebuilt by Amenhetep I outside the citadel was perhaps the building referred to. Buhen also seems to have possessed a mound shrine during the Middle Kingdom, and this also is a candidate for the first Horus temple, see B.J. Kemp, CAJ 5 (1995), 45; 43, Fig. 5.

43D. Arnold and J. Settgast, MDAIK 20 (1965), Abb. 2, opp. p. 50.

44On the difficulties of a modern strategic assessment of these fortresses, see K. Spence, CAJ 11 (2004), 267–9.

45G.A. Reisner and D. Dunham, Kush 8 (1960), 16, Plan 2; Dunham, Uronarti, Section II. Shalfak is one of only two of these forts (the other being Uronarti) still to survive above the waters of the reservoir held behind the High Dam at Aswan, C. Knoblauch, L. Bestock and A. Makovics, MDAIK 69 (2013), 103–42, pp. 140–1.

46Hieroglyphic text: Sethe, Lesestücke, 83–4; translation in Lichtheim, Literature I, 118–20. Some commentators have suggested that the word that can be translated as ‘statue’ (and also ‘image’) should not be taken literally, see Vogel, Festungen, 73–7.

47Dunham, Semna Kumma, Section I.

48Dunham, Semna Kumma, Section II.

49J. Vercoutter, Kush 14 (1966), 125–32; L.V. Žabkar and J.J. Žabkar, JARCE 19 (1982), 7–50; Vogel, Festungen, 264–6.

50AJ. Mills, Kush 15 (1967), 206, pl. XXXVIIIb; Vogel, Festungen, 268–71; C. Knoblauch, L. Bestock and A. Makovics, MDAIK 69 (2013), 103–42, p. 105, Fig. 1; 138–9.

51Marked on the map in J. de Morgan, U. Bouriant, G. Legrain, G. Jéquier and A. Barsanti, Catalogue des monuments et inscriptions de l’Égypte antique, Series I, Vol. 1, Vienna, Holzhausen, 1894, 65; for subsequent investigations see H. Jaritz, MDAIK 43 (1968), 67–74; MDAIK 49 (1993), 107–32; Vogel, Festungen, 268–9; C. von Pilgrim, ‘Elephantine – (Festungs-)Stadt am Ersten Katarakt.’ In Bietak et al., Cities, 257–70, esp. 268, Abb. 7; Moeller, Urbanism, 307.

52W.Y. Adams and H.A. Nordström, Kush 11 (1963), 23; Adams, Nubia, 183.

53P.C. Smither, JEA 31 (1945), 3–10; Parkinson, Voices, 93–5; Vogel, Festungen, 78–87. The quoted passage is from Despatch no. 4.

54See Chapter 1, note 13 for references.

55B.J. Kemp, ZÄS 113 (1986), 120–36; Smith, Askut, 43–7; JARCE 28 (1991), 107–32. See also note 24, on the possibility that dried fruits could have been stored in the granaries as well as cereal, so reducing the numbers of people supported.

56Smith, Askut.

57Kor: J. Vercoutter, Kush 3 (1955), 4–19; H.S. Smith, Kush 14 (1966), 187–243; also B.J. Kemp, ZÄS 113 (1986); Vogel, Festungen, 236–9; Uronarti: Dunham, Uronarti, 22–31, Pls XV–XIX, Map VI; also Vogel, Festungen, 251–6. This Uronarti building appears not to have survived the flooding of the area following the completion of the High Dam at Aswan, see C. Knoblauch, L. Bestock and A. Makovics, MDAIK 69 (2013), 103–42, pp. 129–30.

58S. Quirke, ‘State and labour in the Middle Kingdom. A reconsideration of the term ḫnrt.’ RdÉ 39 (1988), 83–106; J. Śliwa, ‘Der ḫnrt von Qasr el-Sagha.’ In P. Jánosi, ed., Structure and Significance: Thoughts on Ancient Egyptian Architecture, Vienna, VOAW, 2005, 477–91; Moeller, Urbanism, 265, 269.

59P. Lacau, Une stèle juridique de Karnak, Cairo, IFAO, 1949; Muhs, Economy, 59–60, 75–6. The value of the office drops dramatically further if the deben in use was that of the Middle Kingdom, which was around one seventh the weight it was given in the New Kingdom. This seems improbable.

60Moeller, Urbanism, 305–7.

61C.C. Van Siclen, ‘Remarks on the Middle Kingdom palace at Tell Basta.’ In Bietak, Haus und Palast, 239–46; M. Bietak and E. Lange, EA 44 (2014), 4–7; Moeller, Urbanism, 356–60. The plan in M.I. Bakr, H. Brandl and F. Kalloniatis, Egyptian Antiquities from Kufur Nigm and Bubastis, Berlin, Opaion, 2010, 19, Fig. 1 shows the palace in relation to earlier and later cemeteries.

62Geoffrey of Monmouth (AD 1136). The History of the Kings of Britain, iii.1, translated from Latin by L. Thorpe, Penguin Classics, London, etc., 1966, 90.





Part III

Intimations of our futures





