2

The intellectual foundations of the early state





The inescapable state


With the imagined community – the nation – people feel that they share bonds of common interest and inherited values with others, most of whom they will never see. It is a vision of people. By contrast, the state is a vision of power, a mixture of myth and procedure that twines itself amidst the sense of community, giving it political structure. In the modern world the state has become the universal unit of supreme organization. No part of the land of planet Earth does not belong to one, although events in the Middle East and North Africa in the early twenty-first century have shown that legally constituted states are not necessarily as permanent as it had previously seemed. They can face dissolution and with it the reappearance of the turmoil and violence of state formation. The driving force, however, is not a return to an egalitarian order, the discarding of the idea of hierarchical authority and coercion, but the assertion by groups who have felt excluded and now wish to have the instruments of state power to wield for themselves.

What are the roots of this condition, this vast surrender by the many and presumption by the few? People have recognized the state as an abstract entity only since the time of the classical Greeks. But the real history of the state is much longer. If we move further back in time to early complex societies – of which Egypt was one – we can observe the basic elements of modern states already present and functioning vigorously, yet doing so in the absence of objective awareness of what was involved. The existence of the state was either taken for granted or presented in terms which do not belong to the vocabulary of reason and philosophy which is part of our inheritance from the classical world. We must accordingly make allowances if we are not to miss important truths. We must not confuse substance with language. The growth in the mechanisms of the state, as with other products of the mind, has been a process of addition. The ideas and practices that we associate with more modern times have been grafted on to a core which has remained fixed and basic since the appearance of the first states in the ancient world. The study of ancient history exposes this core and thus the bedrock of modern life.

Fundamental to the state is an idealized image of itself, an ideology, a unique identity. It sets itself goals and pursues them by projecting irresistible images of power. These aid the mobilization of the resources and energies of the people, characteristically achieved by bureaucracy and institutions, to whose members are delegated the power of sanction from the ruler (thus, the act of forbidding someone to do something, backed up by the threat of punishment). Dominance hierarchy is thereby enabled across a population of significant size. We can speak of it as an organism, even as a person, because, although made by individuals, as a corporate group it takes on a life of its own and, in so doing, gains collective intentionality. Ideology, images of earthly power, the enabling force of bureaucracy, these are some of the fundamental elements of states both ancient and modern. They contain and reinforce the roles of the state’s leaders as effectively as they do those of its people, and bear it onwards in times of weak leadership. They provide legitimacy for the way things are. These are themes that will recur throughout this book.





Ideology and legitimacy


Ideology has become one of the shaping processes of modern times. It is a distinctive filter through which a society sees itself and the rest of the world, a body of thought and symbol which explains the nature of society, defines its ideal form, and justifies action to achieve that ideal. We might consider using the word with strictest regard to its origin only to refer to the political philosophies of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries AD, of which Marxism supplies the paradigmatic example. Because of their immediate earthly concerns ideologies might also appear to contrast with religions, with their appeal primarily to the personal concerns of individuals and to their redemption. But this convenient contrast between ideology and religion reflects the viewpoint of modern western culture. Islam and Judaism, for example, are concerned equally with personal righteousness and with the form that human society should take on earth. Both prescribe a complete way of life, including a code of law.

Moreover, the very contrast between ideology or political philosophy on the one hand and religion on the other obscures how much they have in common – unprovable knowledge and promises or forecasts taken upon trust (mainly on the basis of particular highly regarded texts); deference towards an idea centred on figures who can be real (though often dead) or imagined (gods); all this expressed in formal and normally collective behaviour and language, often militant, and demands of loyalty which are so strong as to create a separate identity, the category of followers, loyalists or believers. Beginning (it would seem) in the eastern Mediterranean region and the Near East in the latter part of the first millennium BC, a psychological watershed was passed (its origins poorly documented and understood). Logic, and with it greater consistency of thinking and refinement in the defining of categories, was identified. It inspired some to philosophy (taking root particularly in the Greek-speaking world) where debate was an essential feature. Epicurus belongs here. It drove others in a different direction, to a sharper perception of what it meant to be loyal to an abstraction, to a transcendental idea (most obviously monotheism). The relish of being right became matched by the relish of accusation against those on the other side of the divide. In the longer run, down to our own time, monotheism has been joined by nationalism (including its more extreme version, national socialism) and international communism as variant expressions of the widespread urge to belong to a self-selecting elite with a mission to purge.

As we have seen in Chapter 1, the desirable category for ancient Egypt was simply to be an Egyptian, a category defined by behaviour rather than by inner commitments. For much of the time it was enough to offer loyal service and, by speech and dress especially, to conform to the Egyptians’ own stereotype of themselves. That community, so simply yet so confidently self-defined, occupied a place in the world which was the centre of order, terrestrial and cosmic. That order came from the fact that the role of Pharaoh was pivotal to the knowledge which the Egyptians had developed as to the nature of the forces – mostly invisible yet accessible within the mind – which governed existence (and which will be explored below). It was, however, liable to disturbance by fallible, incautious kings and so required constant care and attention through formalized behaviour and pageant, as well as through occasional more forceful reminders in the form of openly critical texts.

It seems entirely appropriate to use the term ideology to cover the Egyptian vision of the state, embedded within knowledge of divine forces yet politically valid and constantly stated in powerful symbolic terms. It was a consciously created framework within which the Pharaonic state functioned. In particular, it satisfied the need that societies feel, that the power that rules them should possess legitimacy. In periods of stable rule, people are inclined to take for granted that whoever is ruling them is doing so legitimately. Familiarity coupled with success suppresses the question, why him or them? But when the source of power changes or is disrupted, for whatever reason, and people become aware that there are alternatives, then the quest for legitimacy becomes urgent. Rebellion and civil war are the penalties for failure.

Legitimacy of government remains very much an active topic in the modern world. Does it, or should it, derive from armed power that it is perilous to challenge, from the ballot box in a democratic system that answers to logic, or from the awe and mystery surrounding the hereditary rule of royalty or the inspired selection of leaders of a religion? In ancient Egypt, the overriding need to provide legitimacy at times of change, even if the new ruler was a usurper of non-royal origin or even foreign and an invader, obliged those who provided support for the new ruler to present him as conforming to the received image of a divine king that was rooted simultaneously in the past and in core knowledge of the universe.

Yet ideology was not the sole source of order. Two others come to mind. It is likely that, inherent in the early development of the state in Egypt, corporate groups emerged, in the form of locally based extended families with patriarchal leaders and numerous dependants and clients held together by dependence and gratitude. Often the leaders held the title ‘nomarch’ (in effect, ‘governor of a province’ or ‘nome’) or ‘mayor’ and had responsibility for local shrines and temples. Such groups, who came to be centred in provincial towns, existed alongside but were only partially integrated into a bureaucratic system which had its own implicit ideology of social ordering that was never raised to the level of a fully formulated conscious scheme. These sources of order will be explored in Chapters 4 to 6.

The formal ideology of ancient Egypt stressed three themes: continuity with the past; a mystic territorial claim of unity over geographical and political subdivisions; and stability and prosperity through the wise and respectful government of kings. It also took for granted, as did the ancient Egyptians as a whole, the notion that those who lived in the Nile valley under the rule of Pharaoh formed the imagined community of ‘Egyptians’.





The Egyptians’ view of the past


Ideology requires a past, a history. For a dynamic ideology of change, such as Marxism, the past has to be unsatisfactory, an imperfect time whose shortcomings are the spur for action, for revolution. The past exists in order to be rejected. More commonly, however, societies embrace the past, or some parts of it, with respect. This can lead to the thought that the present shape of society has fallen from an earlier, proper condition. Thus the latter part of the twentieth century AD saw the re-emergence of a mode of Islamic thinking that seeks to establish once again – as it was for a relatively limited time in the Middle Ages – a single, disciplined, transnational Islamic community under the leadership of a Khalifa (Caliph, the ‘messenger’). Some of its adherents see that, in practice, only through violence can society be cleansed of corruption and this be achieved. With the appearance in northern Iraq and Syria of the Islamic State in 2014 it has presented the world with a fresh example of the process of state formation, illustrating just how violent the release of energy inherent within the process can be: ideas rooted in the past combined with modern weapons; atavism serviced by technology.

Knowledge of the past can contain facts, often names of prominent people and their deeds, but from the facts that are selected and the significance that is given to them, the past is also a partial invention. It easily becomes a myth, and as such can provide a model for the present. Ancient Egypt belongs firmly in this category. It thought it knew its own past, and fitted the images so derived within the myth-world of ideology and this, in turn, shaped the way that the people regarded their current rulers. Were they legitimate or not?

The past for the ancient Egyptians had a straightforward and rather prosaic course. No epic narrative of events spanned past generations, no great theme or tale of destiny urged a moral on the living. The Egyptians and their neighbours had always, so it seemed, lived in their respective homelands. The past was a model of order, a continuous and almost exclusively peaceful succession of reigns of previous kings, each one handing the throne on to his successor in a single direct linear sequence. This mirrored how things really were during the ‘great’ periods of peace and stability.

Continuity emerges most explicitly from the lists of dead kings that the Egyptians themselves compiled. The majority derive from the New Kingdom, by which period the Egyptians had accumulated a millennium and a half of history, from c. 3085 to 1250 BC.1 The best known is to be found carved in fine low relief on one of the inner walls of the temple of King Seti I at Abydos (c. 1290 BC; Figure 2.1). At the left end of the scene stands Seti I himself, accompanied by his eldest son, Rameses (later Rameses II), in the act of making offerings. The beneficiaries of the offerings, as the accompanying text makes clear, are 75 royal ancestors, each represented by a single cartouche, together with King Seti I himself, owner of the seventy-sixth cartouche, and whose own twin cartouches are then repeated 19 times to fill the bottom row. The order of the cartouches appears to be more or less correct historically, but numerous kings are omitted, primarily those from periods of internal weakness and division, periods of transition. As Figure 2.1 shows, the largest group of cartouches (39 of them) covers the earliest kings. The next 17 belong to a line of immediately ensuing kings whose rule probably extended only over the local Abydos region (and so, from our modern perspective, from an Intermediate Period). The whole scene represents a generous version of a common temple cult of royal ancestors. Normally the cult focused on individual statues placed in a temple by individual kings. At Abydos a list of names achieved the same end, more comprehensively but also more economically. Correct chronological order was not essential, however (or was not always achieved). Another king list, in the temple of Amun-Ra at Karnak, and of the reign of Tuthmosis III, represents each of a list of 61 kings by a picture of a statue rather than by a simple cartouche. But with this list the kings appear not to be in correct chronological order.



Figure 2.1Above. Legitimizing the present by revering an edited version of the past: King Seti I (and prince Rameses) present offerings to the names of kings made up into a single continuous sequence which connected Seti I to Meni (Menes), the earliest king of whom the Egyptians had a firm record. In the accompanying diagram the names have been divided into blocks representing periods of legitimate rule as interpreted by the staff of the Abydos temple. The gaps in ‘real’ time and history, visible to ourselves, were periods to which a stigma was attached. The weighting of the list towards kings of earlier periods is striking, presumably because this gave a more intense feeling of antiquity. The weighting has been partly achieved by including the kings of the Eighth Dynasty, whose ephemeral reigns continued the rule of the great Memphite kings of the Old Kingdom, but in reduced circumstances. Temple of Seti I at Abydos (c. 1290 BC). Below. Private reverence of the ruling house and its ancestors, by Amenmes, the chief priest of an image of the cult of the long-dead King Amenhetep I called ‘Amenhetep of the Forecourt’. Amenmes lived towards the beginning of the Nineteenth Dynasty. From his tomb at western Thebes (no. 19), after G. Foucart, Le tombeau d’Amonmos, Cairo, IFAO, 1935, Pl. XIIB, itself a copy made in the nineteenth century AD by Thomas Hay.



An extension to the scope of this royal ancestor cult occurs in the tomb of a high official at Saqqara of the reign of Rameses II, who was an overseer of works named Tenroy.2 At the centre of the scene is a list of 57 cartouches of earlier kings, in correct order. Tenroy asks them in a prayer to grant him a share of the daily offerings that were made to them in the temple of Ptah at Memphis. A similar mixture of expectation and reverence doubtless underlies other New Kingdom tomb scenes where offerings and prayers are made to deceased kings. The tomb at Thebes of the priest Amenmes (Figure 2.1), for example, shows him worshipping the statues of 12 New Kingdom Pharaohs regarded as legitimate, plus the founder of the Middle Kingdom, Nebhepetra Menthuhetep II (c. 2066–2014 BC). Again the chronological ordering is correct.

Although these lists are relatively late, the practice of honouring named royal ancestors was an old one. The pious regard shown by kings of the Twelfth Dynasty towards members of the preceding Eleventh Dynasty, whose power they had usurped, also reveals that the search for continuity in kingship – the key to legitimacy – could transcend the political details of dynastic succession.3

The fact that most lists put their selection of kings into correct chronological order reflects a natural Egyptian inclination towards the keeping and archiving of administrative records. The archival element is very evident in the lists of the Palermo Stone (Figure 2.2). This name is given to a group of fragments of a black basalt slab, evidently carved during the latter part of the Fifth Dynasty (c. 2350 BC). Most of the design consists of horizontal rows of compartments, each one separated by a vertical line with curving top, which is, in fact, the hieroglyphic sign for ‘year’ (another example is in Figure 2.18 (4), p. 95). Each of the compartments contains a summary of the principal events in a single year of kings whose names run across the top of the appropriate block of compartments. The events tell us what things the Egyptians of the time thought were important. They are a mixture of festivals, the creation of statues of the gods, occasional warfare, regular taxation, and, in a separate subdivision, the precise height of that year’s Nile flood. As time passed, the compilers’ preferences changed somewhat, introducing a degree of inconsistency into the kinds of things recorded, and they succumbed to an urge to make the entries longer.4 The Palermo Stone illustrates an interest not only in the names of past kings but in the deeds by which they deserved to be remembered and revered: honouring the gods, the guarantee of good administration and hence of prosperity, victory over the enemies of good order who lived beyond Egypt’s frontiers. This kind of chronicle may have provided the basis for the later summary lists of kings.



Figure 2.2An extract from the Palermo Stone recording events in six years of King Nynetjer of the Second Dynasty (the extract begins with his fifteenth year). His name is written in line ‘a’. The compartments in lines ‘b’ and ‘c’ are divided by vertical lines, curved at the top and with a small projection to the right placed halfway down. Each of these lines is in fact the hieroglyph used to write the word for ‘year’ (see also Figure 2.22 (F), p. 103). Row ‘b’ summarizes in hieroglyphs the main events of the years: (1) Appearance of the king; second running of the Apis bull. (2) Processional tour of Horus (i.e. the king); eighth time of the enumeration. (3) Appearance of the king; third time of the Festival of Seker. (4) Processional tour of Horus; ninth time of the enumeration. (5) Appearance of the king; offering to (?) the goddess Nekhbet; the Djet-festival. (6) Processional tour of Horus; tenth time [of the enumeration]. The biennial rhythm of the king’s official life, built around an enumeration of the country’s wealth every second year (probably an early kind of Domesday record), is striking. The lowest row of compartments (c) contains an exact measurement of the height of the Nile flood: (1) 3 cubits, 4 hands, 3 fingers (1.92 metres); (2) 3 cubits, 5 hands, 2 fingers (1.98 metres); (3) 2 cubits, 2 fingers (1.20 metres); (4) 2 cubits, 2 fingers (1.20 metres); (5) 3 cubits (1.57 metres); (6) destroyed. The variation in height, in this five-year span amounting to 0.78 metres, would affect crop yields in higher-lying fields. See Wilkinson, Annals, 126–8.



Administration and the honouring of royal ancestors do not provide a complete explanation for this interest in the past, however. The records at their disposal enabled the Egyptians to measure past time, and offered them the prospect of a journey in the imagination to the point where time met the cosmos. The most vivid expression of this is found in another king list, again from the New Kingdom, but this time written on papyrus and now in the Turin Museum.5 Originally it listed around 300 names of kings, and the aim of its compiler was to be complete. No king seems to have been too minor or short-reigned for inclusion. The Palestinian kings who formed the Hyksos Dynasty (c. 1650–1535 BC) were included, even though they did not merit having their names written in cartouches. This, in fact, was a remarkable concession to reality: tacitly admitting a break in the succession of legitimate kings just for the purpose of attaining completeness. Against each king in the Turin list was written the precise length of his reign, sometimes to the exact day. At certain points a summary of numbers of kings and total length of reigns was inserted. Thus at the end of what we call the Eighth Dynasty, a summary of 958 years from the reign of King Menes (the first name of the lists) was provided.

If this was all the Turin king list did, it could be classed as an elaborate administrative device. The compiler of the list attempted, however, to continue back in time beyond the reign of Menes. It is here that the modern and the ancient mind part company. Before history we place prehistory: the record of human society in a world without writing, an anonymous place where names and deeds are unknown. Such a state of affairs was inconceivable to the ancient Egyptians. But this did not prevent curiosity about what had gone before the first recorded king. The Turin list devoted more than one column of its text to this. Immediately before Menes came several lines which summarize the collective reigns of ‘spirits’ (or ‘devotees’), not given individual names, and before these, and heading the whole compilation, a list of gods (including Seth and probably ending with the goddess Maat). The name of each is written in a cartouche, as if a king, and followed by a precise length of reign. In the case of the god Thoth, for example, this is 7,726 years.6

From the whole Turin list one could trace in direct line the royal succession from a period when the gods had ruled as kings, and from the completeness of the data gain the added satisfaction of calculating the entire length of the period involved. Because the papyrus is fragmentary (including the loss of the top half of the first column) we can no longer do this but it is clear that the reigns of kings were only a relatively short and ‘recent’ era before which stretched an era of gods and spirits which had lasted for many times longer. On consulting the papyrus, the ancient scribe could have known that this was the age of the world since the time of the first creator god, and he would have seen how the kings of the past and their great monuments fitted within this majestic scheme. It was a scheme that allowed for only a single line of kings, however, each one handing the throne to his successor. We know, from critical evaluation of a wide range of evidence, that there were actually periods of disunity, when rival dynasties of kings ruled particular parts of Egypt at the same time (principally the First and Second Intermediate Periods). But the Turin compiler literally straightened out the record, placing dynasties that had overlapped into a single sequence, one after the other.





A capacity for realism


This is the Egyptians’ ‘official’ version of their history. But the sources we have do not actually present a uniformly respectful view. Knowledge of the gods co-existed with scepticism, an aspect of perversity. The relative strength of each varies with the individual, and both, to some extent, are present within the same individual. Thus some Egyptians, at least, could contemplate the gods with a degree of detachment, even humour. It is a mistake to think that they necessarily believed in gods with childlike credulity. Although shrines or tracts of sacred ground could be protected against acts that defiled them, and transgressors could face harsh punishments, disbelief and even mockery of the gods did not necessarily have the same consequences. There was no crime of blasphemy. Knowledge of the gods was, at least when in a certain frame of mind, a relatively neutral experience. It was thus acceptable to write a story in which the goddess Isis (‘a clever woman. Her heart was craftier than a million men’) schemes to discover the secret name of the sun god Ra, depicted as an old man who, having succumbed to the pain of a snake bite, reveals his hidden name to her.7 The text is complete and its purpose is clear. It provides ‘historical’ authority for using the story itself as a cure for scorpion sting. Another story, written with fine, clear calligraphy and part of a private library that also contained a manual of temple service and spells to cure ills that sought the help of gods, narrates the quarrel between the gods Horus and Seth. The violent episodes of their confrontation formed one of the cornerstones of the myth of the state. It took the optimistic view that the forces of good and evil, of order and chaos, of truth and falsehood, as symbolized by these two beings (Horus and Seth) who were also embodied in kingship, were not in the end symmetrically balanced. Horus, and what he stood for, would ultimately triumph. But this particular papyrus presents it as a comic tale, in which the gods – amongst them Isis and Osiris – are quarrelsome, vulgar and open to ridicule.8

And so it was with kings also. A few reigns acquired a certain ‘flavour’. Sneferu of the Fourth Dynasty, for example, was later regarded as the archetypal good king from the distant past, his wholesomeness expressed in one tale (in Papyrus Westcar) by his delight in being rowed on a lake by a crew of near-naked virgins.9 Rameses II was a more austere model for his successors. ‘You shall double for me the long duration, the great kingship of King Rameses II, the great god,’ prayed Rameses IV some 60 years later (the prayer failed: he died in his seventh regnal year).10 Khufu (Cheops), builder of the Great Pyramid (dying c. 2447 BC), on the other hand, acquired a reputation for cruelty and arrogance, which appears in a collection of stories about the deeds of magicians (Papyrus Westcar again) apparently written in the late Middle Kingdom (c. 1750 BC). It reappears in Manetho’s History (compiled in the first half of the third century BC) and in the narrative of Herodotus of two centuries earlier.11 Whether this was a true reflection of Khufu’s character, or an imagined consequence of having been the builder of the largest of all the pyramids, is something we can no longer tell. Papyrus Westcar provides this unflattering picture as a prelude to introducing the ultra-pious kings of the succeeding Fifth Dynasty, the point evidently being that by arrogant and offensive behaviour Khufu brought doom to his house. The reigns of other kings from the distant past who were thought not to have maintained the standards of kingship that the Egyptians regarded as proper were likewise made the settings for didactic discourses. King Pepi II (c. 2212–2118 BC), almost the last king of the Sixth Dynasty, was one: he is apparently credited with homosexuality in a fragmentary later tale in which an affronted citizen is thwarted from speaking out in public.12 A king with unsavoury reputation probably provided the setting, now lost, for the lengthy set of lamentations on disorder composed by a Middle Kingdom scribe named Ipuwer.13 Akhenaten (c. 1360–1343 BC), who ostentatiously deviated from kingly traditions, was subsequently referred to as ‘the enemy of Akhetaten’, a reference to his new city (see Chapter 8).

Some contexts demanded solemnity, and these were primarily ceremonies of kingship and performances within or around temples and shrines that attracted stylized and sometimes monumental commemoration through carved and painted scenes and hieroglyphic texts. In other contexts, away from this level of solemnity and involving material often committed to papyri, we see Egyptians distancing themselves from aspects of their own culture, especially those pertaining to gods and to kings. Systems of authoritatively stated belief need channels for release and are not necessarily damaged thereby. In the case of kings, people were able to discriminate between the office of kingship with its prescribed code of formal behaviour and the all-too-human temporary holder of the office. Instinct for survival told most people how far to go and when to stop. The reputations of Khufu and Pepi II did not exclude them from the formal king lists (though Akhenaten’s did), nor were the images of the gods Horus and Osiris made any less majestic by their prototypes being made the subject of mirth. Moreover, this limited ‘licence’ or intellectual freedom created settings in which the lessons of bad kingship could be expounded. The acknowledgement that periods of disorder and injustice had actually happened served as a warning, and gave credence to the role of the king as maintainer of order and justice.





Fear of political disorder


There was, however, a limit, perhaps self-imposed through innate respect for what kings stood for or perhaps derived from a blindness to perceiving that the affairs of the state can be presented as a narrative on a larger scale than that of simple story-telling built around a few characters. We know, from modern researches, of a period of internal unrest culminating in civil war between two contemporaneous ruling families, the Ninth and Eleventh Dynasties, of Herakleopolis and Thebes respectively. This was the First Intermediate Period (c. 2117–2040 BC). Later Egyptians treated it circumspectly. The founder of the principal breakaway group, King Khety of the Ninth Dynasty, later became, like Khufu, the object of unfavourable anecdote, preserved in the copies of Manetho. The entry for this king, in fact, summarizes neatly the anecdotal, moralistic view of history: ‘King Achthoes (the Greek form of Khety), behaving more cruelly than his predecessors, wrought woes for the people of all Egypt, but afterwards he was smitten with madness, and was killed by a crocodile.’14 There is no hint here of the political opportunism which must have given Khety and his family temporary control of the Egyptian throne, soon disputed by a rival dynasty based at Thebes (the Eleventh).

No later text that we know of used the setting of provincial breakaway or warring dynasties directly. In the immediately ensuing period (the Middle Kingdom) thoughtful men composed literary texts which dwelt on the nature of a disorderly society, but within them they kept recent historical reality at a distance. The First Intermediate Period was not used directly to point to a moral. One device put the description of disorder into a prophecy uttered by a priest (named Neferty) at the court of the long-dead but highly regarded King Sneferu, of the early Fourth Dynasty.15

All happiness has vanished;

The land is ruined, its fate decreed,

Deprived of produce, lacking in crops.

What was made has been unmade.



The disorders of this unspecified future time are terminated by the saviour-like arrival of a King Ameny, whose historical model was probably Amenemhat I, first king of the Twelfth Dynasty (c. 1994–1964 BC). The lamentations of the scribe Ipuwer, mentioned above, were another product of the same mood, but their dramatic pictures of social upheaval likewise lack historical names and events.

By the time of the New Kingdom a second period of internal disorder had occurred, again culminating in a civil war: the Hyksos Period (see the previous chapter, pp. 42–3). But here the circumstances were very different. The Hyksos were Palestinian kings who had taken over the delta. Since this was a period of rule by foreign kings eventually ejected by military force from Egypt it was legitimate to see it as an unfortunate aberration from the ideal picture of the past. Even the Turin list accepted this. The Hyksos kings appear, but shorn of royal titulary and cartouches, and labelled instead with a hieroglyphic sign which categorized them as foreigners. In one temple text, Queen Hatshepsut (c. 1472–1457 BC), herself a successful usurper of the early Eighteenth Dynasty, used the Hyksos Period as the scenario of disorder from which she had saved Egypt, ignoring the half-century of peaceful and prosperous rule of her Eighteenth Dynasty predecessors.16 Here the theme of royal responsibility for deliverance from chaos was used with a vengeance. It was permissible in a formal text because the Hyksos Period could be explained away, unlike the First Intermediate Period.

Departures from the picture of the ideal past were few, and (the Hyksos Period excepted) confined to individual rulers. More typically the past was the fount of authority and authenticity. A characteristic image is provided by King Neferhetep of the Thirteenth Dynasty (c. 1740 BC), studiously visiting ‘the houses of writings’, examining the ‘ancient writings of (the creator god) Atum’ in order to discover the correct form for a new statue of Osiris, laid down by the gods themselves at the beginning of time.17 With a similar reverence for ancient forms Egyptian artists retained the original shapes of hieroglyphs with scarcely any modification for three thousand years. The general continuity of style in art and architecture owes itself to the careful reproduction of codified styles created in the Early Dynastic Period and Old Kingdom. But there was an element of self-deception in this. Changes of ideals and forms did occur, and these must reflect intellectual development, something directly apparent from written sources also. The modern scholarly apparatus of art history in Egyptology is based upon the premise that style did change from period to period and can be rationally analysed. Thus the brooding, careworn images of kings in Middle Kingdom statuary conveyed a very different message from their idealized youthful counterparts of the Old Kingdom. King Neferhetep’s new statue of Osiris would have been recognizably a product of the craftsmanship of its time. Indeed, the ‘writings’ that the king examined can have specified the nature of the ancient image in only general terms, particularly the precious materials of which it was composed. The Egyptians could not have put into the words of their language a description of the style of a statue in the way that we can do now. The same was true of architecture. The New Kingdom saw a major reappraisal of temple architecture in which, at least as it relates to the royal mortuary cult, we must recognize significant shifts in meaning. Change did occur, but on the whole tastefully and reverently through retention of the basic vocabulary of traditional forms, sometimes reinforced by appeals to the past. More will be said on this theme later in this chapter.

On occasions the exploitation of the past could be quite elaborate. In the next section of this chapter an extract from an important mythological text will be quoted, known as the Shabaka Stone.18 In its preamble King Shabaka of the Twenty-fifth Dynasty (c. 721–707 BC) claims to have copied the text from an ancient worm-eaten document, and it is, indeed, written in a very archaic style. For a long time scholars accepted Shabaka’s claim at its face value, and set the original composition of the text as far back as the Third Dynasty. It has now become generally accepted that, although the themes of the myth belong to the mainstream of Egyptian thought, this particular composition is relatively late, perhaps even of Shabaka’s time. As for its archaic style, there is good evidence to show that in the Late Period scribes had a working knowledge of an archaic form of the language, and could compose in it. An appeal to antiquity, and sometimes a cloaking in antique forms, made new ideas or new interpretations of old ideas, more acceptable. The past was a cultural womb.





The Egyptian myth of the state


The kings of the lists shared one title in common: all were Kings of Upper and Lower Egypt, the two archetypal geopolitical divisions of valley and delta. In this title lay a powerful expression of unity. Again, however, we find the Egyptians shying away from the unpleasant realities of politics. Order versus chaos is a theme that occurs in various guises in Egyptian thought. It was a theme of kingship. Several of the reflective texts of the Middle Kingdom mentioned above (including the lamentations of the scribe Ipuwer) dwell on the nature of a disordered world, making the king responsible for its cure, but these, as noted above, belong to a style of limited free speculation amongst the scribal class. At the level of formal ideology division and disunity were seen not in terms of potential fragmentation into multiple territories, or into the topsy-turvy chaos of the lamentations of Ipuwer. That would have given too much weight to a disturbing possibility. Instead a symbolic dualistic division was proposed. This appealed to the Egyptian love of symmetry, as reflected throughout their art and architecture. Moreover, the idea of two originally separate kingdoms, of north and south, provided a basis for the king’s unique unifying role that was safer and more respectable than a greater number of lesser units, or a wider condition of anarchy. It also matched the general geographical division of the country into two halves, although real political history shows up internal divisions along different lines.

The elaboration of this aspect of kingship was as much pictorial as written. The Egyptians excelled in strong and direct visual symbolism. In this they were helped by the nature of hieroglyphic writing. Most hieroglyphic signs stood for groups of consonants, so that pictures of things could be used to write other words that had the same sequence of consonants even if pronounced differently. It is as if, in modern English, we chose the picture of a leaf to write all words with the sequence of consonants l and f: thus, leaf, life, loaf, laugh and aloof. (Context and additional signs when necessary prevented ambiguity.) This dissociation between sign and meaning was boldly exploited by artists. And it remained a characteristic of the writing system that, although at an early date a cursive form of writing (hieratic) was developed, for use with pen, ink and papyrus, in formal contexts artists lovingly retained all the detail and natural form of the originals so that the roots were never lost. Artists could thus take hieroglyphic signs standing for abstract concepts and work them as tangible objects into artistic compositions whilst retaining congruity of style. This emblematic use of hieroglyphs contributed a visual element to a form of language-game by which significant concepts could be handled. It is an important characteristic of the Egyptian art style, as is the restraint with which it was exploited. In any one composition only a very few signs would be treated in this way, giving a clear and immediate message.

A good set of examples which summarizes the basic ideology of the Egyptian state is carved in low relief on the sides of ten limestone statues of King Senusret I of the early Twelfth Dynasty (c. 1974–1929 BC) from his mortuary temple at El-Lisht (Figure 2.3). Down the centre runs a segmented vertical sign that is actually a stylized picture of a windpipe and lungs, but which was used to write not only the word for ‘lungs’ but also the verb ‘to unite’, which possessed the same sequence of consonants: s, m, and a strongly aspirated a. The word and its hieroglyph were the key components whenever the theme of the unification of the kingdom was presented (other examples are Figures 2.18 (4) and 8.8 (a4), pp. 95 and 338). On top of this emblematic sign for ‘unity’ rests the oval cartouche containing one of the names of the king. Around the sign two plants are being tied in a reef-knot: on the left a clump of papyrus stalks, the heraldic plant of Lower Egypt; on the right, a clump of reeds, similarly characteristic of Upper Egypt. The act of tying is being performed by two gods: on the left the hawk-headed Horus, and on the right Seth, whose animal was a mythological but largely canine creature. The hieroglyphs above each god refer to two localities. Seth is ‘The Ombite’, that is, from the city of Ombos (Nubt, near the modern village of Nagada) in Upper Egypt. Horus is ‘Lord of Mesen’, a town name used for places in both Upper and Lower Egypt (for reasons explained shortly), but here meaning one in Lower Egypt. On some of the other throne bases Seth is called ‘Lord of Su’, a place lying just within the northern border of Upper Egypt, whilst Horus is several times called ‘The Behdetite’, that is, the one from Behdet, another name used for more than one place, but here clearly referring to somewhere in the north.



Figure 2.3The source of political order and stability: the reconciliation of conflicting powers epitomized by the gods Horus (left) and Seth (right), in whose reconciliation are subsumed the political divisions of Egypt (see also Figure 2.19, p. 96). The reconciliation is symbolized by the tying together of the heraldic plants of Upper and Lower Egypt around the hieroglyphic sign for ‘unification’. Throne base of Senusret I (1974–1929 BC) from his pyramid temple at El-Lisht. After J.-E. Gautier and G. Jéquier, Mémoire sur les fouilles de Licht, Cairo, IFAO, 1902, 36, Fig. 35 (redrawn by B. Garfi).



The artists who carved these statue bases were masters of elegant variation. Other dualistic themes were also woven into the same basic design. On five of the bases Horus and Seth were replaced by figures of plump Nile gods identified by symbols as Upper and Lower Egypt, whilst the hieroglyphic captions at the top refer to the ‘Greater’ and ‘Lesser Ennead’ (Company of Nine Gods), ‘offerings’ and ideas of fertility using paired synonyms in both cases. There is also another variation of the Horus–Seth theme. In this case the pairing is between, on the one side, ‘The united portion of the two lords’, with a little picture of Horus and Seth to identify who the two lords were, and on the other, ‘The thrones of Geb’, an earth god who, in longer texts on the same theme, presided over the reconciliation of Horus and Seth. Here the dualism is being extended beyond the pairing of the two contrasting gods to the pairing of one term for both and a reference to the ultimate agreement between them under the authority of an arbiter, Geb.

Within this rearrangement of entities to illustrate the concept of harmony through the balancing of pairs we can glimpse a simple example of one form of the Egyptians’ thought processes: the manipulation of words, especially names, as if they were discrete units of knowledge (which in a way they were). Ancient knowledge, when not of a practical nature (of the kind: how to build a pyramid and how to behave at mealtime), was essentially the accumulation of names of things, beings and places, together with their associations. ‘Research’ lay in extending the range of associations within the imagination. Meaning or significance was left there and remained largely unformulated. Mythological scenes such as those on the throne bases from El-Lisht provided a kind of cross-tabulation of concepts.

The esteem in which names of things were held is illustrated by a class of text referred to using a later Greek term ‘onomastica’ (singular, ‘onomasticon’).19 The best known, compiled in the late New Kingdom (c. 1100 BC) by a ‘scribe of sacred books’ named Amenemope, and much copied in ancient schools, has the promising heading: ‘Beginning of the teaching for clearing the mind, for the instruction of the ignorant, and for learning all things that exist.’ But without a single word of commentary or explanation it runs on as a list of names of things: the elements of the universe, types of human beings and their professions, the towns and villages of Egypt in great detail, parts of an ox and so on. This form of learning, without explanation, at first sight looks dull. But to the people of the time, knowing the name of a thing made it familiar and brought greater confidence (power) in using it. We can, in fact, still recognize some validity in this: the study of the natural world, whether bird watching or classifying plants, begins with knowing names, and with arranging the names in groups (the science of taxonomy), just as was done intuitively in the onomastica, which served as memory aids for the range of knowledge which was absorbed simply as a result of being a reasonably well-educated Egyptian.

This view of names led to a prominent characteristic of that branch of knowledge that embraced the gods (whose names were not included in the lists of the onomastica). Their names became the building blocks for expanded definitions of divinity which at the same time directed the attention towards an underlying unity. Thus the Apis bull of Saqqara could be addressed as ‘Osiris-Apis-Atum-Horus in one, the Great God’,20 and more simply the Egyptians of the New Kingdom defined the power that presided over Egypt (and beyond) as the god Amun-Ra, a fusion of a ‘hidden’ god (the meaning of the name Amun), particularly associated with the city of Thebes, with the sun god Ra. The sun god himself had other links or extensions: ‘I am Khepri in the morning, Ra at mid-day, Atum in the evening.’21 Fascination with the ‘names of god’ produced Chapter 142 of the Book of the Dead, which carries the heading ‘Knowing the Names of Osiris in his every seat where he wishes to be’, and which is an extensive list of geographically local versions of Osiris, as well as of versions of several other divinities finally summarized as ‘the gods and goddesses in the sky in all their names’.22 An appreciation of the Egyptian mode of thinking is essential to the correct evaluation of texts which may seem to have a more direct bearing on the real, material world; such texts can become sources for history. Place names were just as open to manipulation, giving rise to a form of symbolic geography. It created in the mind an idealized and sometimes geographically symmetrical layout of places, with their identity residing in their names and mythological associations.

Often, perhaps always, there was something there on the ground, a huddled mud-brick town or a nondescript little locality. But although symbolic geography articulated a myth of territorial supremacy on the part of the state, it is a mistake to take the geographical references in such sources as guides to ancient real geography. To do so is to miss the abstracting powers of the Egyptian mind which created an ordered and harmonious myth-world from common and often probably rather humble experience. The result was full of familiar names yet belonged to a higher plane. It hovered tantalizingly between reality and abstraction.

It also, however, sets a trap for the unwary. Modern scholarship inclines towards the approach of lawyers: documented facts are assembled, they are discussed point by point, and a verdict is reached which satisfies modern logic and the ‘weight of the evidence’. But ancient texts and scenes reflect their own mental architecture. They were composed from within the minds of their creators, and reflected an inner world which was not a straightforward projection of the material world, the world which, for example, archaeology uncovers. Symbolic geography was a product of an imaginative people. We should not think of using it as a straightforward basis for historical reconstruction.

We are now in a better position to pursue the imagery on the throne bases of Senusret I. A written version of the underlying myth occurs as part of the Memphite Theology, or Shabaka Stone, mentioned earlier. Outwardly it has narrative form:

[Geb, lord of the gods, commanded] that the Ennead (company of nine gods) gather to him. He judged between Horus and Seth; he ended their quarrel. He made Seth king of Upper Egypt in the land of Upper Egypt, as far as the place where he was born, which is Su. And Geb made Horus king of Lower Egypt in the land of Lower Egypt, as far as the place where his father (Osiris) was drowned, which is ‘Division of the Two Lands’ (a mythical place name although an Egyptian would probably instinctively think of Memphis). Thus Horus stood over one region, and Seth stood over one region. They made peace over the Two Lands at Ayan. That was the division of the Two Lands … Then it seemed wrong to Geb that the portion of Horus was like the portion of Seth. So Geb gave to Horus his (i.e. Seth’s) inheritance, for he is the son of his firstborn son. Geb’s words to the Ennead: ‘I have appointed Horus, the firstborn’ … He is Horus who arose as King of Upper and Lower Egypt, who united the Two Lands in the Nome of the Wall (i.e. Memphis), the place in which the Two Lands were united. Reed and papyrus were placed on the double door of the House of Ptah (the temple of Ptah at Memphis). That means Horus and Seth, pacified and united. They fraternized so as to cease quarrelling in whatever place they might be, being united in the House of Ptah, the ‘Balance of the Two Lands’ in which Upper and Lower Egypt had been weighed.23



On the El-Lisht thrones Horus and Seth are representatives of Upper and Lower Egypt of equal status. On the Shabaka Stone Seth’s place is diminished. From an initial equality with Horus he is subsequently disinherited, though acquiescing in his new subordinate role. An archetypal tension has been created which each king must resolve by ensuring once again the triumph of the sense of legitimacy and orderly rule that Horus stood for. This text (together with a mass of further ancient allusions on the same theme, which can be found spread over a good part of Pharaonic history) poses a fundamental question. Does the myth reflect a formative historical phase in the history of the Egyptian state? Or was it invented to provide a philosophical basis for the Egyptian state which had, in fact, developed along a different historical path?

Earlier generations of scholars (well into the twentieth century) were frequently attracted to the first of these hypotheses, that the myth somehow reflected a formative historical phase. Before the First Dynasty they saw two kingdoms, each with a ‘national god’: Lower Egypt under Horus, Upper Egypt under Seth. A turning point had come when Lower Egypt defeated the south and established a unified kingship, even though this may have been short-lived in view of other evidence which suggested that the First Dynasty began with unification imposed from the south. That there is an alternative explanation owes much to archaeology. Indeed, the synthesis of sources, of archaeology with ancient myth, provides a case history of how ideology is created.





The formation of the state: a model for early Egypt


There is no defining size for states. They can be based on a city and its immediate territory (as in the cases of classical Athens and Venice in the Middle Ages and after) or can be continental in extent (the Ottoman Empire, for example). Nor is there anything mysterious about the processes involved in the emergence of states, a subject which has been much debated. The history of the final episodes of several examples that developed relatively late is known from contemporary written sources of the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries AD, in Africa, Central Asia and the Pacific islands. Violence is a central theme.24 Since 2014 we have been able to witness the process for ourselves (through news reports) as it has unfolded in Syria and northern Iraq, and with a still uncertain outcome.

What is much harder to ascertain is how or why the process began in the first place, given the long period during which human groups remained small and marked by practices which ensured that dominant leadership did not develop (to judge from the evidence of those – hunter-gatherer or forager groups – that survived into modern times). Why should an equilibrium which allowed humans to maintain themselves as a viable species gradually break down and give way to something more complex and prone to turmoil?

The answer almost certainly lies in the nature of human cognition, an evolutionary development, which has the power to create ever-greater complexity through self-reinforcement. A received set of ideas or behaviours becomes a baseline for further subdivisions which are, in turn, further subdivided in an indefinite progression. The process engenders its own acceleration, which is so obvious a feature of modern life. But in the beginning, for thousands of years, it proceeded at an almost unnoticeably slow pace. Few of the ideas and behaviours of Palaeolithic communities are preserved in the archaeological record. But there is still sufficient evidence, including in the slow refinement of stone tool technology, to imply that human cognition was not static even then (though this still does not answer the question ‘why?’ to which there currently appears to be no answer other than through random mutation).

The acceleration of complexity in human awareness and understanding also proceeded unevenly from one society to another. In the eastern Mediterranean and Near East, at least as early as the ninth millennium BC, it had come to embrace critical consideration of plants and animals and a degree of experimentation which brought the beginnings of agriculture. Some of the elements of slowly increasing complexity will also have been social and behavioural. They led, in this same area, to collective action to express transcendental ideas in the form of large-scale sculpture (most notably at the site of Göbekli Tepe in Anatolia) also in the ninth millennium BC. It led to villages, even towns (most notably Çatalhöyük in the same area).25

Proposing a series of steps can make the process seem logical, even inevitable, with the resulting patterns of life fitted for their purpose. But across the world the process did not follow the same course. The starkest contrast is provided by some groups, certain of the hunter-gatherers, who seemingly thwarted the processes of change and maintained a small-scale form of equilibrium more or less down to this day. It is, in a way, more difficult to explain this than to explain the runaway trajectory of development towards the complex forms of society, including the state, which has eventually swept up most of humanity. The northern Nile valley followed a course of development towards settlement and complexity which seems to have had much in common with what had begun much earlier in the eastern Mediterranean and Near East but may not have been quite the same. The move towards permanent settlement and a ‘Neolithic’ way of life did not commence until considerably later (seemingly towards the end of the fourth millennium BC) and then proceeded faster, suggesting that, ‘despite their geographical proximity, prehistoric societies in Africa and Asia followed very different trajectories to political centralization’.26

Two related aspects of Egypt can be picked up in the record of the early dynasties which might have given the local process of state formation a distinctive character. One was the prominence of local families – one might call them clans – whose male heads commanded the resources to build tombs which were the largest constructions in their area. These tombs accommodated cults of their human owners which, for a long time, seem to have drawn in more resources than were expended on the shrines of gods. The recognition that heads of families possessed something of the aura of divinity remained for a long time a feature of ancient Egypt. The other was that these cults were in turn supported by landed estates (or domains). The ownership of agricultural land and other means of production by leading patriarchal families lay at the heart of provincial life and became embedded in the symbolic geography of the country. Kings, as heads of the most important family of all, came in time to dominate the process, and domains remained an ineradicable institutional core to ancient Egypt.27

The prominence of land, especially as organized into domains, in the symbolism of Egypt in the early historic periods and the equal prominence of local families who evidently controlled it must reflect a long prior development in the Predynastic Period. Permanent occupation and working of the same tract of land triggered, through a powerful psychological process, a sense of territorial rights which came to be expressed in transcendental, symbolic terms which in turn created a peculiar sense of self-confidence within the communities concerned. It fostered in some a competitive urge, as they saw the possibility of obtaining an agricultural surplus for a more satisfactory life not through extra agricultural work on their own part, but by purchasing it or coercing it from others. The combination of ambition and mystic sense of identity put individuals and communities into potential competition with one another, to a greater extent than had happened before.

The course that this competition took in a landscape of almost unlimited agricultural potential, of the kind supplied by ancient Egypt, we can envisage through the analogy of game playing (Figures 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 are to help the reader to envisage the background). We can begin simply by imagining a board game of the ‘Monopoly’ kind. At the start we have a number of players of roughly equal potential. They compete (to some extent unconsciously) by exchanges of different commodities, and later more openly by conflict. The game proceeds by means of a combination of chances (e.g. environmental or locational factors) and personal decisions. The game unfolds slowly at first, in an egalitarian atmosphere and with the element of competition only latent, with the advantage swinging first to one player and then to another. But the initial equality amongst the players does not last indefinitely. An advantage that at the time may escape notice upsets the equilibrium enough to distort the whole subsequent progress of the game. As is the way with feedback into a system of interconnected units each of which has some degree of autonomy, it has a ‘knock-on’ effect out of all proportion to its original importance. A person on a winning streak finds that the advantageous position continues to reinforce itself. And so the game inexorably follows a trajectory towards a critical point where one player has accumulated sufficient assets to outweigh the threats posed by the other players and so that player becomes unstoppable. It becomes only a matter of time before that player wins by monopolizing the assets of all, although the inevitability of the win belongs only to a late stage in the game.



Figure 2.4Model landscape of Upper Egypt in the late Predynastic Period showing the likely environmental factors and local pattern of territorial and political expansion during the crucial phase of state formation.





Figure 2.5Left. Hypothetical map of the most important proto-states of Upper Egypt as they developed in the late Predynastic Period (see also Figure 2.6, p. 74). Right. Map of the Nile delta, showing early sites located through archaeology. The uneven distribution reflects, to some extent, the varying intensity of archaeological survey. It is generally more difficult, even in later historical periods, to envisage territorial boundaries in the delta, and no suggestions are made here. After Y. Tristant and B. Midant-Reynes, ‘The predynastic cultures of the Nile delta.’ In Teeter, Origins, 45–54, p. 45, Fig. 5.1.





Figure 2.6State formation. Left. A simple linear view. The processes of centralization are at work throughout the area but at different rates, so that different stages of development (arbitrarily reduced to three) had been reached by the time that the politically most developed centre, a proto-kingdom of Upper Egypt based at Hierakonpolis (Figure 2.8, p. 77), embarked on a military expansion (marked by arrows) which engulfed the whole of Egypt. Early in the First Dynasty the expansion continued into Nubia. Right. A more likely process, of complicated but now unrecoverable micro-history involving an ebb and flow of success for individual places, ‘jockeying for position’ but not always through violence. In the diagram the boundaries are those of territorial area as a proportion of the total land available for control and are guessed. The letters N (Nagada), H (Hierakonpolis), T (Tell el-Farkha), B (Buto/Tell el-Fara’in), M (Maadi) and A (Abydos) are introduced to give the diagram some topicality. The considerable shortening of the predynastic timescale arises from re-assessments of radiocarbon dates, http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/469/2159/20130395.



We can move closer to historical reality by imagining numerous games proceeding simultaneously, with winners promoted to join a progression of increasingly select games, where they dress in strange costumes and perform the acts of play with exaggerated formal gestures, the successful amongst them playing for ever higher stakes. We need also to correct the timescale, our view of who the ‘players’ really are. For the most part, so few significant changes of circumstance occur in any one real lifetime that each player is actually many generations treated as a unity. And in real life the games continue beyond the point of winning. Processes of decay and fission set in (in ancient Egypt they were the Intermediate Periods) and the games go on with different outcomes likely.

The attraction of this analogy is that it sets up in our imaginations a simple system with feedback loops. It concentrates attention on the essence of a basic process at work in history and draws one away from the temptation to explain events through single causes and the careers of individual actors or agents. The heroes (or demonic villains) have their part to play but only if the circumstances are favourable. Human societies large and small are made up of individuals whose behaviour is not completely predictable. Yet the result is not wholly randomized ‘background noise’. As with any complex adaptive system that allows a degree of free association and interaction of its constituent parts – the molecules of air in weather formations, for example – tiny variations can set up self-reinforcing consequences that grow in power out of all proportion to the starting conditions. Hurricanes suddenly appear. The process can also lead away from a level of integration already achieved. The rapid collapse of communist states in eastern Europe in the 1980s and 1990s and the equally rapid collapse of the market economy of the West in 1929 (and narrowly avoided in 2008) are striking modern examples of human social and economic systems running temporarily in reverse, towards dispersal of the energy that had previously gathered into centres of power.

Analogies have drawbacks. A misleading aspect of my imagined board game concerns the notion of rules. They stand for the limits which most people place on their behaviour and for the various restraints which systems impose. The study of history, however, including cases of recorded state formation, reveal that striking transformations often happen through the agency of unusually aggressive individuals who flout the rules, kill their rivals and seize everything. Charismatic yet ruthless leadership is, in a way, another ‘chance’ factor, but to make good progress it has to come at the right point in the game. The interaction between system and agent (the individual person) lies at the heart of much modern historical (and archaeological) study.

We can draw the inference, increasingly supported by archaeological findings, that all parts of Egypt where settled farming communities were early established should have advanced some way along the trajectory of play before its final and more theatrical stages, simply as a result of local internal processes. Everywhere villages, towns and agglomerations that were sometimes proto-states spread across the Nile valley and delta. There was thus a receptive background to the last phase of political unification. The final expansion of the winning kingdom was into a social and economic landscape in which the processes of state formation were already under way, although at different rates, and destined to be arrested (for a time) through the victory of one of them. The entire process – more or less the span of the cultural phases of Nagada I to IIIA – seems, to judge from recent radiocarbon dates, to have been accomplished within six to seven centuries (c. 3750–3085 BC).28





Foundations of ideology (1): local tradition


It is very difficult to penetrate the minds and the dealings of people during the Predynastic Period, before writing had appeared. But archaeology gives us two signals to inform us when the process of state formation was in progress. One is the physical drawing together of communities into larger settlements that become towns (where local elites would be based). This is the process of urbanization, which increases the scope for interaction amongst individuals in whom the great change in outlook is gradually taking place, involving an expanding sense of imagined community and symbolic association with a defined tract of land. The other is the appearance of the rewards of successful competitive interaction in the form of evidence for conspicuous consumption and display, fuelled by trade in raw materials and finished products, sometimes bringing in material from far away (lapis lazuli from the area of modern Afghanistan being one). The familiar picture of inequality, of a society of haves, have-nots and many in between, has arrived. In Egypt this reveals itself in characteristics that would mark society for centuries to come: larger and more richly equipped tombs for a minority, mostly a ruling elite, and signs of an emerging ideology of power. Two sites in Upper Egypt, Nagada and Hierakonpolis, exemplify both aspects.

The modern village of Nagada, 26 km downstream from Luxor, on the west bank, has given its name to a site more properly known as Ombos (Nubt).29 In Pharaonic times this was an important centre for the cult of Seth. Excavation and survey have revealed that a town had stood here from the Nagada II phase of predynastic culture (from c. 3500 BC, thus perhaps 400 years before the beginning of the First Dynasty), and that from the Eighteenth Dynasty or earlier it had possessed a small stone temple dedicated to Seth. The extent and importance of the town in historical times seem to have been far less than during the Predynastic Period when it is, in fact, one of the largest known sites in the Nile valley (Figure 2.7). This applies both to the area covered by a deposit of predynastic settlement debris, which included part of a walled town (the South Town) built of brick, and to a series of cemeteries. One of them, cemetery T, small and lying on a ridge just behind the town, has the hallmarks of a rulers’ cemetery. Some of the graves had been unusually large and well-furnished and, most unusually for the Predynastic Period, had been lined with sun-dried mud bricks. If we combine the archaeological picture of Nagada with the later position of Seth, we have a reasonably firm basis for claiming that at some time in the later Predynastic Period Nagada had been the capital of a small state.



Figure 2.7Nagada: centre of one of the first proto-states in the Nile valley. Note the extent of the predynastic town, with its substantial mud-brick enclosure and other buildings at the northern end. The town of the historic period occupied much less space, but probably made up for this in increased density of occupation. The temple of Seth, however, remained a building of modest size throughout ancient times. The huge predynastic cemetery behind the predynastic town is the largest to have survived from this period. Cemetery T, although small, contained unusually well-constructed tombs for rich burials, probably those for a ruling house of Nagada. The basic map is after W. Kaiser, MDAIK 19 (1963), 16, Abb. 3 (see also Petrie and Quibell, Naqada, Pl. IA); the inset map of the South Town is after Petrie and Quibell, Naqada, Pl. LXXXV, and that of tomb T5, ibid., Pl. LXXXII; the inset map of cemetery T itself is after B.J. Kemp, JEA 59 (1973), 39, Fig. 1, itself after Petrie and Quibell, Naqada, Pl. LXXXVI.



The association between a major early archaeological site (Nagada) and the cult of one of the gods most closely associated with kingship (Seth) is encouragingly neat. The second site, Hierakonpolis, also contains the essence of a similar association, this time with Horus, but of a more complex kind. The site itself lies in the most southerly region of Upper Egypt (Figure 2.8).30 Its importance is visible from two aspects of its archaeology. One is the sheer size of the spread of settlement debris of the Predynastic Period (at least 7 ha on the desert, and more now buried beneath modern fields). It includes an area of buildings (locality HK34) that had been protected by a palisade or wall of logs (over 50 m so far exposed) and a structure (locality HK29A) that might be the remains of a ceremonial area (see below, p. 90), not far from which was another stretch of wooden palisade (locality HK29B). The second aspect comprises unusually rich and well-constructed tombs. These were divided between at least two widely separated cemeteries: locality HK6 (see below, p. 90), and the other unnumbered and now lost to modern development. One tomb at the latter, no. 100, lined with mud brick and painted with a series of scenes, must have been the tomb of a late predynastic ruler.31 Although in style the painting appears alien in comparison with the formalized art of the dynastic period, we can recognize at least two motifs which survived into historic times: the victor smiting bound enemies with an upraised mace (Figure 2.18 (2), (3), p. 95), and the ruler standing beneath a simple awning, reminiscent of later scenes of the king seated during the jubilee or Sed-festival (see below, pp. 103–4).



Figure 2.8Hierakonpolis: cradle of Egyptian kingship. The base map shows the areas of predynastic settlement together with the cemeteries on the low desert, and the possible continuation of settlement beneath the present floodplain, on an ancient wadi outwash fan now buried beneath alluvium. In the midst of the latter area stands the walled town of Hierakonpolis of the dynastic period (see also Figure 3.9, p. 130, and Figure 5.2, p. 198), which represents, as at Nagada, a smaller but much denser settlement than its predynastic predecessor. The map is after R. Friedman, ‘The early royal cemetery at Hierakonpolis: an overview.’ In F. Raffaele, M. Nuzzolo and I. Incordino, eds, Recent Discussions and Latest Researches in Egyptology. Proceedings of the First Neapolitan Congress of Egyptology, Naples, June 18th–20th 2008, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 2010, 67–85, Fig. 1. The boundary between desert and fields as it was in the 1950s is taken from W. Kaiser, MDAIK 17 (1961), 6, Abb. 1. Early in the developmental sequence of kingship is tomb 100 (the ‘Decorated Tomb’), probably the tomb of an early king of Hierakonpolis of the Nagada IIC phase (c. 3400–3300 BC); at the other end is the fragment of Early Dynastic palace wall (c. 3000–2700 bc) and the huge mud brick ‘fort’ of the end of the Second Dynasty, both monuments of the aristocratic family which continued to occupy Hierakonpolis for several generations after the beginning of the First Dynasty. The Early Dynastic palace gateway and wall is a simplified version of Figure 2.9, p. 79. The ‘Main Deposit’ is a cache of objects of the late Predynastic/Early Dynastic Period and somewhat later, found beside the early temple enclosure of Horus. A detailed plan of the temple remains is given in Figure 3.9, p. 130. Amongst the material in the deposit were the Narmer Palette (Figure 2.10, p. 81) and Smaller Hierakonpolis (or Two-dog) Palette illustrated in Figure 2.15, p. 91.



In its general aspect Hierakonpolis resembles Nagada. Both sites also exhibit a pronounced shrinkage towards the end of the Predynastic Period (something visible at other sites of this time). This marks a fundamental change in the nature of settlement, bound up with the appearance of true urbanism in Egypt: the shift from sprawling low-density settlements to walled brick-built towns of higher population density. The city on the floodplain into which the low-density occupation of Hierakonpolis eventually coalesced has fared much better than Nagada. Destruction has been less intense, and much of the archaeological digging has been reasonably careful. One discovery has been a fragment of a sector of the Early Dynastic town, kept separate from the rest of the town by a distinctive, whitewashed enclosure wall marked at regular intervals with buttresses (Figure 2.9).32 Part of the way along it was broken by a projecting gateway decorated with a more elaborate style of panels and niches that seems to have been a symbol of rule (the heraldic device known as a serekh, meaning something like an ‘announcement’, which was used as a frame around the king’s Horus name, is derived from it, Figure 2.9, inset). It is an example of the way that architects sometimes use the scale and design of gateways to summarize the function and interior of the building as a whole. The gateway gave access to a maze-like settlement that seems to have surrounded a central space into which protruded a small brick platform, which could have been a throne dais, also with panelled sides provided with supports for wooden poles, perhaps for a canopy. The complex as a whole is a good candidate for being an early palace (for another, at Tell el-Fara’in, see Figure 2.13, p. 85), which turns out to have been a mud-brick compound, seemingly modest in the scale of its individual parts, and providing only limited separation between the huts of the king’s followers and the needs of ceremonial. It was in these surroundings that the products of high craftsmanship that we so admire were made and used, and the power of the early state was wielded.



Figure 2.9Hierakonpolis: a mud-brick ruler’s compound (or ‘palace’) of the Early Dynastic Period. The niched ‘palace wall and gateway’ appears also in Figure 2.8, p. 77, and Figure 5.2, p. 198. From front to back the ground level rose, so that the panelled platform was higher than the entrance. The small arrows mark upward slope. Omitted are various walls, mainly in the central open space, which seem to belong to an Old Kingdom town-phase which followed, although much of the rear was also buried in sand, whether naturally blown in or deliberately dumped is not clear. After W.A. Fairservis, The Hierakonpolis Project, Season January to May 1981. Excavation on the Kom el Gemuwia, Poughkeepsie, NY, Vassar College, 1986, Figures 7A and 7B; also K. Weeks, JARCE 9 (1971–2), unnumbered figure after p. 33. Inset. The substance of early monarchy: the name of King Djet of the First Dynasty (c. 2950 BC), written with the hieroglyphic sign of the cobra, appears above a stylized rendering of the distinctive architecture of the royal palace. The Egyptians called this a serekh, and a common modern term for the style is ‘palace-façade’. Standing above is a figure of the falcon god Horus, of whom each king was an embodiment. Funerary stela of King Djet, from his tomb at Abydos. After A. Vigneau, Encylopédie photographique de l’art: Les antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du Louvre, Paris, Editions “Tel”, 1935, 4.



Another portion of the early town to have survived is a site of what had been either the principal shrine or a site for royal ceremonial (described below, pp. 129–32 and Figure 3.9), within which, much later, quantities of objects from the late Predynastic/Early Dynastic Period had been buried, some of them of the finest craftsmanship, being no longer needed for display. The royal associations are plain. The deposits include statues, stone vases and other fragmentary inscribed pieces of one or more kings of the late Second Dynasty and, above all, the Narmer Palette (Figure 2.10). This remarkable object, carved in low relief on both sides of a palette of siltstone (‘slate’), portrays a victory over a northern enemy by a King Narmer from the very beginning of the First Dynasty. He wears the crowns of Upper and of Lower Egypt, and is faced on one side by a figure of the god Horus. The whole is decorated according to the full artistic canon of Pharaonic Egypt, displays certain of the key distinguishing marks of kings in its depictions of Narmer, and contains small groups of hieroglyphs. The Narmer Palette encapsulates certain of the essential elements of Pharaonic culture, and announces their presence at the very beginning of the dynastic sequence.



Figure 2.10The Narmer Palette, 63 cm high, is a slab of siltstone (or ‘slate’) carved on both sides with scenes commemorating the reign of a king with the Horus name of Narmer (written at the top in the ‘palace-façade’ rectangles), who must have lived immediately prior to the beginning of the First Dynasty and may well have been the last and greatest of the kings of Dynasty 0 of Hierakonpolis. On the left side, Narmer, wearing the white crown of Upper Egypt and other insignia of early monarchy, stands with upraised mace about to smite a kneeling captive. Beside the captive’s head a group of hieroglyphs gives his name as Wash. The design above probably conveys the supplementary message that the Horus-king (the falcon) has won a victory over an enemy based in the delta, of whom Wash was presumably the ruler. Behind Narmer is a high-ranking figure who carries the king’s sandals. On the right side, the images of conquest in the top and bottom registers are balanced by the central design which expresses harmony, in the form of the intertwined and captive mythical animals. In the top register Narmer, now wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt and accompanied by two men of high and distinctive rank, walks to inspect two rows of bound and decapitated enemies. The party is preceded by four bearers of standards of distinctive shape. These standards were later called the ‘Followers of Horus’, or ‘The gods who follow Horus’. Whatever their origin, by the time of Narmer they were clearly part of the array of symbols which contributed to the unique aura of kingship. The symbols above the decapitated enemies cannot be interpreted with confidence. In the lowest register the conquering power of the king, symbolized by a bull, is directed against a walled and fortified town. The drawings of the palette are after J.E. Quibell, ZÄS 36, 1898, Taf. XII, XIII; Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, Pl. XXIX; Petrie, Palettes, Pls J, K; V. Davies, Nekhen News 10 (1998), 22.



Hierakonpolis became the home of one form of the god Horus, called Horus of Nekhen (Hierakonpolis). Aside from his connection with kingship, Horus (and to a lesser extent his female counterpart, the goddess Hathor) was, in historic times, an important figure in the Egyptians’ speculative universe, having widespread immanence in specific local forms. He was thus, at one and the same time, universal and local, although how far his universality was recognized in predynastic times is difficult to judge. The name Horus means ‘The One on High’, and as such he appears in a boat astride a pair of wings in the sky, above a second Horus figure surmounting a king’s name (Figure 2.11 (2)). Later thinking located Horus more particularly at the horizon, and associated him with the sun god Ra at the time of sunrise, in the combination Ra-Horakhty (‘Ra-Horus of the horizon’). Early representations (Figure 2.11) also stress a violent aspect and show him wielding weapons – a spike, a harpoon, a mace-and-shield or a hoe (for hacking down walls) – an aspect which survived into much later times as ‘Horus, avenger of his father’ (Osiris) and ‘Min-Horus, the victorious’, the object of a cult at Abydos. These varied associations illustrate the way that Egyptian thinking created networks of meaning that spread out from an initial name and image and followed pathways of open association.



Figure 2.11The dual aspects of Horus: as heavenly power, wielding instruments of destruction, and as earthly ruler. Nos (1), (4) and (5) are figures of Horus wielding a spike or harpoon. On (3) (left) he also wields a mixture of mace, shield and hoe. Towards the right side of (3) the Horus name of the king, Aha (‘the fighter’), written with a mace-and-shield hieroglyph, is borne as an emblem by the figure of Horus. In (2) and (3) the ubiquitous nature of Horus as heavenly power is symbolized by a boat which, in (2), is also borne aloft by a pair of wings. The Horus name of the king commemorated on (2), Djet, is the same as that depicted in Figure 2.9, inset. (1) is a reconstructed figure on the side of one of Coptos colossi (see Figure 3.11, p. 134). (2) is an ivory comb, length 8 cm, from Abydos. After R. Engelbach, ZÄS 65 (1930), 115–16; Tiradritti, Cairo Museum, 44. (3) is the top register of one of a pair of ivory year-labels from Nagada, width 5.6 cm. After V. Vikentiev ASAE 33 (1933), Pl. II; Tiradritti, Cairo Museum, 42. A companion piece fills in the missing area of water beneath the central boat, J. Garstang, ZÄS 42 (1905), 62, Fig. 3.



In historic times local forms of Horus (and Hathor) appear both within Egypt and in certain foreign territories under Egyptian control. ‘Horus Lord of Hebenu’ was, for example, the presiding divinity at the town of Hebenu in Middle Egypt (the archaeological site of Zawiyet Sultan or Zawiyet el-Meitin); ‘Horus Lord of Buhen’ and ‘Horus Lord of Miam’ were cults set up by the Egyptians at two of their later fortresses in Nubia, Buhen and Miam (modern Aniba). Two more of these topographically defined Horus gods appear on the El-Lisht throne bases: ‘Horus, Lord of Mesen’ and ‘Horus, the Behdetite’, but here, as we have seen, they stand for Lower Egypt. Yet the first time that ‘Horus of Behdet’ appears, on a carved stone panel beneath the Step Pyramid (c. 2570 BC), the symbolic connections are actually with Upper Egypt.33 There has to be the strong suspicion that the Lower Egyptian association of Horus is the product of rationalization, taking place during the dynastic period and reflecting an interest in creating a geographically comprehensive picture of how elemental power was distributed across the Egyptians’ world. The celestial Horus, who also embodied each king, was perfectly fitted to this mobile role.

Hierakonpolis remained important during the Old Kingdom, becoming a walled town of densely packed buildings.34 Thereafter it seems to have declined as a centre of settlement, although its temple remained in use and was rebuilt in the Middle and New Kingdoms and perhaps in the Ptolemaic Period. It may have exemplified the imbalance between size of later temple and size of adjacent settlement known from other places (especially some in New Kingdom Nubia). Its place as a major focus of urban life on the west bank in this part of Egypt was taken over by Edfu, 15 km upstream (incidentally illustrating how the competition between towns and their elites that had given rise to the early state remained active long afterwards). The archaeological record here reveals a place of negligible significance in the early periods.35 Only with the late Old Kingdom, perhaps the Fifth Dynasty, does a walled town seem to have appeared, which then grew, reaching a maximum extent in the First Intermediate Period. The rise of Edfu as a regional centre at the expense of Hierakonpolis led to one of several outbreaks of local internal warfare in the early part of the First Intermediate Period. In the course of this, Edfu was for a time taken over by the governor of the Hierakonpolis region, a man named Ankhtify who, to judge from the location of his tomb at Moʾalla, lived not at Hierakonpolis itself but 50 km downstream, near the northern border of the nome (province). By the early Middle Kingdom, a Horus cult at Edfu had become prominent, remaining so until Ptolemaic and Roman times and attracting the resources for the monumental sandstone temple of that late era that still stands almost intact. The place names Behdet and Mesen, primarily Lower Egyptian names, came to be used as synonyms for Edfu, a recognition of its symbolic status. The changing mythical role of Horus exemplifies how traditions, which are bound to be inventions in themselves, are moulded and reshaped as history moves on.

Much of our knowledge of ancient Egypt is the result of huge labours – the collection of information and its interpretation – that gathered momentum in the late nineteenth century AD. For many topics within Egyptology, progress now takes the form of reinterpretation of sources that have been known for a long time. One of the biggest exceptions is the prehistory and early history of the Nile delta. Well into the second half of the twentieth century little was known of its early archaeology beyond a few sites situated on its desert margins (principally the early Neolithic village of Merimda Beni Salama on the west, and the town of Maadi on the east, the latter barely in the delta and part of a probable spread of settlements in the area that eventually coalesced into the city of Memphis across the river on the west). What constitutes modern field archaeology, its multiple techniques for investigating the ground and the professional standards of recording and interpretation, has nowhere in Egypt been demonstrated to greater effect than in surveys and excavations across the flat landscape of the delta, particularly its eastern part.36 For Upper Egypt (or at least its southern part, south roughly of Abydos) it still seems to make sense to develop a narrative of explanation that combines some of the elements of the mythology of historic times with archaeological evidence, all the time being aware of how readily traditions are invented (including myths of origin). So far, this chapter has followed this path. In the case of Lower Egypt, however, this approach barely works at all. Archaeology now offers a wealth of information on early settlements and their cemeteries that creates a narrative of cultural development that stands on its own with fewer points of contact with later historic traditions (as they have survived). It is notable that one site which must have been important in its time (Tell el-Farkha) has no ancient name that we can give to it, and the same is true for others identified by archaeology in the delta.

Early settlements spread across the full extent of the delta, a width of some 400 km in the north (Figure 2.5, p. 73). Their material culture shows sufficient similarity to justify a single term of reference: Lower Egyptian culture (though Maadi or Maadi-Buto culture are terms that have also been used). They seem to show a broadly similar course of development. Built structures, which must have been mostly dwellings, were of wooden posts and wattle-and-daub screens (as was to be found also at Upper Egyptian sites). The dead were buried in individual graves in separate cemeteries, along with modest amounts of burial goods. Material culture, especially pottery and flintwork, shows affinities with the contemporary Chalcolithic culture of Palestine, though the wider implications of this are not well understood. Lower Egyptian culture seems to be broadly contemporary with the earlier part of the Nagada sequence of Upper Egypt. Then, beginning seemingly in the Nagada IIC–D phase (c. 3350 BC), the way of life at these places changed. Mud-brick buildings of larger size and greater regularity of plan appeared, along with pottery and other kinds of objects that belong to the material culture traditions of Upper Egypt, as defined by the site of Nagada. At two of these sites, Tell el-Farkha and Tell Ibrahim Awad, groups of figurines have been discovered that are Lower Egyptian counterparts (though with stylistic differences) to groups from Upper Egypt that represent a tradition that began towards the end of the Predynastic Period (Dynasty 0) and continued for some time afterwards (they are discussed further in the next chapter). Amongst those from Tell el-Farkha are two of standing human males, figures of authority, originally of wood overlaid with gold foil and with inlaid eyes of lapis lazuli (Figure 2.12).



Figure 2.12Early heroes from the eastern Nile delta, perhaps rulers. Originally of wood covered with gold leaf, they come from the Nagada IIIB phase of the town site at Tell el-Farkha but could have been made earlier. The height of the larger is c. 60 cm and of the smaller c. 30 cm. The gold had been fixed in place with many gold rivets, 4 mm long. The inlaid eyes are of lapis lazuli, originally with pupils and eyebrows of another material (now lost). A group of beads was found lying over the larger figure and possibly represents a necklace. After Chłodnicki et al., Tell el-Farkha, 203, Fig. 3; and photographs by Kemp. The pieces are in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo. Drawings by A. Boyce.



During this time (within the period of Dynasty 0) it is likely that the whole territory of historic Egypt, from the northern coast of the delta to the First Cataract at Elephantine, had become a single kingdom, under the rule of kings whose family base was in southern Upper Egypt. Another important site of Lower Egyptian culture is Tell el-Faraʾin where, in later times, the city of Buto was to be found, centre of the cult of the cobra goddess Wadjit, a protectress of the king. Early in the First Dynasty a large, carefully laid-out building with an intricate internal plan was constructed of mud bricks that attracts the term ‘palace’ (Figure 2.13, and see Chapter 5, pp. 195, 215). This is the most obvious connection between a Lower Egyptian place and later myths of kingship. The ‘palace’ approximately corresponds in time with complex mud-brick architecture at Tell el-Farkha (Figure 3.7, p. 126), on a part of the site which was subsequently abandoned.



Figure 2.13Plan of a building at Tell el-Faraʾin (Buto) in the north-western delta. It dates to the Early Dynastic Period. The interlocking pattern of rooms and corridors is a feature of urban architecture of the time, continuing through the Middle Kingdom (Chapter 5). The size, elaboration and complexity of the building suggest that it served as a centre of authority and administration, and is thus entitled to be called a ‘palace’. After U. Hartung, ‘Recent investigations at Tell el-Faraʾin/Buto.’ In Midant-Reynes and Tristant, Origins, 2012, Fig. 13; Moeller, Urbanism, 106, Fig. 4.32. Above. In later centuries Buto (as well as Hierakonpolis) was thought to be the home of ‘souls’ (royal ancestral spirits), here shown as hawk-headed beings, labelled ‘Souls of Pe’, one of the names of Buto. After E. Naville, The Festival-Hall of Osorkon II in the Great Temple of Bubastis (1887–1889), London, EEF, 1892, Pl. IX.6.



In the process of state formation, societies pass through an unstable period of local competition led by elites, some of whom are more successful than others in enlarging their territory and the number of places made subject to their control. They reward themselves with more desirable goods and with distinctive marks of their elevated status, including more distinctive residences and ceremonies that allow their power to be paraded before others. A process of this kind must lie behind the growing evidence for early settlement in the delta. The process continued to be played out even after a single kingdom was created. This is evident in the decline and disappearance of some of these settlements after the Early Dynastic Period, as well as written and artistic evidence for a conflict between south and north at the end of the Second Dynasty (c. 2600 BC; Figure 2.18 (4), (5), p. 95).

The discovery of so much evidence in the delta where, until the late twentieth century AD, there was so little also highlights that archaeology has so far failed to locate what ought to be a wealth of early sites on the floodplain of Middle Egypt, given that it is a particularly fertile part of the Nile valley. The most likely explanations for what looks increasingly like an anomalous gap in knowledge are that early settlement sites are buried more deeply below the present floodplain and that less intensive archaeological survey has been carried out. On the map of Figure 2.6, left (p. 74), I have assumed that settlements and their political counterparts extended unbroken through Middle Egypt.

Throughout the dynastic period, with only isolated exceptions (of which the most conspicuous occur in the Second Intermediate Period; see above, pp. 41–3), the visible culture of Egypt was more or less uniform from Elephantine to the Mediterranean. But predynastic Lower Egyptian culture represents a period of perhaps four centuries when this had not yet come about, and aspects of culture at places in the north seem to have been different. Uniformity came about through the northward expansion of the Nagada culture of which the towns of Nagada and Hierakonpolis were important centres. Some commentators stress the role of trade in promoting uniformity and also the particular attraction to people living in Upper Egypt that access to trade routes that connected the delta to Palestine and the Near East would have had, drawing them to migrate northwards. Cultural differences notwithstanding, a settled farming way of life seems to have developed in the north at least as early as it did in the south. The same competitive processes leading to the emergence of local elites must have begun to come into play there as well, losing out only in the later stages of disequilibrium.

The significance of this difference is hard to evaluate. So much that makes up culture and identity is not expressed directly through material remains and so leaves the archaeologist of prehistory with little that is firm to grasp. The ability to organize and to fight is not, for example, wholly to be measured in how well villages are constructed and how ornate are the pots. Thucydides in the fifth century BC made the point tellingly in a contrast between Athens and Sparta, both great powers, yet the latter ‘simply a collection of villages, in the ancient Hellenic way’. He invites the reader to imagine Sparta reduced to ruins: ‘I think that future generations would, as time passed, find it very difficult to believe that the place had really been as powerful as it was represented to be.’37 The archaeological evidence from Buto suggests that palace culture, if such it was, arrived only with the First Dynasty, but that does not answer the Thucydides paradox: that power and display are not wholly dependent upon one another. We are not entitled to judge from the modesty of material remains that Buto and other Lower Egyptian places had not previously been sufficiently organized to engage in warfare.

This brings us back to the topic of identity. In the south, the material culture of Nagada had much in common with that of northern Nubia, its neighbour, and the peoples of the two areas were closely similar at the skeletal level. Yet we know, because the difference persisted into historic times, that the two societies were divided by language and that Egyptians of later periods saw Nubians as a different people. To the north the distinction, at the level of archaeology, between the Nagada and Lower Egyptian cultures seems to be larger. At the same time, it is possible to trace something of a continuum in material culture from the eastern delta across northern Sinai and into southern Palestine, something that persisted into the Early Dynastic Period. There might not yet have developed that sense of Egyptian identity that is a feature of the Pharaonic periods. People who lived in these communities of the north and the south may have identified more closely with those who lived in neighbouring communities, in a chain that extended beyond the frontiers that were only later established and maintained, particularly those of Sinai/Palestine, Libya and Nubia. In a world of multiple local identities, if you lived in the north-eastern delta, the places in northern Sinai might have seemed as culturally close to you as those deeper into the delta to the west and south.

This leads on to a question that cannot be answered. Did the people of the delta speak the same language as that of the southerners? In our own era, experience over the past few centuries of the expansion of cultures that have become dominant is that language is a ready victim in the reduction of cultural diversity. There is, I would have thought, some justification for holding that the separate identity that the north seems initially to have had was expressed not only in material culture but in its own language. The conspicuous ‘Egyptianness’ of the historic periods, which was later so easily able to absorb outsiders, might itself have been the result of the northward expansion of an Upper Egyptian identity in which language played a key role. We are unlikely ever to be able to explore this possibility further, but should retain it as an option.

Late in the Predynastic Period a third major player emerged in Upper Egypt, represented through archaeology by the site of Abydos (Figure 2.14).38 Throughout the Pharaonic periods Abydos remained a town on the edge of the desert, one of those places that coalesced from several tiny settlements at the end of the Predynastic Period. From the Middle Kingdom onwards it was nationally famous for its cult of the god Osiris, whose tomb was thought to be in the desert behind Abydos and was a place of pilgrimage for any who wished to enhance the prospects of resurrection after death. It seems never to have served, however, as a regional centre. That position, in historic times, was held by the city of This, which seems to have lain close to the river, probably in the vicinity of the modern town of Girga. The local inhabitants of predynastic times used a number of cemeteries on the desert edge. But further out across the sand, at the very place which was later seen as containing the tomb of Osiris, a separate cemetery developed (in modern times named the Umm el-Qaʾab, ‘mother of pots’, on account of the vessels left by pilgrims of later periods), beginning in the Nagada I phase of the Predynastic Period and culminating with the actual tombs of the kings of the First Dynasty. As revealed by excavation, it is a classic demonstration both of long continuity (potentially 800 years to the end of the First Dynasty) and of the emergence of social and economic disparity, in this case the emergence of the people who would become the rulers of all Egypt and the founders of the dynastic state. I will return to the architecture of the funerary monuments of the Early Dynastic kings at Abydos later in the chapter. For the moment we will concentrate on the area of the Umm el-Qaʾab where the tombs of their immediate predecessors were located, designated Cemetery U.



Figure 2.14Abydos and Egypt’s early kings. Superimposed on the sketch map of Abydos is the plan of tomb U-j of ‘Dynasty 0’ and of some of its contents. (1) Ivory sceptre of office (originally painted red). Height 33.5 cm. (2) Four ivory labels incised with early hieroglyphic signs. (3) and (4) Two examples of the approximately 200 imported Palestinian pottery storage jars (decorated with red-brown lines) found in position in the tomb. After Dreyer, Umm El-Qaab I, Abb. 2 (plan), 147, Abb. 85 (sceptre); 122, Abb. 77 (labels); and 103, Abb. 66 (pots). For the Shunet el-Zebib and other adjacent enclosures, see the sources cited in note 51. The distance between the ancient town of Abydos and the Umm el-Qaʾab is c. 2.5 km.



Mostly it had been badly disturbed by the time it was investigated by archaeologists, and the contents of the individual tombs to some extent scattered. But the earliest of the recognizable names of kings come from here, and they form a sequence estimated to have numbered 12, which extends before the start of the later king lists and our own sense that Egyptian history had begun. The custom has grown up of referring to these rulers collectively as forming ‘Dynasty 0’, as a way of marking their kingly status in relation to the unassailable numbered list of dynasties given to us by Manetho in the early third century BC. One tomb (its modern designation U-j), better preserved than most, provides a particularly valuable point of reference (see Figure 2.14).39 Its 12 brick-lined chambers were intended to house a richer burial than its predecessors, one of the chambers still containing over 400 wine jars. Left over from the debris of robbery were the remains of an ivory ceremonial sceptre and 173 small bone and ivory labels originally attached to other commodities to identify them by means of groups of signs. Though hard to read with confidence they must count as the earliest use of hieroglyphic writing that we can recognize.

The owner of tomb U-j lived at a time (in cultural terms Nagada IIIA2, thus c. 3300 BC) when Nagada culture had spread across the delta. Competition for supremacy amongst the rulers of Egypt’s proto-states had probably entered a phase when it seemed feasible to aim to become the ruler of the whole territory of the north and the south. Did this man achieve this position? Was he from a long-resident line of local rulers who were in the process of enlarging their territory, or was he one of the rulers of Hierakonpolis who, having extended their territory northwards to include an existing cemetery on already sacred ground, were now taking advantage of the opportunity to locate their own tombs there, too? Related to this is the equally difficult question as to whether there is any real historic connection between the choice of this piece of desert for a cemetery by a royal family, and the selection by later generations of one of the tombs (of King Djer, c. 3050 BC according to radiocarbon dates) as supposedly the tomb of Osiris?40 For our present concerns we should note that yet another fundamental aspect of Egyptian myth, intertwined about kingship and the tension between Horus and Seth, has a strong connection with an archaeological site in Upper Egypt central to the emergence of the Egyptian state.

In the principal king lists (Saqqara excepted) the earliest name is Menes and his should be one of the tombs on the Umm el-Qaʾab.41 As first king of the lists Menes has tended to attract more attention in modern than in ancient times. For there appears to have been no special body of legend attached to him. In the Ramesseum (the mortuary temple of Rameses II) a short list of all the kings of the New Kingdom down to Rameses II is prefaced first by King Menthuhetep II of the Eleventh Dynasty, victor of the civil war of the First Intermediate Period, and before him by Menes. But we cannot be sure if this reflects any special knowledge of Menes as the first unifier, or is a deduction from the simple fact that his was the first name in other lists. The Saqqara king list actually omits him, starting its enumeration a few reigns further on. This is particularly surprising in view of the fact that Herodotus records a story that Min (as he calls him) founded the city of Memphis, to which Saqqara belonged as the principal cemetery. Manetho has nothing special to say at all. His entry for Menes reads: ‘He made a foreign expedition and won renown, but was carried off by a hippopotamus.’42

Menes belongs to the final stage in state formation. One new aspect of the dynastic state was the keeping of written annals: brief hieroglyphic notes on the most significant events in a royal year. The Palermo Stone was compiled from such documents. These records seem to have commenced with the period of Manetho’s First Dynasty (the earliest belonging to the reign of Narmer himself, he of the famous palette, Figure 2.10, p. 81). This may have been sufficient reason for later generations to start their lists with Menes (to be identified with either Narmer or Aha, his likely successor): he was simply the first of the kings to have a reign properly documented by annals. I mentioned earlier that the Turin king list ventured beyond Menes, with groups of unnamed ‘spirits’ or ‘devotees’ placed between Menes and the gods. The Palermo Stone provides us with a clue as to the origin of this tradition. Along the very top of the stone ran a line of little rectangular boxes which contained not the events of the passing years but simply names plus little pictures of seated kings. On the main fragment, they wear the crown that, in historic times, had come to signify the kingship of Lower Egypt. On another, in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, they wear the double crown. These names must belong to prehistoric kings about whom nothing more was known by the Fifth Dynasty, when the Palermo Stone was engraved. When grouped as ‘spirits’ by the even later Turin king-list compiler they made a suitable transition between gods and real kings with recorded reigns. For us there is the temptation to take them as the kings of Dynasty 0, in charge of several territories – the proto-states – throughout Egypt. The noteworthy fact that on the Cairo fragment some of these little figures wear the double crown means also that the Egyptians themselves did not, at least in the Fifth Dynasty, see Menes as the very first king of a unified country. If it is a reliable tradition (and it is a big ‘if’), it fits in with a more protracted political history of formation of a unified state, such as the archaeological and artistic record implies.43





Foundations of ideology (2): the containment of unrule


State formation seems often, perhaps normally, to involve violence, although violence against other human beings was not something that only appeared at this stage in human development. As already noted (p. 49), many of the people buried in the late Palaeolithic cemetery at Gebel Sahaba several millennia earlier had suffered weapon injuries. At the heart of state formation is dispossession, of land and of status. The feeling of collective identity is injured by subordination. The history of large parts of the world (whether documented by written sources or not) is a palimpsest of dispossession and subordination. The consequence can be resentment that lasts for centuries expressed through sporadic violence. And dispossession goes on. As I write, regular news bulletins report on the attempt at state formation in Syria and northern Iraq by people of complex loyalties but primarily to an idea, the re-creation of a Khalifate. Without extreme violence it would have made no progress in taking territory and it has, in response, provoked violent retaliation. Although its weapons are modern, it chooses to behead its enemies and others of whom it disapproves – a practice which, in Egypt, we first meet on the Narmer Palette, where one of the symbols of the king’s position as supreme leader is rows of beheaded men (Figure 2.10, p. 81; in Figure 2.16, above, p. 92, the beheaded figures are enemies of the gods). One wonders to what extent ancient Egyptian history incorporates a largely invisible river of resentments.

Violent conflict is one of the themes of a range of delicately carved low relief scenes in soft stone and ivory which must have originated from the courts or elite households of predynastic Upper Egypt. They contain their own symbolism. Some elements survived into the iconography of historic times, but we cannot be sure if the values and meaning were modified in the course of transmission. More seriously for our chances of correct understanding is the absence of many of the most distinctive features of the iconography of historic times. Thus almost the whole of the later iconography of kingship is missing, at least until the very end of the sequence of the objects in question. The end is represented by the Narmer Palette and a few comparable carvings (most notably the king Scorpion mace head, also from Hierakonpolis). As objects – commemorative palettes and large mace heads – they belong to the world of the late Predynastic Period. But in their content and style the last pieces are the products of a great codifying of traditions that took place immediately prior to the beginning of the First Dynasty. At this time, and building on the work of the creators of earlier commemorative pieces, creative individuals thought out or invented a remarkably homogeneous intellectual system. It embraced hieroglyphic writing, formal commemorative art of the kind that became one of the hallmarks of Pharaonic Egypt, and a basic iconography of kingship and rule. It was, in total, not quite the Egyptian culture of later centuries. Particularly in formal architecture and its meaning the Early Dynastic Period acquired a tradition of its own which was subsequently, during the early Old Kingdom, subject to a second major re-codification of form and meaning. But despite later reworkings the meaning of Early Dynastic culture is to some extent accessible to us because of the wealth of later material in the same style. This is far less true of predynastic material. The process of conscious, academic codification that laid down the initial rules by which we now interpret Egyptian culture also acts as a barrier to our understanding of the material that had been produced by previous generations, during the late Predynastic Period. Another way of looking at what happened is to see it as the ‘evolution of simplicity’, in which potential design alternatives were dropped in favour of variations within a single design style. The process is illustrated by a study of Early Dynastic writing, which shows that it utilized a far larger corpus of signs than that of later Pharaonic hieroglyphic script. ‘As a result of a thoroughgoing process of redefinition, half of the corpus was filtered out before the Old Kingdom.’44

One of the most prominent aspects of these decorated objects is the use of animals, both real and imagined, as allegories or proxies of the forces of life (Figure 2.15). The species are primarily of the deserts, not those from which the Egyptians later developed animal cults. Sometimes they occur alone, sometimes they share a scene with human figures. They engage in violence, the predatory strong attacking the weak, or are at rest. Prominent is a harmonious pairing and balancing of particularly fierce beasts: wild dogs, lions and long-necked mythological creatures. They are always quadrupeds, and in no respect do they show a resemblance to the figures of Horus and Seth. One example occurs on the Narmer Palette, and here the context implies that the paired beasts stand for a political harmony. The theme generally conveys powerfully the intention on the part of the artist to depict an ultimate, attainable harmonious framework to a turbulent world, the framework in the form of reconciled opposites, portrayed in allegorical form. An alternative depiction of order, again using animals to symbolize raw, natural life-forms, was by peaceful processions of animals, arranged in horizontal rows one above another. Sometimes they are accompanied by a more heterogeneous group of ‘shepherding’ figures that must symbolize a form of control. (They comprise the hunting-dog and lion, catfish, a star or rosette sign, and (with some doubt attached) a stork and a serpent.) Sometimes, too, the orderliness was emphasized by using parallel horizontal base lines on which the animals stand. In these cases we can see the beginnings of the division of artistic space into defined horizontal bands (registers) that was to become such a distinctive feature of Pharaonic art. The use of animals as an allegory of untamed chaotic life-force survived into the temple art of historic times, most notably in scenes of king and gods capturing wild birds (and in the Graeco-Roman Period animals as well) in a huge clap-net, where texts and context make it clear that the symbolism is of the containment of disorder (Figure 2.16, below).45



Figure 2.15The containment of unrule. Left. The smaller Hierakonpolis (or Two-dog) Palette, reverse side. It portrays life allegorically as an unequal conflict between the strong and the weak, seemingly animated by the flute-playing presence of the Seth-like figure in the bottom left corner. The pre-eminent predators are the facing lions at the top who are, however, not far from a point of equilibrium in which their powers are mutually balancing. This ultimate point of harmony is hinted at by the framing figures of the fierce hunting dogs. Right. The actual point of arrested conflict is shown as having been achieved in two other scenes in which the facing lions are now held apart by a male human figure, perhaps a king. The upper example is from tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis (see also Figure 2.8, p. 77); the lower is on the Gebel el-Arak knife handle. Photographs of the palette are in Petrie, Palettes, Pl. F; Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Pl. XXVIII; Mellink and Filip, Frühe Stufen, Taf. 208. For the Gebel el-Arak knife handle see Mellink and Filip, Frühe Stufen, Taf. 210; Ancient Egypt 1917, 29, Fig. 4.





Figure 2.16Above. The theme (containment of unrule) transferred to a cosmic plane of cyclic rebirth in which the triumphant voyager is the sun god, here passing in his barque through one of the hours of the night. In the upper register are three beheaded figures identified as ‘the enemies of Osiris’, and three prostrate figures labelled ‘the rebels’. In the lower register the demon of evil, the giant serpent Apopis, is butchered. Part of the Seventh Division of the ‘Book of What is in the Otherworld’ as painted on the walls of the tomb of King Tuthmosis III in the Valley of the Kings at Thebes (c. 1430 bc). The cursive hieroglyphic text has been omitted. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Part I, New York, Pantheon Books for Bollingen Foundation, 1954, Fig. 80. Below. The same theme illustrated by simple allegory from nature. Disorder is symbolized by the wild fowl of the papyrus marshes. They are trapped and therefore constrained by a fowler’s clap-net operated by King Rameses II and the gods Horus (left) and Khnum (right). Great Hypostyle Hall at Karnak, inner face of the south wall. See also Frankfort, Kingship, Fig. 14.



The artistic evidence, considered in isolation, could be the product of distant observation and imaginative composition. Archaeological evidence from Hierakonpolis, however, brings us to a world in which wild animals were caught, dragged or led to places in or near the town, and there slaughtered. For the artists (and for everyone else), the noise, smells, danger and bloodshed may have been a vivid experience. The evidence comes from two separate sites. At cemetery HK6 (Nagada I–IIB), an elaborate group of graves and associated structures included pit graves for animals, buried singly or in groups (Figure 2.17).46 The animals included elephants, hippopotamuses, a crocodile, wild bulls (aurochs), a leopard, a hartebeest, baboons, cats, dogs, cattle and goats, thus a mixture of the wild and the tame. This suggests a way of celebrating the supremacy of the ruler over the near-uncontrollable animating force of life. It was a practice which survived at least into the early First Dynasty, for the tomb of King Aha at Abydos incorporated the burials of at least seven mostly young lions.47



Figure 2.17Hierakonpolis locality HK6. Above. General map of the site, the central part of which is shown in more detail below. Below. The central area of excavation of site HK6. The area to the right is largely occupied by pit graves, many of which had been marked by enclosing fences anchored within narrow trenches. The area to the left, by contrast, contains few burials. Instead the space was largely occupied by roofed buildings constructed of wooden posts and surrounding screens. At the bottom runs a long trench for anchoring a continuous fence that seems to have surrounded the central part of the site. Many of the burial pits were for animals, as labelled. The site was in use over a long time, covering the entire sequence of Nagada phases and on into the Early Dynastic Period. For the location of the site at Hierakonpolis, see Figure 2.8 (p. 77). After Friedman, in Teeter, Origins, 37, Fig. 4.6; Friedman, in Patch, Dawn, 86, Fig. 17; R. Friedman, JARCE 45 (2009), 82, Fig. 3.



The second site (locality HK29A, Figure 3.19, p. 150) takes us to the heart of the town itself. As will be described in a little more detail in the next chapter (p. 149), an elongated space with curving ends, surfaced with packed mud and given a fixed perimeter, variously of timber and bricks, has proved to be a rich source of finds, many from pits dug around the periphery. Artefacts included flint implements, some of them fine borers for beads, debris from the making or sharpening of flint blades, and many pottery jars, perhaps drinking-vessels. The animal bones, numbered in many thousands, represented cattle, sheep, goats and large fish, but a proportion were from wild and sometimes dangerous animals, amongst them crocodiles, soft-shell turtles, hippopotamuses, gazelles, barbary sheep and various carnivores. Collectively the material suggests butchery and feasting, drawing on animals that were raised and on others that had been caught in the wild. At both Hierakonpolis localities, we are presented with abundant evidence for how the ceremonies that surrounded and supported human rule were reinforced with the drama of subduing and killing animals.

The wall painting in tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis (Nagada IIC phase, c. 3400/3300 BC; Figure 2.8, p. 77), located in a separate cemetery, provides a broader context for the struggle to maintain order over unrule. It portrays a symbolic universe in which the central element is a line of boats. This is an early example of the prominent use of the boat as symbol that was to have a long history in Egypt. Some societies (including those of Europe from Roman times onwards) have found in the horse a powerful image of authority, which elevates and almost enshrines the rider. The Egyptians used the boat, often decked out in a distinctive way, to achieve the same effect, sometimes turning it quite literally into a shrine (see below, pp. 248–9). In the Hierakonpolis tomb the boats appear as unassailable points of order and authority, conveying also the sense of passage through time. One of them, with its depiction of a ruler seated beneath an awning and protected by female guardian figures, is specifically associated with rule. On all sides are the threats from manifestations of raw life-force, some as desert animals and others in human form. The threats are countered by vignettes of capture or defeat. The same elemental struggle waged during a perpetual boat-voyage through time lies behind some of the much later scenes painted in the tombs of New Kingdom Pharaohs at Thebes. But by this time fifteen centuries or more of intellectual and artistic development had transformed the simple real landscape of chaos into an imagined Otherworld of dangers represented by invented demons (Figure 2.16). Real wooden boats also came to be an element of the royal and elite tomb constructions of the Early Dynastic Period (see pp. 98, 100, and Figure 2.14, p. 87).

We are entitled to ask: what was the source of the disorder that made itself felt at this time? The culture of the first settled communities in the eastern Mediterranean and Near East, of far longer duration than the Egyptian Predynastic Period, also expressed, through art and in the remains of feasting, the wild, dangerous, aggressive dimensions of the domain of nature.48 The Egyptians of the Predynastic Period thus, to some extent, occupied an imaginative world that was common to people over a far wider area, all of whom felt that they lived on the edge of continued existence, never far from being overwhelmed by a world of animate force which was more or less outside their control. The more successful of these communities, the incipient and actual proto-states, had also become engaged in more organized conflicts over territory, the conflicts which would lead to the birth of the Egyptian state. The urgent reality of conflict involving attacks on walled settlements, the horrors of the battlefield and the executions which followed victory were sometimes translated directly into pictorial scenes (Figure 2.18), although the essence of conflict, of disequilibrium, was still viewed in generalized allegorical terms. From the experience of disorder and struggle, the shattering of an earlier equilibrium, arose the perception of a world in conflict, real or potential, between chaos and order. This was to remain a theme of intellectual concern for the rest of Egyptian history. So did the notion that containment (though not ultimate defeat) of disorder and unrule was possible through the rule of kings and the benign presence of a supreme divine force manifested in the powers of heaven, of Horus and of the sun. The intellectual view of the nature of the universe coincided with the structure of political power.



Figure 2.18The enforcement of rule. (1) One side of the Tjehenu Palette. The main scene, probably of battle, has been lost. The remaining bottom part shows seven fortified towns being attacked by animals probably symbolizing the monarchy and wielding hoes. The palette presumably celebrated a series of victories in the northward expansion of the kingdom of Hierakonpolis. After Petrie, Palettes, Pl. G; Mellink and Filip, Frühe Stufen, Taf. 214b. (2) A warrior holds a mace ready to kill a pair of tied enemies, as represented on a painted jar of the Nagada IC phase from Abydos, cemetery U. After G. Dreyer, U. Hartung, T. Hikade, E.C. Köhler, V. Müller and F. Pumpenmeier MDAIK 54 (1998), 114, Fig. 13. (3) The scene of a warrior brandishing a mace over a line of bound captives is taken from tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis (Figure 2.8, p. 77), and probably depicts a predynastic king in his role of victor in battle. (4) Incised design on a granite vase inscribed with the name of King Khasekhemui, end of the Second Dynasty, from the Main Deposit at Hierakonpolis. The goddess Nekhbet of El-Kab (her symbol a vulture) grasps both the ‘unification’ symbol and a circular cartouche containing the name Besh. At the right-hand edge is the ‘regnal year’ sign and a group of signs reading ‘fighting the northerners’. Egyptian Museum, Cairo CG 14724. After Quibell, Archaic Objects, Pl. 66 (redrawn by M. Bertram). (5) Incised designs on the base of a seated limestone statue of King Khasekhem from Hierakonpolis. The design shows the bodies of the slain, the plant motif above one symbolizing the north of Egypt, and the numerals 42,209. The name Khasekhem is on the top surface of the base, beside the king’s feet; hence its reversal. After Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, Pl. XL (redrawn by M. Bertram). Both designs seem to record the victory of King Khasekhem/Khasekhemui over a northern Egyptian population and their ruler, Besh.



The paired animals are always identical. Even on the Narmer Palette they have no distinguishing marks to suggest a wish to identify each one with a part of the country or a separate kingdom. Political harmony must be there in the meaning, but only as an urgent aspect of the ideal of general harmony in the world that the Egyptians knew. The paired animals are, none the less, the forerunners of the paired figures of Horus and Seth. The former are the symbols of a general statement; the latter represent a more specific application of the concept and its depiction to the new political order of dynastic Egypt. There is an interesting transitional phase to recognize, too. The earliest depictions of paired figures standing explicitly for the unity of two kingdoms are not figures of Horus and Seth, but two facing figures of Horus, in an archaic form that particularly resembles that of Horus of Hierakonpolis (Figure 2.19). This is a straightforward adaptation of the paired identical figures on the slate palettes. It recurs occasionally in historical periods, when the two kingdoms can both be represented as an inheritance from Horus.49



Figure 2.19The theme of duality in early royal monograms and names. Nos 1 and 2 (transition to the First Dynasty) are monograms which represent in a simple way a section of royal palace façade, without adding the king’s name (cf. Figure 2.9, inset, p. 79), surmounted in each case by two Horus figures. After J. Clédat, ASAE 13 (1914), Pl. XIII; H. Junker, Friedhof in Turah, Vienna, Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, 1912, 47, Abb. 58. In no. 3 the same two Horus figures (a) accompany the name of King (Adjib) Mer-pi-bia (b) of the First Dynasty (after Petrie, Royal Tombs I, Pl. V.12). No. 4 is a writing of the name of King Khasekhemui of the Second Dynasty in which one of the Horus figures has been replaced by a figure of Seth (compare Figure 2.3, p. 67). After J. Capart, Memphis à l’ombre des pyramides, Brussels, Vromant, 1930, 119, Fig. 116.



The cosmic balancing act was not, by itself, enough. Egyptian society of the dynastic period was strongly hierarchical. Harmony within the state – through the threat of sanction – flowed down from a single source, the king, through loyal officials to the people. The king’s role of maintainer of order was paramount. It covered not only responsibility for justice and piety but also the conquest of unrule. The philosophical texts of the Middle Kingdom depict unrule not only in terms of social upheaval, but also natural and cosmic catastrophe. The final guarantee of harmony in society and in the natural order was not a balancing of opposites. One force had to be superior. We can glimpse this already in one of the vignettes in Hierakonpolis tomb 100 (Figure 2.15, top right, p. 91). Here the two paired and facing animals (lions in this case) are held apart and balanced by the central figure of a ruler. The introduction of Seth enabled this to be reflected in the broader structure of knowledge, and to understand this we must remember that each king was also a particular embodiment of Horus. And so Seth becomes the loser, and the antagonist to Horus. He becomes the antagonist to order on a grand scale: celestial disturbance in the form of storms, the hostile nature of the surrounding deserts, the exotic character of foreign gods, even red-headed people – these were expressions of Seth. Yet, as the Shabaka Stone tells us, Seth also acquiesces in the divine judgement against him. He retains the power to be a reconciled force in the ideal balance of harmony.

The myth of Horus and Seth is not a reflection of how the Egyptian state emerged politically. The details of the period of internal warfare among the proto-states of the Nile valley are unlikely ever to be known, but we can safely assume that it was not a simple epic struggle between two protagonists. The myth of the state in historic times was a clever transformation of an earlier, more generalized statement of an ideal world originating in Upper Egypt. It combined the old concept of an ultimate harmony through balanced opposites with the newly perceived need for a single superior force. It was created as part of the great codification of court culture. It drew upon local traditions of knowledge, which in the case of Horus and Seth were centred in Upper Egypt. It became part of the long active interest that the Egyptians maintained in symbolic geography; in effect, a process of internal colonization at an intellectual level.

There is a broader dimension within which to consider this theme. Much later the Middle East became home to a philosophical tradition of dualism, which imagined a perpetual conflict between a good and an evil force in the universe, between light and darkness. It saw the material world as evil and urged the individual to struggle to overcome its superficial attractiveness, and to seek a path of separation from worldliness. Through orthodox Christianity and various alternative forms of essential knowledge (‘heresies’ is an unfair word for them) the idea rooted itself very firmly in Egypt (it is well represented in Gnostic literature of the early centuries AD) and it has had a profound influence upon European understanding. In the material discussed in this section we seem to see the ancient Egyptians facing up to the same philosophical challenge – the source of discord and chaos – but giving it a more optimistic and less personally troublesome resolution. Ultimately the struggle was waged externally by divine proxies on behalf of the people, although in the foreground king and people were obligated to heed the ordering concept of maat in their lives. A harmonious outcome was held to be within reach.

One further observation needs to be made. The First Dynasty began as a state that was territorially as large as most that were to occupy the lower Nile valley until modern times. There was no long process of growth from a spread of city-states, a common early political form that had a thriving history in, for example, Mesopotamia. The organizational or political units that had developed earlier cannot have matched the complexity of city-states as they developed in other parts of the Near East. I have used the term ‘proto-state’ for them (‘incipient city-state’ is an alternative term). We can be fairly sure of two (Nagada and Hierakonpolis), and we can suspect that there were others at various stages of development (Figure 2.5, p. 73, marks some of them where there is archaeological evidence). The internal warfare pursued most vigorously from the south terminated this polycentric period of political growth, but as states everywhere discover sooner or later, regional assertion remains a powerful force even when its centres are submerged within a larger polity. The game goes on.





Foundations of ideology (3): architecture as political statement


The unification myth was but one aspect of what emerges with the First Dynasty as the principal focus of both intellectual and organizational effort: the projection of kingship as the symbol of power supreme over all others. On the late predynastic slate palettes conquering figures occur in the form of animals (a lion, a bull, a scorpion, a falcon; see Figure 2.18 (1), p. 95) that we can take to be symbols of human power, perhaps of a king. But it is only with the Narmer Palette that we find figures of human kings to which detailed treatment has been given in order to convey some of their symbolic attributes. When we turn to architecture we find an equivalent process but on a far grander scale. The royal tomb became the principal public statement on the nature of kingship. Changes in royal tomb architecture are thus our most important single guide to the evolution of ancient perceptions of monarchy. Those perceptions seem at this stage to have given significantly greater prominence to the king than to the gods (something mirrored at the level of the patriarchal leaders of local communities). And the architecture presupposes, from the reign of King Aha onwards from near the beginning of the First Dynasty, an equally great enhancement of the drama of the royal burial, involving the sacrifice of human life and the devotion of much labour.

Nagada and Hierakonpolis have provided us with tombs that, by their size, sometimes by brick linings, sometimes by the presence of accompanying subsidiary burials and, in the case of Hierakonpolis tomb 100, wall paintings, imply ownership by leaders of more than just a local community, by men in that hazy category of kings who are not yet of the authoritative reach of those of the dynasties of Pharaohs to come. By those later standards their tombs are, none the less, relatively modest constructions (on their superstructures more will be said below). The First Dynasty brought substantial change. Against a background of increased tomb size throughout the country, reflecting the increased wealth and organization of the Early Dynastic state (though much of it often still focused on the tombs of provincial patriarchal clan leaders), we find the builders of the royal tomb developing steadily in the direction of monumental scale and distinctive architectural symbolism in more durable materials. The effect must have been a change in the tempo of life for those who lived within the ambit of the court. The hugely increased scale of expenditure and thus of obligation must have created a more marked punctuation of time – the death of the king the end of an era – than had previously existed.50 One form that this marking of time took was the inclusion within the royal burial layouts of the burials of people assumed to be retainers who seem (although some ambiguity still surrounds the evidence) to have been executed at the time. It is estimated that, by the end of the First Dynasty, nearly 2,000 individuals had met this end.

The centre of this drama was Abydos and the tombs of the kings of the First Dynasty (and of the last two of the Second) who were buried in the part known as the Umm el-Qaʾab (Figure 2.14, p. 87). The royal tombs consisted of brick chambers constructed in large pits dug into the desert, covered probably by a simple superstructure in the form of a plain square enclosure filled to the top with sand and gravel. Their royal ownership was proclaimed by pairs of free-standing stone slabs (or stelae) bearing the Horus name of the king in question (an example is Figure 2.9, inset, p. 79). For each king, a separate and more conspicuous building was also constructed closer to the edge of the floodplain, and just behind the site of the ancient town of Abydos (Figure 2.14, p. 87). The best preserved is the last, from the end of the Second Dynasty, the Shunet el-Zebib, belonging to King Khasekhemui (Photograph 2.1).51 The Shunet el-Zebib is an enclosure measuring 122 × 65 m externally, surrounded by a double wall of mud brick, pierced by doorways. The inner wall, still standing in places to a height of 11 m, is a massive 5.50 m thick. On its outer surfaces it was decorated with niches to give a panelled effect. The panelled façade on the long side facing the cultivation was emphasized by the insertion at regular intervals of an inner, deeper niche. A small part of the interior of the enclosure was occupied by a free-standing building near the east corner. This contained a suite of rooms in some of which pottery storage jars had been stowed. The outer faces of this building had been decorated in the same panelled style as the great enclosure wall (Figure 2.20 (A)). The earlier counterparts of the Shunet el-Zebib, in a closely set group, show no signs of their existence above the present ground level, each having apparently been demolished at some time after the funeral had taken place. This would have left the tomb itself, on the Umm el-Qaʾab, as the place of permanent cult. Along the side of one of the enclosures a row of 14 wooden boats had been buried, about 25 m long but only about 50 cm high, encased in mud and bricks. They have individual counterparts in boats buried alongside the tombs of courtiers of the Early Dynastic Period at Saqqara and Helwan, and presumably represent a continuation of the theme of the perpetual voyage by the upholder of authority that is so strikingly portrayed in tomb 100 at Hierakonpolis and here has the scale of a small fleet.



Photograph 2.1Early royal architecture: the Shunet el-Zebib at Abydos, mud-brick funerary palace of King Khasekhemui of the Second Dynasty (c. 2611–2584 BC), looking south-east.





Figure 2.20The royal style of architecture in the Early Dynastic Period. (A) South-east sector of the Shunet el-Zebib at Abydos (see Photograph 2.1; reign of Khasekhemui, late Second Dynasty). The position of the territorial cairns is hypothetical. After Ayrton et al., Abydos III, Pl. VI. Note the simplified ‘palace-façade’ niched style of brickwork on external surfaces. For a section of real (as distinct from funerary) palace wall see Figure 2.9 (p. 79), from Hierakonpolis. (B) Reconstruction of part of the façade of a First Dynasty court tomb, reproducing in miniature the ‘palace-façade’ architecture of court buildings. (C) The reconstruction of the elaborate designs – largely painted – on the upper parts is based on later reproductions on sarcophagi and tomb-chapel offering-places. This example derives from the Fifth Dynasty tomb of Tepemankh at Abusir, after J. Capart, L’art égyptien I: L’architecture, Brussels and Paris, Vromant, 1922, Pl. 46, itself derived from L. Borchardt, Das Grabdenkmal des Königs Ne-user-reʾ, Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1907, Taf. 24. (D) A further example, a carved Fourth Dynasty sarcophagus from Giza, tomb of Fefi, after S. Hassan, Excavations at Gîza (1929–1930), Cairo, Faculty of Arts and Oxford, OUP, 1932, Pl. LXV.



Two paths lead us towards the meaning of this building and its companions. One concerns the panelled effect on the outer walls. The most striking examples occur on the façades of large tombs of the Early Dynastic Period (Figure 2.20 (B)), mostly in the Memphite area (although one is at Nagada). Some examples preserve the lower part of elaborate painted designs, which reproduce in great detail a way of further decorating the walls: by draping over them long strips of brightly coloured matting lashed to horizontal poles. These panelled surfaces were broken by deep recesses with similarly panelled sides, and at the back of each recess stood a broader niche, painted red, apparently to signify the wooden leaf of a door. The whole design of panels, recesses and applied matting patterns became a fixed scheme of decoration on later sarcophagi and offering-places in tomb chapels, and these supply us with the details missing from the upper parts of the Early Dynastic tombs (Figure 2.20 (C), (D)).

The design occurs in another context, too. A narrow section of it formed the basis for the heraldic device (the serekh) in which the Horus name (the principal name) of Early Dynastic kings was written (Figure 2.9, inset, p. 79). From this it was long ago deduced that the architectural style belonged specifically to the royal palace. Scholars coined the term ‘palace façade’ for the architectural style. It was only in 1969, however, that an actual stretch of wall decorated in this style was found which was not part of a tomb. It lay in the centre of the Early Dynastic town of Hierakonpolis, and formed the gatehouse for what is evidently an Early Dynastic palace, the one briefly described in an earlier section (Figures 2.8 and 2.9, pp. 77 and 79). The Hierakonpolis gatehouse, the Shunet el-Zebib and the frame around the king’s Horus name reveal that the Early Dynastic kings adopted the niched and decorated façade as a symbol of power. It denoted by itself the idea of ‘palace’ as a ruling entity, and for those who were part of the court – the palace elite surrounding the king and administering his power – it was permissible to use a scaled-down version to decorate their own tombs, advertising that they, too, shared in the rule of Egypt.

For the second path we must turn to a monument which in time is only a generation later than the Shunet el-Zebib, but which belongs to another plane of architectural achievement: the Step Pyramid at Saqqara, tomb of Djoser, the first king of the Third Dynasty (c. 2584–2565 BC) (Figure 2.21).52 It is the first building of truly monumental scale in Egypt to have been constructed throughout of stone.53 In its detailing it also contains many of the basic decorative motifs that came to characterize Pharaonic architecture. It represents, in architecture, a major act of codification of forms such as had occurred in art around the beginning of the First Dynasty.



Figure 2.21Political architecture. (A) Reconstruction of the southern part of the Step Pyramid of King Djoser at Saqqara, eternal plaza of royal display and setting for the Sed-festival (see also Photograph 2.2, p. 105), after Lauer, La pyramide, Pl. IV. (B) Scene of King Djoser proceeding to visit the temporary shrine of Horus of Behdet. The column of hieroglyphs in front of the king reads: ‘Halting (at) the shrine of Horus of Behdet.’ The last sign is actually a picture of a temporary shrine of the kind modelled in stone around the Sed-festival court at the Step Pyramid. Note that Djoser wears the crown of Upper Egypt. Northern stela beneath the Step Pyramid at Saqqara, after Firth and Quibell, Step Pyramid, Pl. 17, and A. Gardiner, JEA 30 (1944), Pl. III.4. (C) Stone platform with double staircase as found at the southern end of the Sed-festival court in the Step Pyramid (see also Photograph 2.2, p. 105), Lauer, La pyramide, Pl. LVI.1 and p. 145, Fig. 146. (D) Ancient representation of the double throne dais with canopy as used at the Sed-festival, based on a carved lintel of King Senusret III (Twelfth Dynasty), as reproduced in K. Lange and M. Hirmer, Egypt: Architecture, Sculpture, Painting in Three Thousand Years, 3rd edn, London, Phaidon, 1961, 103, 104.



The Step Pyramid confronts us with a problem of interpretation. It has many distinctive parts, each of which must have held a particular meaning. However, very little of it bore any figured or written decoration to declare its meaning explicitly. For much of it we have to rely upon interpretations derived from later sources, principally the Pyramid Texts (collections of short prayers and statements carved inside the burial chambers of pyramids from the end of the Fifth Dynasty onwards, thus three centuries later, and the first body of significant written knowledge to have survived from ancient Egypt). By this time, however, pyramid layouts had changed, and so, too, must have the meanings of the various parts. There is thus, for example, no straightforward answer to the basic question: why a stepped pyramid? By the time of the Pyramid Texts the true pyramid had long replaced it, and so, presumably, had a different meaning. This made a strong link between the pyramid shape and the cult of the sun (as the sun god Ra) centred at Heliopolis (Figure 3.14, p. 142). By a common modern explanation, the plain mounds which stood over early tombs and were, in the Early Dynastic Period, turned into plain brick rectangles, evolved into the square plain block of stone masonry which at first covered Djoser’s tomb and over which the Step Pyramid was then erected. Similar mounds are known to have been incorporated invisibly into the palace-façade superstructures of court tombs at Saqqara. For explanation, one can turn to a rich tradition of later times that made earth mounds into symbols of creation and rebirth. Possible playful ways (modern and ancient) of working with this imagery will be explored further in the next chapter (see especially Figure 3.23, p. 157). The temptation is accordingly there to see the final stage of the Step Pyramid as an inspired design idea which created a vision of a heavenly staircase from a series of superimposed stone mounds of diminishing size.

Fortunately, not all of this amazing monument is mute. Djoser’s stepped pyramid stands at the centre of a rectangular enclosure, 278 × 545 m (Figure 2.21). It was surrounded by a thick stone wall with external towers, the façade carved with a simpler, modified version of the palace-façade style, although each tower was treated as if it were a gateway with closed door leaves imitated in stone. The one true entrance is at the south-east corner, and in the general design of the whole complex we can still recognize the basic shape of the Shunet el-Zebib at Abydos. Across the centre of the enclosure extends a huge open inner space, a rectangle measuring 108 ×187 m, faced by panelled walls. At each end stood originally a pair of stone horseshoe-shaped cairns, and immediately in front of the pyramid a stone platform reached by steps faced the alignment of the cairns. This arrangement of cairns and stepped platform is known pictorially from Early Dynastic carvings. In one of them, on a mace head of the reign of Narmer (Figure 2.22 (G)), we can see that the arrangement appears to be in use for reviewing the livestock and prisoners captured in a battle. In another, a label of the reign of the First Dynasty King Den, the king appears twice: once on the stepped throne beneath an awning, and once on the arena running or striding between the groups of cairns (Figure 2.22 (F)). This latter element is one of two subjects of scenes actually carved within the Step Pyramid complex itself, in underground corridors beneath the Southern Tomb and the pyramid proper (two of them are depicted in Figure 2.21 (B) and Figure 2.22 (E), pp. 101, 103).54 Two groups of three carved panels occur at the backs of imitation doorways. Some of the panels show Djoser performing this very ceremony of striding or running between the cairns, accompanied by other symbols. The shape of the cairns can be clarified by later references, as can one of the prominent groups of symbols. They are markers of territorial limits. Later sources also tell us that the arena itself was called simply ‘the field’, and that the ceremony was termed either ‘encompassing the field’ or ‘presenting the field’, with the emphasis then on the dedication of the arena to a god, although this element is not apparent from the early depictions.



Figure 2.22A demonstration of territorial claim. (E) Scene of King Djoser running (or striding) across the ceremonial arena between the two sets of territorial marker cairns. In front of the king is the standard of the canine god Wepwawet, and a vertical column of hieroglyphs, the meaning of which is obscure. The literal translation is ‘The Great White Ones’, a plural reference to a baboon god whose picture forms part of the last hieroglyph. The first element in the name, however, is also a word for a shrine, evidently a ‘White Shrine’. It has been suggested that the baboons in question might be images of ancestral spirits. Behind the king is a pair of symbols used to write a word (mdnbw) meaning ‘limits’. Central stela beneath the Step Pyramid at Saqqara, after Firth and Quibell, Step Pyramid, Pl. 16. (F). Part of a wooden label of King Den of the First Dynasty from his tomb at Abydos, to be read from right to left: (1) the sign for ‘regnal year’ (see also Figures 2.2 and 2.18 (4), pp. 62 and 95); (2) the king running between the territorial cairns; (3) the king appearing seated beneath a canopy upon a stepped throne dais; (4) Horus name of King Den. After Petrie, Royal Tombs I, Pls XI.14, XV.16. (G) Part of a scene from a ceremonial mace head of King Narmer, First Dynasty, from Hierakonpolis. It depicts a ceremonial appearance of the king on the stepped and canopied throne dais (1), accompanied by bearers of the ‘Followers of Horus’ standards (3a, see also Figure 2.10, p. 81). The occasion is evidently the review of prisoners (2b–4b, 4c) and animals (2a, 3c) captured in battle. The many small signs in line ‘c’ are numerals. Note the seated figure (divine image?; 2b) in a portable carrying-chair with curved canopy (see also Figure 3.17 (4), p. 147). Note how the human captives are paraded between the territorial cairns: the court of royal appearance has become a victory parade-ground. After Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, Pl. XXVI.B.



One of the general needs of monarchy (and of other forms of state leadership) is theatrical performance to reinforce deference: a formal setting for the display of the leader in person, either to the public at large or to select representatives. In later times the Egyptian sources make much of the ‘appearance of the king’, and we should anticipate that each age sought a dramatic setting for this moment, built around certain basic elements: an open space for assembly, an elevated place where the king could be seen within a formal framing, and a token palace where robing and resting could comfortably and privately take place. In Chapters 6 and 8, pp. 267–8, 270 and 337–8, the elaborate devices adopted by the New Kingdom Pharaohs for displaying themselves will be described and we shall find settings of just this kind. The early sources, both pictorial and architectural, also combine to satisfy this demand. We are prompted to imagine that an important part of an Early Dynastic king’s palace was an enclosed arena or plaza, equipped (at one end) with cairns which symbolized territorial limits and with an elevated throne dais shaded by a canopy of distinctive shape (this latter element present already in one of the boats in Hierakonpolis tomb 100), and a token palace perhaps placed separately. It was used as the setting for major royal occasions, such as the reception of tribute, of captive people and of captured animals, and for a particular ceremony in which the king laid claim to his territory by striding forcefully around its symbolic limits. The Shunet el-Zebib at Abydos and the great plaza in front of the Step Pyramid are replicas at full (if not exaggerated) scale that provided the king with the necessary setting for his own pageantry for the eternity of death. One might identify a less developed example (with as yet no trace of the cairns) in the courtyard with panelled dais in the Hierakonpolis palace (Figure 2.9, p. 79).

This is not the end of the story. There is another element to the staged public appearances of kings at this time: a periodic celebration termed the Sed-festival by the Egyptians. Sources from early times onwards make the Sed-festival a jubilee celebration of the king’s earthly rule over a period that came in time to be seen as ideally of 30 years, although second and third celebrations could subsequently take place at shorter intervals and 30 years was not an invariable rule (in Figure 3.1, p. 113, King Menthuhetep IV’s first Sed-festival is recorded as having been celebrated in only his second regnal year). The way that the festival was conducted changed over time, and so, probably, did the meaning. It is tempting when dealing with Egyptian culture to combine sources from all periods in order to create a comprehensive explanation for a particular theme because the pictorial forms tended to remain constant. But continuity of forms masked changes in meaning and practice. Inventing traditions was something that the Egyptians were very good at. For each period the sources should be interpreted within the spirit and for the illumination of that age alone. (In Chapter 6, pp. 270–5, we shall examine one particular set, those of Amenhetep III of the Eighteenth Dynasty.) Two aspects seem more than any other to have characterized the Sed-festival. The king, often wearing a distinctive robe, sits on a special dais provided with two thrones for an appearance as King of Upper Egypt and of Lower Egypt. The thrones are normally shown back to back (Figure 2.21 (D), p. 101), but this may be an artistic device for rendering a pair which were actually side by side.55 More elaborate scenes, later than the Early Dynastic Period, give as the setting for this ceremony a series of shrines pictured as constructions of wood and matting. The origin and meaning of this style of architecture will be explored in the next chapter. In these scenes one design stood for Lower Egypt and one for Upper Egypt. Sometimes they were specifically for the cobra goddess Wadjit of the delta town of Buto, and of the vulture goddess Nekhbet of El-Kab in the south. But they were for other deities as well. This gathering of provincial images of gods and goddesses in a series of temporary shrines beside the double throne of the king was a gesture of provincial homage to the person of the king. The other element specifically associated with the festival after the Third Dynasty is the ceremony of laying claim to the ‘field’ by striding around the cairns. At some time, therefore, this separate and presumably more frequent ceremony was absorbed into the pageantry of the Sed-festival.

Again the Step Pyramid clarifies the picture. Beside the great arena with cairns is another but quite separate part of the complex. This runs along the east side of the main enclosure and consists of a series of mostly solid, dummy buildings arranged along both sides of a court (Photograph 2.2). They have a distinctive appearance: a series of small rectangular structures, with exterior detailing which creates in solid, full-scale, three-dimensional architecture the shapes of the temporary shrines which were envisaged as constructed of timber and matting. They are, in fact, representations of the very kind of buildings which later scenes show gathered for the Sed-festival. This seems to be their meaning at the Step Pyramid, too. For at one end of the court is a square throne dais with two flights of steps, originally covered with a little stone building (Figure 2.21 (C), p. 101). It is hard to escape the conclusion that this was a rendering in stone for eternity of the double-throne dais covered with special canopy, and that this part of the Step Pyramid complex gave King Djoser the eternal setting for the periodic Sed-festival. Scenes of the king visiting the various shrines form the other subject of the carved panels in the underground galleries (Figure 2.21 (B) p. 101). The subject of shrines – accommodation for gods – has so far barely been touched upon. This in itself reflects what appears to have been the order of priority in the thinking of these times: celebrating human leaders attracted more resources than finding homes for gods. It forms an important part of the next chapter.



Photograph 2.2The Step Pyramid of King Djoser, Third Dynasty, at Saqqara, looking north-west. In front of the pyramid are the renderings into stone of the tent shrines erected on pedestals, forming part of the Sed-festival court. Note the probable double-throne platform in the foreground.



We can now appreciate better the meaning of the architecture of early royal tombs, of which the Step Pyramid is the most complete and elaborate. They provided an arena for the eternal pageantry of kingship as it was experienced on earth: the king as supreme territorial claimant, protected within his distinctive palace enclosure, the focus of staged actions centred on his person.

With the Fourth Dynasty the form of the royal tomb changed dramatically. The stepped pyramid became a true pyramid, and instead of occupying the middle ground of a great complex of other buildings, it towered at the end of a linear architectural sequence which stretched down to the edge of the alluvial plain (Figure 2.23). The great enclosed arena or plaza of the royal appearance and the special Sed-festival architecture all vanish. In their place comes a temple intended primarily for an offering-cult for the king’s spirit via an offering-place on the east side of the pyramid, and via a group of statues. These elements had been present in Djoser’s complex, but now they were dominant. Sed-festival scenes occur on walls, but alongside other themes. The true pyramid was a symbol of the sun (another aspect of the great codification discussed in the next chapter), and there is other evidence from the Fourth, and especially the Fifth Dynasty to show that serious intellectual consideration was paying more attention to the power of the sun as the supreme force. The prominent title of kings, ‘Son of Ra’, appears first at this time. The Fourth Dynasty and later pyramids convey a new image of kingship. Gone is the raw power of a supreme territorial ruler. The king is now sublimated into a manifestation of the sun god. Architecture conveyed this fundamental reappraisal to the maximum effect.



Figure 2.23The apotheosis of kingship. The pyramid of Medum (reign of King Sneferu, c. 2520–2470 BC) was the first of the new generation of pyramid tombs which conveyed a radically different view of the nature of the monarchy. In place of a tomb which celebrated the king as supreme territorial claimant and perpetuated his earthly pageantry (Figure 2.21, p. 101), the new-style pyramids proclaimed his absorption into the mystic symbol of the sun. The tiny offering-temple was the principal gesture to his human aspect. Later pyramid complexes softened this stark contrast in scale between pyramid and temples.



The social and economic climate in which the early Egyptian state arose still remains sketchily documented. We can recognize as a general background a relatively egalitarian farming society settled in low-density villages and larger settlement areas spread through the Nile valley and delta during the fourth millennium BC. Local identities and community leaders emerged, but at a pace and on a scale which varied from place to place. Inherent in the nature of the process was that local variations that were initially quite small were amplified on an ever-increasing scale. This became an exponential rate of growth for the most successful, which culminated in a single state (whose rulers formed Dynasty 0) before the end of the Predynastic Period. Those involved in this final phase of dynamic growth and terminal competition already perceived the consequences of power on a grand scale and codified its expression in distinctive intellectual form. This cleverly fused together a generalized concept – the superiority of a locally derived order over a universal chaos – and the position of a single king whose power as earthly territorial ruler was expressed in monumental architecture, in public performances, and in symbolic art. As a set of ideas and ideals for legitimizing the rule of a king over his subjects it was to survive the ups and downs of political history for three thousand years. It also left the Egyptians incapable of visualizing the polycentric pattern of their own early political growth. Whenever political fragmentation reappeared it seemed to be a fall from the original ideal yet (as we can now see) quite mythical state of things. And as the next chapter will show, a parallel erection of a myth-world shut the Egyptians off from their cultural beginnings.





Notes

1In general see D.B. Redford, Pharaonic King-lists, Annals and Day-books: a Contribution to the Study of the Egyptian Sense of History, Mississauga, ON, Benben, 1986; D. Wildung, Rolle; Yasmin El Shazly, ‘Representations of sequences of royal ancestors in Deir el-Medina tombs.’ In J. Toivari-Viitala, T. Vartiainen and S. Uvanto, eds, Deir el-Medina Studies, 65–86.

2Now in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, CG34516; Sir A.H. Gardiner, Egypt of the Pharaohs, Oxford, OUP, 1961, 49, fig. 8; https://pharaoh.se/saqqara-king-list.

3Arnold, Tempel Mentuhotep, 92–5.

4Wilkinson, Annals; Strudwick, Texts, 65–74. For a similar basalt slab inscribed with detailed royal annals of the Sixth Dynasty, see M. Baud and V. Dobrev, BIFAO 95 (1995), 23–63; Strudwick, Texts, 75–7.

5Sir A.H. Gardiner, The Royal Canon of Turin, Oxford, GI, 1959; J. Malek, JEA 68 (1982), 93–106; Ryholt, Political Situation, 9–33; K. Ryholt, ZÄS 127 (2000), 87–100; D. Franke, JEH 1 (2) (2008), 267–87.

6Ryholt, Political Situation, 24–5 logically places several small fragments here which then gives us a list of demi-gods and legendary heroes who include ‘He who possesses noble women’ and ‘The follower Meni great of height’.

7Pritchard, Texts, 12; www.ucl.ac.uk/museums-static/digitalegypt/literature/isisandra.html.

8The tale is preserved in P. Chester Beatty I, in the British Museum, written in the reign of Rameses V, c. 1146–1141 bc. See A.H. Gardiner, The Library of A. Chester Beatty: Description of a Hieratic Papyrus with a Mythological Story, Love-songs, and other Miscellaneous Texts, London, OUP, 1931; D. Sweeney, JEA 88 (2002), 141–62. There are small fragments of a Middle Kingdom version, Parkinson, Voices, 120–1. For the private library in which it was found see McDowell, Village Life, 134–5.

9Sneferu’s later reputation: B. Gunn, JEA 12 (1926), 250–1; G. Posener, Littérature et politique dans l’Égypte de la XIIe dynastie, Paris, Champion, 1956, 31–3; D. Wildung, Rolle, 104–52. P. Westcar is translated in Lichtheim, Literature I, 215–22.

10Peden, Ramesses IV, 93; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions IV, 19; Kitchen, Ramesside Inscriptions (Trans) IV, 20–1.

11Lichtheim, Literature I, 215–22 (P. Westcar); Herodotus II, 124–7; Waddell, Manetho, 47, 49.

12Parkinson, Voices, 54–6.

13Lichtheim, Literature I, 149–63; Parkinson, Poetry and Culture, 204–16.

14Waddell, Manetho, 61, 62.

15Lichtheim, Literature I, 139–45; Parkinson, Poetry and Culture, 200–4.

16Speos Artemidos text: D.B. Redford, ‘Textual sources for the Hyksos Period.’ In E. Oren, ed., The Hyksos: New Historical and Archaeological Perspectives, Philadelphia, PA, The University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, 1997, 1–44; J.P. Allen, Bulletin of the Egyptological Seminar (New York) 16 (2002), 1–17.

17Simpson, Literature, 339–44.

18Lichtheim, Literature I, 51–7; III, 4–5; B.G. Ockinga, ‘The Memphite Theology – its purpose and date.’ In A. Woods, A. McFarlane and S. Binder, eds, Egyptian Culture and Society: Studies in Honour of Naguib Kanawati 2, Cairo, Conseil Suprême des Antiquités de l’Égypte, 2010, 99–117. R. Krauss, ‘Wie jung ist die memphitische Philosophie auf dem Shabaqo-Stein?’ In E. Teeter and J. A. Larson, eds, Gold of Praise: Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honor of Edward F. Wente, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1999, 239–46 argues for a Ptolemaic date.

19A.H. Gardiner, Ancient Egyptian Onomastica, London, OUP, 1947.

20Cited in Frankfort, Kingship, 146, 329, n. 15, a text of the Nineteenth Dynasty.

21S. Morenz, Egyptian Religion, London, Methuen, 1973, 145, citing a papyrus in the Turin Museum.

22T.G. Allen, The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1974, 118–20. A similar invoking of the manifold forms of Ra (75 in all) is contained within the Litany of Ra, see Piankoff, Litany; Kemp, How to Read, 20–22 cites other examples of the multiplicity of names of things associated with the gods.

23Note that here, the text in square brackets is a restoration of the ancient original; the text in round brackets is the author’s commentary. Hieroglyphic text: K. Sethe, Dramatische Texte zu altaegyptischen Mysterienspielen, Leipzig, Hinrichs, 1928, 23–35; translation in Lichtheim, Literature I, 52–3, and note 18, above.

24K.V. Flannery, CAJ 9 (1999), 3–21.

25A review of this early evidence within a discussion of its wider significance is I. Hodder, ‘Probing religion at Çatalhöyök: an interdisciplinary experiment.’ In I. Hodder, ed., Religion in the Emergence of Civilization: Çatalhöyük as a Case Study, Cambridge, CUP, 2010, 1–31.

26M. Dee, D. Wengrow, A.J. Shortland, A. Stevenson, F. Brock, L. Girdland Flink and C. Bronk Ramsey, Proceedings of the Royal Society A (4 September 2013), http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/469/2159/20130395, penultimate paragraph.

27Papazian, Domain, is a detailed exploration of this theme in early Egypt.

28M.W. Dee, D. Wengrow, A. J. Shortland, A. Stevenson, F. Brock and C. Bronk Ramsey, JAS 46 (2014), 319–23; http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/469/2159/20130395; A. Stevenson, CAJ 25 (2015), 145–61.

29Petrie and Quibell, Naqada; W. Kaiser, MDAIK 17 (1961), 14–18; B.J. Kemp, JEA 59 (1973), 38–43; W. Davis, MDAIK 39 (1983), 17–28.

30Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I; Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II are the reports on the first excavations. The extensive excavations of more recent times on the crucial settlement and cemetery sites on the desert can be followed through the issues of Nekhen News: www.hierakonpolis-online.org/index.php/nekhen-news, and the syntheses, R. Friedman, ‘Hierakonpolis’, in Teeter, Origins, 33–44; R. Friedman, ‘Hierakonpolis’, in Patch, Dawn, 82–93. Also R. Friedman, JARCE 45 (2009), 79–103, and T. Hikade, G. Pyke and D. O’Neill, MDAIK 64 (2008), 153–88 for the localities HK29A and HK29B.

31Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, 20–2, Pls LXXV–LXXIX; [F.W. Green], The Prehistoric Wall-painting in Egypt, [London, BSAE, 1953]; H. Case and J.C. Payne, JEA 48 (1962), 1–18; J.C. Payne, JEA 59 (1973), 31–5; B.J. Kemp, JEA 59 (1973), 36–43.

32Moeller, Urbanism, 94–103.

33A.H. Gardiner, JEA 30 (1944), 23–60 discusses in some detail the problems of Behdet and related matters.

34R. Bussmann, JEA 100 (2014), 311–37.

35N. Moeller, EA 23 (2003), 7–9; N. Moeller, CAJ 14 (2004), 261–5; N. Moeller and D. Farout, EA 31 (2007), 14–17; Moeller, Urbanism, 226–32; B.J. Kemp, Antiquity 51 (1977), 185–200; M. Bietak, ‘Urban archaeology and the “town problem” in ancient Egypt.’ In K. Weeks, ed., Egyptology and the Social Sciences, Cairo, AUC Press, 1979, 97–144, esp. 110–14.

36Several of the chapters in Teeter, Origins, provide a good introduction.

37Thucidydes I,10.

38D. O’Connor, Abydos: Egypt’s First Pharaohs and the Cult of Osiris, London, T&H, 2009.

39Dreyer, Umm El-Qaab I; G. Dreyer, ‘Tomb U-j: a royal burial of Dynasty 0 at Abydos.’ In Teeter, Origins, 127–36.

40Manetho claimed that the first two dynasties were from the city of This, but this might reflect the same connection with the Abydos cemetery that we make. Hierakonpolis was a place of no importance by his time and he makes no mention of it. The city of This and its god Onuris had no position of special significance in the later symbolic geography of Egypt.

41Wildung, Rolle, 4–21; T.C. Heagy, Archéo-Nil 24 (2014), 59–92. For the Early Dynastic kings, the later lists used alternative names to the Horus names familiar to us from Early Dynastic sources, and there remains a technical problem in equating the two sets for the very first group of kings. A mud seal impression of the First Dynasty from the Umm el-Qaʾab which lists successive kings features the men-hieroglyph prominently but not as a royal name Menes, see G. Dreyer, MDAIK 43 (1987), 33–43.

42Waddell, Manetho, 1940, 26–33. Min and the founding of Memphis is in Herodotus Book II, 99; A.B. Lloyd, Herodotus Book II: Commentary 99–182, Leiden, Brill, 1988, 6–13.

43The warning given in note 70 for Chapter 1 should be borne in mind. The names might be inventions introduced to give the very sense of continuity between men and gods that seems satisfying to us as well.

44I. Regulski, ‘The origin of writing in relation to the emergence of the Egyptian state.’ In Midant-Reynes and Tristant, Origins, 985–1009, the quote being from p. 1001. The ‘evolution of simplicity’ is a theme explored by D. Wengrow, The Archaeology of Early Egypt: Social Transformations in North-East Africa, 10,000 to 2650 bc, Cambridge, CUP, 2006, Ch. 8.

45The same theme can be applied to explain the symbolism of the Narmer Palette, D. O’Connor, ‘The Narmer Palette: a new interpretation.’ In Teeter, Origins, 145–52.

46R. Friedman, ‘Hierakonpolis’, in Teeter, Origins, 33–44, pp. 36–40; V. Linseele, W. Van Neer and R. Friedman, JARCE 45 (2009), 105–36; R. Friedman, ‘Hierakonpolis’, in Patch, Dawn, 82–94.

47G. Dreyer, MDAIK 46 (1990), 53–90, pp. 86–7.

48M. Verhoeven, CAJ 12 (2002), 233–58.

49The earliest evidence for the pairing of Horus and Seth is almost as ancient, from the reign of King Djer of the First Dynasty. In a queen’s title ‘She who sees Horus and Seth’ the king is presented as an embodiment of the two gods, A.H. Gardiner, JEA 30 (1944), 59, note.

50A. Stevenson, CAJ 25 (2015), 145–61.

51Ayrton et al., Abydos III, Chapter I; L. Bestock, ‘The first kings of Egypt: the Abydos evidence.’ In Teeter, Origins, 137–44; L. Bestock, JARCE 48 (2012), 35–79.

52The basic publication is Firth and Quibell, Step Pyramid; Lauer, La pyramide. A valuable and detailed summary is J.-Ph. Lauer, Histoire monumentale des pyramides d’Égypte I, Cairo, IFAO, 1962. Some remarkable architectural drawings of the timber and matting architecture prototypes are in H. Ricke, Bemerkungen zur ägyptischen Baukunst des alten Reichs I, Zurich, Borchardt-Institut für ägyptische Bauforschung und Altertumskunde in Kairo, 1944.

53The stone-built enclosure to the west, the Gisr el-Mudir, would be a precursor if a Second Dynasty date could be confirmed, see I. Mathieson et al., JEA 83 (1997), 17–53; I. Mathieson et al., JEA 85 (1999), 21–43.

54Firth and Quibell, Step Pyramid, Pls 15–17, 40–42. J.-Ph. Lauer, Monuments et Mémoires (Fondation Eugène Piot) 49 (1957), 1–15; F.D. Friedman, JARCE 32 (1995), 1–42; F.D. Friedman, ‘Notions of cosmos in the Step Pyramid Complex.’ In Manuelian, Studies I, 337–51.

55The most explicit early reference occurs on the Palermo Stone in a First Dynasty entry (probably for King Den). It shows the double throne dais and accompanies it with the legend: ‘Appearance of the King of Upper Egypt, Appearance of the King of Lower Egypt: Sed-festival’. See Wilkinson, Annals, 107–8.





3

The dynamics of culture



If I visit the pyramids of Giza or the decorated temples and tombs at Luxor I am aware immediately of facing a distinctive human creation. I will feel the same when in the presence of a mediaeval mosque in Cairo or a castle or cathedral in Europe. All are products of great and distinctive traditions of culture. They combine the essence of contemporary high knowledge and of deference to power. In their appearance, they leave conveniently distinctive images in the mind. When, on the other hand, as an archaeologist I excavate amidst the dwellings of one of ancient Egypt’s poorer communities, the distinctiveness is much less. The men from the local village whom I employ to do the digging will see the outlines of human life not too different from their own: here the kitchen, there the cattle byres. The ordinariness and predictability can be discouraging. I have to remind myself that culture and environment are never really the same from place to place and from time to time, and that the search for variation within the broad regularities of human life is an essential part of understanding the complete spectrum of human behaviour. That kind of variation might be less visually arresting than the subject matter of tourist guidebooks, and harder to define, but it is bound to be there and is the prime source for investigating life at grass-roots level.

‘Great culture’, which in time becomes tourist culture, was not the spontaneous creation of the common person. It is no accident that we meet its manifestations in large buildings where gods are honoured, in palaces, mansions and castles. Great culture, which requires patronage and the direction of labour, originates in courts. The wealth, size, splendour, craft standards and intellectual novelties are part of the instruments of rule, encouraging personal abasement, the attitude of deference. Temple and palace, and in the case of ancient Egypt their extensions into the culture surrounding the dead, often seem to account for much of what is distinctive about past cultures. When well established, a great tradition may have an influence that is felt throughout society. But to reach this stage it has to expand at the expense of other traditions. It has to colonize the minds of the nation. Whatever does not succumb becomes ‘folk culture’ or ‘popular culture’ (although in the modern world, aspects of the latter have achieved an unprecedented level of elevation).

Ancient Egypt is amongst the earliest of the world’s great cultural traditions. We are fortunate in being able to observe, through a relative abundance of material, the codification of tradition by which it started at the time of transition to the First Dynasty. In the beginning, however, it had a restricted scope. The objects were themselves small in size, and were probably limited in numbers. They expressed the pretensions of a new generation of rulers, and the beginnings of an attempt to systematize and to express more explicitly knowledge about the profundities of the universe. But should we assume that, from this moment on, all cultural expression in material form took its cue from this source? Did the First Dynasty kings throw a cultural switch that instantly lit up the whole country? Was there the will, or the means, or even the interest to convert the whole country to this intellectual outlook?

To answer these questions we must investigate how court culture expanded at the expense of other local traditions, and consider not only early works of art, but also the general archaeological record in which we might find traces of ‘folk culture’. One way of thinking about this is to see the subject as a manifestation of the two sources of human order. One is when individuals retain some autonomy even when acting as part of a larger group. When expressed through the act of building the term ‘self-organization’ is useful; in other forms of expression its equivalent is ‘self-defining’ and together they represent the ‘informal’ and draw upon what appears to be spontaneity. The other source of order is a codified style which prescribes, in part through teaching, what the proper forms are, whether in art or in architecture. Those that follow considered and authoritatively promoted models can be said to be ‘formal’. A chronological way of ordering the evidence is then to recognize a general evolution in degrees of formality in culture in which the self-defining loses ground.

A common way of introducing ancient Egypt is through a selection of artistic and architectural masterpieces, produced as expressions of an accepted codified style. Selections of this kind provide a record of continuous development in which geographical homogeneity is also prominent. From this perspective, the source material does provide a generally most satisfactory basis for writing a history of Egyptian ‘high’ culture. From prehistoric times, a single line of progress can be followed from the late predynastic cultures of Upper Egypt, through the Early Dynastic Period to the full flowering of Pharaonic culture in the Old Kingdom. Late predynastic artistic achievement comes to us as a series of isolated objects, small in scale, individual in expression. Its culminating product is the Narmer Palette from the very beginning of the First Dynasty (Figure 2.10, p. 81). From this phase of great creativity emerged a carefully composed visual art that successfully moulded the shape of Pharaonic culture to the very end, and just as successfully has influenced modern appreciations of ancient Egypt. Hieroglyphic writing, statuary and two-dimensional art became aspects of a single, rigidly studied mode of visual expression. An integral part of the process was the development of an iconography of gods which, whether they represented speculative abstractions or the presiding spirits of local places, reduced them to variants of a single image. This was the achievement of the Early Dynastic Period, the invention of a world of ideas and forms. Subsequently the Egyptian impetus for innovation turned to monumental architecture, culminating in the pyramids and their temples. By this approach the lights were indeed switched on in the Early Dynastic Period. Later dynasties added to their number and luminosity.





Pinning down the gods


Pharaonic Egypt presents us with a clear instance of a common aspect of complex societies: the identification, in particular localities, of gods who were felt to be accessible, usually through the adoption of a deferential attitude that often needed to be expressed through gifts considered to be worthy, and specially composed forms of words and prescribed actions. As time passed, traditions of formality developed (including calendars of feasts), which discouraged variation. Spontaneity and improvisation nevertheless remained possible. Knowledge of imaginary beings (gods and spirits, including the element that was divine within people, both living and dead), like all knowledge, was ultimately internal to individuals. They carried it with them, in the home, when dragging stones in quarries, when travelling to a foreign land. That knowledge could trigger spontaneous acts of deference or reverence when far away from the gods’ places of origin.

This was (and is) a particular instance of a wider form of human behaviour: marking one’s presence in order to give a sense of permanence to a passing moment that appeared significant at the time and, with the spontaneously inventive power of the imagination, also giving it explicit meaning defined by the knowledge of the time. A single graffito or deliberately selected and placed object can set off a pattern of copied behaviour, in effect a local tradition, and the underlying attitude can range from the casual, to a claim of ownership, or to an appeal to transcendental power. Although patterns recur, this kind of behaviour cannot be reduced to rules. A strong element of randomness is present. Some distinctive desert landscapes, for example, attracted graffiti and shrines, but many more, equally distinctive, did not. It took only the action of a single individual to make a place seem significant and thus to prompt others to repeat the action, sometimes over long periods.

How it could work is illustrated by records carved in the Wadi Hammamat in the eastern desert, at a place where there were quarries for siltstone and the closely related greywacke, a hard, greenish-grey stone prized for statues and sarcophagi (the Narmer Palette, Figure 2.10, p. 81, is an example).1 Amongst the large number of ancient graffiti must be one which was the earliest but cannot now be identified, either left by someone collecting loose pieces of stone for carving into objects or, since the earliest probably belong to people who pre-dated stone-carving, pausing whilst using the long, winding wadi as a route between the Nile valley and the Red Sea. Over a long period of time it prompted others to carve on the surfaces and with growing elaboration. As ever, human imagination supplied added layers of meaning. So a large expedition arrived there near the end of the Eleventh Dynasty (reign of Menthuhotep IV, c. 2001–1994 BC). No sooner had it arrived (so a text tells us) than a pregnant gazelle appeared which seemed to lead the expedition to a particular spot where it gave birth, the patch of rock being just right for the extraction of a sarcophagus lid. The gazelle was killed as an offering to the presiding spirit of the place who required a name: not Horus or Hathor, who might in other desert locations have been chosen, but in this case Min ‘Lord of the Desert Hills’ who was also the presiding spirit of the town of Coptos at the Nile valley end of the Wadi Hammamat (the remains of an early shrine at Coptos are described below, pp. 132–5). Eight days later a thunderstorm struck, described as a revelation of the god’s appearance (or ‘forms’) and creating a temporary pool of drinkable water. After five days the desired block of stone had been cut and brought down from the quarry face. In celebration, cattle and goats were slaughtered and incense burnt, simultaneously a thank-offering to Min and a communal feast for the large workforce. We have this narrative because it was recorded in hieroglyphic texts carved on adjacent rock surfaces along with a picture of the king offering milk before Min (Figure 3.1).2 A scene of this kind is more familiar on the walls of temples. Its presence here illustrates how a tradition, by now quite ancient, of marking an individual’s presence was elevated to something more significant by importing the formula of named god and reverential practice.



Figure 3.1Encountering god in the landscape. King Menthuhetep IV (c. 2001–1994 BC) of the Eleventh Dynasty offers milk to the god Min of Coptos as thanks for a successful quarrying mission to the Wadi Hammamat. The scene and text are carved on a rock surface adjacent to the place of rock extraction. The text describes how the birth of a gazelle on a slab of rock was a miraculous sign for where the extraction should begin. The bottom two horizontal lines of text give the titles and name of the high official in charge of the expedition, the vizier Amenemhat. The sculptor made no attempt to create a neat shape for the carving. The triangular piece missing from the bottom right corner was already broken away. The beginnings of the columns and lines of hieroglyphs follow the broken edge: no part of the text is missing. The text is dated to the king’s second year of reign, which is also said to be the first occasion for celebrating the Sed-festival. After LD II, 149.c and J. Couyat and P. Montet, Les inscriptions hiéroglyphiques et hiératiques du Ouâdi Hammâmât, Cairo, IFAO, 1912, Pl. XXIX.110.



Over the centuries many more expeditions were to come, leaving their records carved in the same locality. Many of these records are no more than the names of the men who formed the expeditions. Yet apart from a small number of huts of boulders, nothing seems to have been built, although, in the late first millennium BC, one secluded piece of quarry received a concentration of commemorative scenes and texts, qualifying it, in modern literature, as a ‘chapel’ or ‘shrine’ (although it is unlikely to have had staff to look after it). Apart from this late attempt at greater formalization, the rough inscribed rock faces provided a sufficient focus of attention for visitors wishing to direct their thoughts and perhaps the actions of offering to the presiding spirit of the place. Nothing as elaborate as a guide-book temple was created during two thousand years.

At some desert locations visitors defined a point of contact with a presiding spirit more overtly. One of these was in the hills beside the Red Sea, at Gebel Zeit where, between the Twelfth Dynasty and late New Kingdom, they mined the mineral galena (msdmt, lead sulphide, thus lead ore), used as an eye pigment. As work got under way a shrine was created in a natural cave. Eventually, in the New Kingdom, a shelter, c. 6.5 m across, was built from rough stones on a nearby terrace (Figure 3.2).3 An arrangement of post holes suggests that a small canopy was erected inside. Those who used the shrine marked their presence by leaving a small object behind, frequently one of the brittle faience rings that were popular at the time. Some were left in cracks between the stones; others had been gathered into a pottery jar and buried outside. Small stelae and statuettes were buried in the north-east corner. These show that some of the people who came to the shrine had their own personal view as to whom they were addressing: Hathor, ‘Lady of Galena (msdmt)’, Horus, ‘Lord of the Desert Hills’, Min of Coptos (as at the Wadi Hammamat) and Ptah of Memphis. There seems to have been no formal identification: the simple structure was there to provide a conducive atmosphere for individuals to open portals in their minds (help-lines of a sort) to a god or goddess whom they had already chosen or who had been suggested by another member of the expedition. In view of the isolation and difficulties of supply, it is unlikely that anyone was left to look after the shrine between expeditions.



Figure 3.2A distant place for encountering gods: a shelter built of rough stones near the mines for galena (lead sulphide) at Gebel Zeit, close to the Red Sea coast. To judge from the objects found in and around it, it provided the quarry teams with an agreed place where they could contact protecting spirits and mark the occasion by leaving a small offering. The commonest objects to have survived were faience rings and scarabs, of which respectively 85 and 418 were found. Other objects included stelae and pottery female figurines. After Régen and Soukiassian, Gebel el-Zeit, 78, Plan 7; 132, Plan 8. Twelfth Dynasty to late New Kingdom.



When back home in the Nile valley and delta, in a world made more complex by the development of innumerable local traditions, the same people rejoined a world of many options in the search for protection and the expression of gratitude beyond the society of the living. Some options were to be found in the home, where spells could bring protection and where, at least in later periods, ancestors could be remembered and honoured. Those ancestors and the spirits of the more powerful dead were primarily accessible, however, at their tombs and the offering-places and chapels with which they were often provided. These were regular destinations for many Egyptians, either from the obligations of paid employment as officiants in the permanent offering-cults or from inner promptings. But as a result of moments of invention and personal initiative places within the community were also selected where people could feel close to particular members of the broad assemblage of gods and ancestral spirits that the Egyptians recognized. Some of these places failed to survive for long; others gained sufficient prestige to have a long history. These places of quickened imagination are the shrines and temples of society. In time they served also as repositories of local prestige, manifested through donations of objects, of revenue-producing land and of labour. In their shapes as places and in the character of the donations they chart their own history. Although it could not have been foreseen in the earlier periods, that history was towards a single, carefully constructed formal style which integrated most aspects of material culture. Formal style is open to being broken up into component parts and thus to being taught, using examples as approved models, and hence to involving a greater number of people at various levels of skill. It is also more open to scaling up to monumental size. Full formality of style is what we see as typical of ancient Egypt, the style of the Pharaohs.

The gradual adoption of formality of style is not easily defined by the chronological divisions of dynasties and broader historical periods. I have been inclined to group the earlier material under the heading ‘Preformal’. In terms of architecture, the temples of the New Kingdom, which mark a major extension of patronage in favour of towns, giving each a striking centre of local prestige, represent the flowering of formality and so a ‘Mature Formal’ style. ‘Early Formal’ covers intermediate forms, whilst the ‘Late Formal’ temple absorbed much energy in the period between the Thirtieth Dynasty and the earlier part of the Roman occupation of Egypt.

This chapter is primarily concerned with places of encounter with gods, and the term ‘Preformal’ still implies something that can be recognized as a shrine. But self-evident recognizability cannot be extended indefinitely back into Egypt’s prehistory. Readily identifiable shrines – designated spaces that we can recognize were created for communication with accessible and named invisible beings – appear in the archaeological record relatively late. Was there a yet earlier phase which we are still unable to see? The transition from more-or-less invisibility or insubstantiality to visibility and growing formality has been observed in African societies since their contact with the West:

The more a society departs from the simplest forms of social organization – lineages and clans – in the direction of state structure, the more the places of worship tend to take on importance. In other words, political and administrative centralization itself requires a certain concentration of religion into well-defined buildings, while the division of society into lineages and clans favors the scattering of places of worship and diminishes their distinctiveness to the point that certain of them blend into the environment.4



An example of how simplicity in this context could manifest itself is provided by accounts of the people of Ingessana (on the Sudan-Ethiopian border), where the basic form of settlement remained till modern times the individual farmstead composed of a cluster of circular dwellings surrounded by a fence. The shrine was a hut, in appearance indistinguishable from others and usually empty. Although regarded as dwelling houses for gods, an important part of their purpose was to shelter those outside from what was thought to be inside. Myths explained them as having been ‘built as ordinary houses but at an extra-ordinary time, usually at the origin of the world as it is today’.5 They contained no carved images of divinities; indeed, they have sometimes been described as containing no artefacts at all.

How the peoples of the Egyptian Nile valley imagined their world before the later predynastic phases is largely lost to us. We should not assume that it resembled the later world of named gods often associated with places or that it drew forth distinctive behaviour at particular localities. That formalized picture is part of the runaway invention of Pharaonic culture which took place as the dynastic state came together, passing through a distinctive ‘intermediate’ phase during the Nagada culture as it did so. What we can do is to examine the evidence for early manifestations and try to identify its components and whether they arose as a defined group. The evidence is not only architectural. It extends to groups of mostly small objects to which the term ‘votive’ is generally given.





Communicating via objects


In the fortified town of Iken (modern Mirgissa) in Nubia a small shrine was created during the Eighteenth Dynasty to house a cult of the goddess Hathor, in her local form ‘Lady of Iken’ (Figure 3.3).6 The cult was an Egyptian creation to serve the needs of the small local and probably predominantly Egyptian population. Hathor represented the kindly side of nature. At Mirgissa, an isolated desert location far from Egypt’s homelands, she was a person to turn to for solace. It is one of a number of small shrines where the goddess Hathor was honoured and where people left small objects inside the shrine, in this case within a space so small that it would have been necessary to kneel or crouch down to reach the offering-stone which was set on the ground (although it was a step upwards in formality from the shrine at Gebel Zeit, Figure 3.2, p. 114). Many of the objects were of a kind – beads, pendants, broken pieces of glass and faience – which, when found in other contexts, we would recognize only as part of the debris of ordinary living. They had not been made to be used in this way. They had become votives only when they were left inside the tiny shrine.



Figure 3.3Judging objects by where they are found. Top right. Plan of the New Kingdom temple at Mirgissa, including the side shrine to Hathor. After Vercoutter, Mirgissa, 307–9, Figs 1–4; H. Lyons, JEA 3 (1916), 182–3. Left and below. Selection of objects found in the Hathor shrine. All (even the wooden stela) would be at home in domestic settings. They acquire the term ‘votive offerings’ only from being found in a shrine. (1) Wooden stela with designs in black, red, blue and green on white. On the left, seated on a throne, is the goddess Hathor ‘Lady of Iken’ (the ancient name of Mirgissa). Facing her and presenting her with a bowl of incense is a woman named Tamehit (‘Northern breeze’). Height 18.5 cm. Museum of Khartoum. (2) Painted wooden counterweight from a bead collar in the form of the goddess Hathor. (3) Sherd from a polychrome glass vessel. (4) Earring in blue faience. (5) Large blue faience scarab bearing the prenomen of Amenhetep III. (6) Painted limestone figurine of a woman on a bed. (7) Blue faience figurine of woman. (8) Natural pebble. (9) Faience bead in the shape of the goddess Taweret. (10) Four faience collar pendants in plant designs. The stela after J. Vercoutter, RdÉ 16 (1964), 181, Fig. 2; the other objects after Vercoutter, Mirgissa, 328–60. No scales are given in the publication. The illustration (without the stela) originally appeared in B. Kemp, CAJ 5 (1995), 27, Fig. 1.



A characteristic of many of the pieces is a glossy turquoise colour, commonly used in making glass and faience. Whether through cause or effect we cannot tell, but Hathor’s cult at the main source of turquoise in Sinai gave a name to her local form there, ‘Lady of Turquoise’. Thus fragments of turquoise-coloured glass or faience (and, by further extension, objects of these materials in other colours) were deemed to be pleasing to her. Their shape was less important or of no importance at all. They acted as a special currency by means of which transactions were possible between humans and gods. Gratitude for deliverance was one reason. Although of a different form, a tiny stela from a shrine on a hillside at Asyut, for example, where the canine-formed god Wepwawet was honoured, expresses gratitude for safe deliverance from the attack of a crocodile.7 A few of the pieces at the Mirgissa shrine have the shape of a woman attached to a plaque which sometimes has the form of a bed. But one must be careful in thinking that one can guess the meaning. One spell in a papyrus collection to be recited over the figurine of a woman is for the alleviation of stomach ache. The process is made explicit. Once certain words have been spoken ‘over a woman’s statue of clay’, then: ‘As for anything he suffers from in [his] belly – the affliction will be transferred from him into the Isis-statue, until he is healed.’ Since similar figurines are fairly common in houses of the period (the New Kingdom), the spell could actually have been used in the house without need of a shrine.8

We are commonly attracted to small objects that can easily be handled or even held in the hand and which often have the shape of a person or animal. Their meaning need not be very specific and they can attract the possibility of communion, offering quiet comfort. We should not take for granted that a particular shape used in the past had a meaning that we can recover or which was even defined in words. Shapes resonate in the mind, being variously pleasing or otherwise, or bringing associations from other experiences, none of them necessarily amenable to the codings of language. The fact of personal possession can be its most important trait. Leaving something of oneself at a place with a special atmosphere can be a significant act in itself, whether that something is a possession (a faience ring, for example) which a person can leave in a shrine or (as in the case of the Wadi Hammamat quarry) is a personal name carved on a rock. One can ask the question, is this an area of behaviour that had been expressed over the millennia in ways that archaeology does not pick up and only in the latter part of the Predynastic Period became more explicitly defined and permanently visible, as levels of craftsmanship, the supply of raw materials and the appearance of greater craft specialization rose as society became more complex?

Some of the early sites, as well as places like the Gebel Zeit shelter of the New Kingdom and evidence from houses at Amarna (pp. 371–2), suggest that we should not be too strict or formal in how we envisage a shrine.

As illustrated in this chapter, concentrations of small objects, often representational, are one of the defining features of early shrines; they can be, in fact, the only defining feature. The practice raises the further question, was the act of marking a place with something of oneself the key to this behaviour, with the formalization of ideas about gods a secondary development? The variety of shapes of the objects in question suggests that personal preferences dictated the forms – inner projections of the individual’s imagination (inevitably limited by shared experiences with the local group). These inner projections of the imagination might not yet have had sufficient names and linkages to form the kind of system of knowledge that developed in Pharaonic times and that we like to impose on the past.

What was offered to users by some of the places which archaeology signals as perhaps significant in this context was confinement, privacy, semi-darkness, a place where they could clasp small objects in the hand and – perhaps aided by closed eyes – drift into a state of reverie in which the mind escapes from the logic of the visible world to the conjurings of the imagination, typically seeking help and guidance or giving thanks for these in return. The experience can work without it being necessary to have an explicit focus of attention – a statue or a two-dimensional depiction – although a personal object held in the hand probably helps. By leaving it behind, something of the owner remained there, to join the accumulated promptings from previous visits and previous visitors. How careful we must be in drawing boundaries is illustrated by an Old Kingdom building at Elephantine (see p. 197), which seems to have been the residence of the town’s governor or mayor, but at the same time was equipped in a way that marks it as a place of cult.





Early shrines


The first three examples – Elephantine, Tell Ibrahim Awad and Tell el-Farkha – are presented here in a decreasing order of the clarity which they bring to the subject. The fact that Tell el-Farkha seems to be earliest perhaps makes the lack of clarity of meaning a significant fact in itself.





Elephantine9


This small town site on the southern tip of Elephantine Island was built directly over natural rounded granite boulders. Its development as a town, with a fortified annexe, occurred during the Early Dynastic Period (and is illustrated in Chapter 5, with Figures 5.3 and 5.4, pp. 199, 201). In 1972–3 a shrine serving this early town was discovered (Figure 3.4 and Photograph 3.1). It lay in an angle formed by the walls of the town and the fortress, amidst the boulders themselves. This setting has provided archaeology with a so far unique set of circumstances. At other temple sites, on flatter ground, the rebuilding and enlargement of temples in later periods inevitably did much damage, and sometimes wrought havoc, to the earliest shrines. Not so at Elephantine. The builders of later temples, in seeking to escape the space restrictions created by the boulders surrounding the early site, simply filled the site in, and then paved it over, so sealing the early shrine and its associated floors and artefacts. The resulting archaeological record gives us, for the first time, a fairly complete picture of what an early local shrine looked like.



Figure 3.4The early shrine at Elephantine, preserved beneath the pavement of the Eighteenth Dynasty temple of the goddess Satet (see also Photograph 3.1). The two plans at the top record two stages in the architectural evolution of the brick shrine. In the Sixth Dynasty plan, ‘a’ is a cartouche of Pepi II, ‘b’ is a short inscription of Merenra. Below is the section along the line X–Y. For a reconstruction of the pedestal for the portable image see Figure 3.17 (2), p. 147. After G. Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, Abb. 1, 16, 7. Figure 5.3, p. 199, marks its location.





Photograph 3.1Provincial tradition: Preformal mud-brick temple at Elephantine in its late Old Kingdom phase, looking south-west. From Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, Tafel 2a. By courtesy of the Deutsches Archäologisches Institut Kairo.



Its history began as a corner at the back of a squarish natural niche between the boulders. It must have looked like a small cave. The qualities of enclosed spaces that emulate cavities within the earth – the term ‘chthonic’ is quite useful here – can have a strong effect on the imagination, though, as we shall see at other sites (especially Hierakonpolis and Coptos), there were other directions in which the attention could be drawn. The experience of a single unknown individual at a moment in the Predynastic Period must have led to a slowly growing recognition that this was a place of communication with a spirit world. In whatever ways its users communicated they left no marks on the actual rock faces, which seem to have remained in their natural state. The space in front was, however, gradually enclosed, at first by two small brick rooms and then by further walls to create a more clearly defined courtyard (or a roofed area). The development took place within the Early Dynastic Period, although some of the pottery found is of predynastic date.

The basic form of the shrine – a niche in the rock served by modest brick shelters – was kept throughout the Old Kingdom, and apparently on until the time of the reunification of Egypt in the Eleventh Dynasty (c. 2040 BC), a period of six centuries. Over this time the principal change to the shrine’s appearance was to create a more neatly defined space in front using thicker walls. In its centre stood a square pedestal, 0.95 × 1.10 m, constructed from courses of brick separated by layers of matting for extra strength. A wooden pole stood against each corner. As will be suggested in a later section of this chapter, this could have been a canopied podium (facing north) to support a portable divine image. The little complex as a whole was then protected by an outer corridor and second wall. Overall, we can identify on a tiny scale the journey of ‘appearance’ – from a hidden interior to a place of visible presence – around which the architecture of later temples and palaces was designed (most notably, Figure 6.9, p. 268, and Figure 8.5, p. 332).

In the Eleventh Dynasty the shrine was enhanced, carved stone slabs being set into a renewed mud-brick structure, though the plan seems to have been a continuation of the existing one. In turn this shrine was replaced at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty (reign of Senusret I) by another building largely made of finely decorated stone blocks. However, to judge from the extent of stone pavement (the loose blocks have been rebuilt in modern times nearby on the site), even the Twelfth Dynasty shrine kept to the same restricted limits as had developed during the Old Kingdom, although becoming a neat structure measuring c. 12 × 8 m. The increasing use of decorated stone blocks reflects a general trend in Egypt towards greater court-inspired patronage. In the Eighteenth Dynasty the original site exemplified the move towards greater formality and monumentalism at provincial sites, and it took on a very different aspect. The existing building was pulled down, and the ancient niche and court were filled with blocks of stone in order to build the level of the ground up to the top of the granite boulders. On this new higher and level platform, a larger stone temple was erected, in the reign of Tuthmosis III. The Mature Formal phase had arrived. Yet even at this time the builders tried to maintain contact with the original sacred ground that they had so thoroughly buried. The new sanctuary was sited over the old one, and direct communication was made by means of a stone-lined shaft that descended through the foundations to the floor of the early sanctuary.

If the simplicity of the early shrine is striking, corresponding to the great age of pyramid building in the north, so also is the relative simplicity, even crudeness, of most of the hundreds of small representational objects recovered from the associated floor levels (Figure 3.5). Many were found scattered within them, but one particular concentration seems to have formed during the Fifth Dynasty. Most of the objects were made from faience (the shiny blue/green glazed synthetic material which was the ancient equivalent to modern plastic), but pottery, ivory, limestone and sandstone were used as well. They can be grouped as follows:

1human figures: both adults and children, the most numerous group being children with fingers at their mouth; a unique figure is the lower part of a seated king, which bears a single hieroglyphic sign interpreted as reading the name of the First Dynasty King Djer (although from a Sixth Dynasty level);

2baboons/apes, a few also with fingers to mouth;

3a small number of animals and birds, the former including frogs, crocodiles, lion, pig, hippopotamus, cat and hedgehog;

4oval faience plaques bearing at one end the head of an animal, apparently a hedgehog (41 examples of this curious design); there is a parallel from Tell Ibrahim Awad (Figure 3.6 (2), p. 124) where the plaque has a clear boat shape;

5faience tiles of the type otherwise used in wall inlays, many with an incised or painted sign on the back;

6faience objects of various forms, mainly large beads, necklace spacers and model pots;

7natural flint pebbles of curious shapes (and similar to Figure 3.3 (8), p. 117);

8flint knives.





Figure 3.5Selection of votive objects from the early temple deposits at Elephantine (top row), Hierakonpolis (middle row) and Abydos (bottom row). (1) Faience plaque with head of hedgehog, height 8.5 cm (after Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, Taf. 37.202). (2) Faience plaque commemorating the first Sed-festival of King Pepi I, Sixth Dynasty, 6.4 by 4.5 by 1.5 cm (after ibid., Abb. 58, Taf. 56.440). (3) Faience figurine of a young girl, height 8.1 cm (after ibid., Taf. 17.42). (4) Faience scorpion with raised tail and sting, length 7.6 cm (after Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis, Pl. 13.98). (5) Ivory figurine of woman, height 20.4 cm (after ibid., Pl. 44.360). (6) Faience figurine of kneeling ibex, length 9.4 cm (after Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, Pl. XXII.17). (7) Faience baboon, height 18.9 cm (after Petrie Abydos II, Pl. VI.51). (8) Faience model of pot on a stand, height 6.8 cm (after ibid., Pl. XI.244). (9) Two large, natural flint nodules in suggestive shapes, heights 87.6 and 64.8 cm (after ibid., Pl. IX.195, 196).



In addition to these groups a number of objects bore the names of Kings Pepi I and II of the Sixth Dynasty (c. 2265–2219 and 2212–2118 BC). Some of them, perhaps all, were in celebration of the first Sed-festival (jubilee) of these kings. One was a vase in the form of a squatting ape holding its young. The remainder were faience plaques (mostly for Pepi I). The Sixth Dynasty provided also the only inscriptions found in position: two graffiti of King Merenra (c. 2219–2212 BC) and of King Pepi II scratched on one of the granite walls of the niche, the former commemorating a military campaign into Nubia.10

This material comes from a series of stratified layers that range through all of the first six dynasties. Yet vertical position does not automatically assign a date of manufacture to an individual piece; it merely shows when it was discarded, and some pieces may have been old when finally buried in the floor of the shrine. The traditions involved clearly began in the Early Dynastic Period, and set a tone that lasted for a long time. The detailed study of the material piece by piece, however, shows that whilst the Early Dynastic Period is the date for the origination of the style and repertoire of forms, it is not necessarily the date for the manufacture of every piece. The tradition ran on through the Old Kingdom, and at the end the faience plaques bearing the names of Sixth Dynasty kings were being produced in the same simple way. A small group of craftsmen, perhaps attached to the shrine, must have met a demand for such objects, retaining forms and techniques over a long period of time, the entire first six dynasties in fact (the almost one thousand years between our conventional dates of 3085–2117 BC).

Another conspicuous feature of this group of objects, which applies also to similar groups from other sites (including Tell Ibrahim Awad, Tell el-Farkha and Abydos), is the absence of representations that can be associated with deities as defined and represented in the formal art which became increasingly pervasive as the Old Kingdom developed (although the Hierakonpolis group includes figurines of hawks, assumed to represent Horus). To judge from the text on a granite naos donated by Pepi I and reinscribed under Merenra (from the shrine area, although its original position is not known for sure), by the end of the Old Kingdom the site was held to be sacred to the goddess Satet, who later appears as one of a group of three Elephantine deities: Khnum, Satet and Anukis.11 Their forms were distinctive: Khnum was a ram, and the others were women with unusual headdresses. Yet nothing relating to these forms occurs amongst the votive material.

This varied (indeed, heterogeneous) range of material stands in contrast to the standardized forms of gods and goddesses that arose as court thinkers reduced a varied and fuzzily defined assemblage of imaginary beings present throughout the population into the ‘pantheon’ of gods and goddesses, each with a name and some distinguishing feature, a collective that shapes a good part of our perception of ancient Egypt. Just as how, in the built environment, self-organization pulls in one direction whilst imposed, ordered layouts pull in the other, so in the world of knowledge, self-definition and myriad local spontaneous promptings can find themselves working separately from an academic format preferred by those whose role it is to maintain that format. Invention is the result. Yet transfer from one to the other could take place. The images of baboons and scorpions as objects of cult in court circles are examples.12

The fact that we can work backwards in time at Elephantine from clearly identifiable temple remains to a natural feature urges us to label the original granite niche as the first shrine there. The small objects which had been left there at the beginning marked the visits of individuals who wished to leave something of themselves in a place which triggered inner contact with an imagined presence with whom perhaps transactions were possible. In time this developed into recognition of a named goddess (Satis) together with people whose job it was to guard, improve and administer the place, incorporated into the system of local administration.





Tell Ibrahim Awad13


Tell Ibrahim Awad, located in the north-eastern delta (Figure 2.5, p. 73), is the worn-down stump of an archaeological mound which preserves the remains of a provincial town whose name has been lost but whose beginnings extended back into the Predynastic Period. An excavation begun in 1988 exposed the deep foundations of a Middle Kingdom brick building at a level below that of the original floor and surrounding ground (Figure 3.6). As is characteristic of the Middle Kingdom, the walls are thick (up to 2.90 m) and enclose relatively small spaces. They define a rectangular building that seems to have stood within an enclosure wall. The Middle Kingdom layer seems not to survive over other parts of the site so it is not possible to judge to what extent, if any, this building fitted within a larger planned town of the period. The fact that a cemetery lay against one side does, however, point to the likelihood that it stood towards the edge of the town.



Figure 3.6Superimposed Old Kingdom and Middle Kingdom brick buildings at Tell Ibrahim Awad in the eastern delta. They have been identified as temples mostly on account of the objects found in the fill of soil. After D. Eigner, ‘A temple of the early Middle Kingdom at Tell Ibrahim Awad’, in van den Brink, Nile Delta, 70–1, Figs 1, 2; D. Eigner, Ä&L 10 (2000), 17–36; W.M. van Haarlem, EA 18 (2001), plan on p. 33. (1) Faience crocodile, length c. 19 cm. (2) Pottery hedgehog-ship, length c. 10 cm. (3) Ivory female figurine. (4) Faience model of a shrine, its door flanked by a pair of poles with streamers (?) at the top, the later sign for divinity. (1) and (3) after photographs in W.M. van Haarlem, EA 18 (2001), p. 33; (2) after W.M. van Haarlem, JEA 82 (1996), Pl. XX.1 and 2; (4) after W.M. van Haarlem, MDAIK 54 (1998), 184, Fig. 3.



The excavators discerned, both in the fragmentary plan and in certain associated features, sufficient reason for identifying the building as a temple. The features were a bed of sand beneath the main walls, and, almost straddling the east–west axis, a rectangular sand-filled pit (c. 7 × 5.60 m) over and around which were numerous limestone chippings assumed to be from the destruction of a small structure built of limestone blocks. Deeper excavation then revealed walls from a far more modest building, on a different alignment, and with a far less formal plan. This, too, has been interpreted as a temple or shrine, of the Old Kingdom.14 Within an oblong chamber (8 × 3 m) a partition wall defined a tiny space (2 × 1.5 m) that partially surrounded a low platform. A row of pottery offering-stands had stood along one wall.

Scattered within the surrounding soil, buried in pits and left within some of the rooms were objects that, collectively, resemble those from Elephantine (as well as from other sites; see below). Numbering over 600, they include figures of humans and a variety of faience and ivory animals (largely carved from hippopotamus tusks), such as baboons (200 of them), crocodiles and hippopotamuses; also mace heads, gaming pieces, jewellery, faience wall tiles, natural stones in odd shapes and vessels deemed to be ‘cultic’. Particularly striking are a hedgehog-shaped boat in pottery of a type known primarily from Elephantine, and models in faience of wood-and-matting shrines (Figure 3.6 (4)), buildings quite unlike the walled space in which they were found. The building and the objects, when taken together, have the potential to be a brick version of the Elephantine shrine, a cave-like place built on a plain (or did it occupy a mound which is no longer visible?). Because the settlement did not develop into a place of long-term patronage, expressed in part through carved stonework, we can give no name to a god or goddess honoured here.





Tell el-Farkha15


Tell el-Farkha is another of several early sites located in the eastern part of the delta (Figure 2.5, p. 73). As it survives now it covers around 4.5 ha and rises to 4.5 m above the surrounding fields. It comprises three separate low mounds to which the Arabic word kôm (‘a lesser mound’ or ‘hillock’) is applied, thus East Kom, Central Kom and West Kom. A major excavation programme, beginning in 1998, has revealed parts of an inhabited area and a cemetery, through superimposed layers which extend from a time in the Predynastic Period (equivalent to the beginning of Nagada IIB/C, c. 3450 BC) to a time in the Fourth Dynasty. It is one of the sites where one can follow the transition from the cultural characteristics of the Lower Egyptian predynastic tradition to that of the Nagada tradition which was rooted in Upper Egypt.

Amongst the material found are many representational objects of a size that can be readily held in the hand, thus figurines. The materials are ivory derived from hippopotamus tusks, clay, faience and wood (although only the gold-leaf covering of two of them left them recognizable in the damp, saline soil). They show considerable variety in form, style and level of craftsmanship, and tended to occur in groups. We have already looked at the pair of gold-leaf covered male figurines (Figure 2.12, p. 84) which fit other portrayals thought to be of rulers. Along with two large flint knives and hundreds of carnelian and ostrich egg-shell beads, they were found buried beside a wall inside a room or courtyard on the corner of a mud-brick building complex on the East Kom, the date of burial being perhaps two centuries before the beginning of the First Dynasty.

The principal concentrations of objects were found on the West Kom, again within a mud-brick building complex now of the last phase of occupation, its abandonment dated to the middle of the First Dynasty (Figure 3.7). They occurred within defined spaces, one a room (W106) measuring c. 3 × 2 m, the other seemingly an L-shaped space (W211) c. 2.5 m wide, its plan not fully recovered. Many of the objects (in one case numbering 62) had been left inside pottery vessels which might have originally been buried beneath the floor. Other objects, including beads, were found loose within the earth. The objects as a whole include siltstone (‘slate’) palettes, pear-shaped stone mace heads and, most notably, figurines. With them, the makers have combined observation of the world around them with varying degrees of fantasy and have rendered them with great skill. The figurines of a scorpion and of a fish and of a woman holding a child follow natural forms. There is a fascination with dwarf humans, men and women, which had a long subsequent history in Egypt. In two subjects, however, nature and fantasy have merged: a snake with a human (woman’s?) face, and a quadruped with bird’s head and a probably lion’s body (as in a griffin).



Figure 3.7Plan of the latest phase of buildings at the West Kom, Tell el-Farkha, from the end of the Predynastic Period. Areas A and B contained concentrations of objects, many of them figurines. Do they identify the spaces as ‘shrines’ and thus that the objects are ‘votives’? After Chłodnicki et al., Tell el-Farkha, 178, Fig. 26. The accompanying objects made from hippopotamus tusk are a selection from one of these deposits, found in a pottery jar in area ‘B’, and are after ibid., 208–18, various figs. (1) Scorpion. (2) Snake with woman’s face, height 2.4 cm. (3) Seated ‘griffin’ (bird-headed lion?), height 7.2 cm. (4) Woman seated in a basket and holding a child, height 4.1 cm. (5) Boat with cabin. (6) Male dwarf, height 4.8 cm. (7) Female dwarf, height 3.4 cm. The objects are in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo. Drawings by A. Boyce.



Meaning is one thing, purpose another. The places where the figurines and associated objects were found are subdivisions of a building of many spaces where purpose is hard to define. Neither in their positions nor in their internal features do the rooms with objects appear to show features which distinguish them from others. Without the collections of objects the rooms would call for no special comment and, unlike at Elephantine, the abandonment of this part of the site means that there are no signs of how later generations regarded it (although the Central Kom continued to be occupied into the Fourth Dynasty, by which time, at Elephantine, a more recognizable shrine was appearing). Given that this is a significant time in the development of Egyptian perception and behaviour, when a latent part of people’s psychology became formalized, eventually manifesting itself in places specifically constructed for communication with gods, we can interpret Tell el-Farkha as a place where the process was arrested at a relatively early moment. If we use the term ‘shrine’ for these enclosed spaces we should do so without imbuing them with attributes which only appeared later and at other sites.

The next two sites, Abydos and Hierakonpolis, offer narratives which are similar to that for Elephantine in that they belong to towns with important later cult associations although the contexts for the early material are harder to define.





Abydos16


As already mentioned (p. 86), the provincial town of Abydos probably came into existence close to the beginning of the First Dynasty. Late in the Old Kingdom the temple site which lay adjacent to the town saw a major phase of rebuilding, which represented a step towards formality (Figure 3.8). The main emphasis was on creating a new enclosure with a thick girdle wall. On the north-east side, towards the north corner, lay a stone-lined gateway bearing traces of the cartouche of one of the Kings Pepi of the Sixth Dynasty. A number of mud-brick buildings of modest size stood within the enclosure, none of them, by size or layout, being self-evidently a temple. Here we are put on a particular track by limestone stelae concerned with the administration of a temple (‘mansion of god’) of the god Khenti-amentiu (‘Foremost of the Westerners’, thus the spirits of the blessed dead, and portrayed as a jackal). They date to the reigns of Neferirkara, Teti and Pepi II (collectively c. 2282–2118 BC), and thus to almost the whole span of the Sixth Dynasty. One of them was found in place, directly in front of the stone-lined entrance to one of the brick buildings. It is natural to identify the building as the temple of Khenti-amentiu, despite its modest appearance, a rectangle measuring 18 × 21 m, with internal subdivisions.



Figure 3.8Remains of the early temple of the god Khenti-amentiu at Abydos. The temple stood close to the corner of a heavily walled enclosure, surrounded by storerooms and other buildings. After Petrie, Abydos II, Pls L–LIV. The walls that appear grey are of an earlier period, associated with a bed of sand.



This same building also lay at the centre of a spread of small objects, mostly figurines. Some were found inside, and included faience tablets and alabaster vases bearing the names of Pepi I and II. At a depth of 50 cm beneath the floor was a large deposit of ash and burnt earth containing ‘hundreds of little twists of burnt clay’. Similar objects were found in an apparently Early Dynastic deposit beneath the New Kingdom temple at Armant.17 Other small objects had been buried in nearby pits, one of them (pit M69) actually beneath the line of the wall of this late Old Kingdom temple. They consisted of human figurines, made mostly of ivory and faience, a large group of animal figurines mostly of faience, limestone and ivory, and models of pots, boats, portable shrines, fruits and flowers, which were practically all of faience (see Figure 3.5, p. 122). One of the human figurines was a beautiful ivory statuette of a king in jubilee-festival robe.18 This material shares the same dating problem with the deposits from Hierakonpolis. It became separated from its context when the temple was rebuilt, and its Preformal style creates an impression of extreme age. It has, however, a close parallel with the material from Elephantine. Some is undoubtedly Early Dynastic, but other pieces probably extend the range into the Old Kingdom. By the time that the temple came to be rebuilt late in the Old Kingdom they were no longer actively required in the temple, so they were buried in the foundations.19

There is the implication, therefore, that this Sixth Dynasty temple had replaced something earlier. The structural remains that could be traced beneath the floor consisted, however, of only patches of sand and lengths of thin brick walls that do not join up to form a single coherent building. One part seems to consist of a rectangular courtyard from which a narrow brick-lined corridor leads off, recalling in a general way the basic ground plan of the Preformal temple at Medamud (see below, pp. 135–7). In the late Eleventh Dynasty and the reign of Senusret I the temple was rebuilt again, employing limited amounts of stonework, presumably set into walls of mud brick. All trace of this building had been destroyed in further rebuilding in the New Kingdom.

The Old Kingdom temple was one of many buildings, some of them houses, which seemingly filled the large walled enclosure, so turning it into an early example of an urban citadel that protected the community’s main assets, the temple being one of them. Another of its buildings, which lay closer to the gateway, contained the remains of many statues of wood, and a tiny ivory statuette of Khufu, builder of the Great Pyramid. It could have been a supplementary place for honouring statues especially of kings.

One consequence of increasing court patronage and the involvement of the formalizing approach at Abydos was the change in the identity of the god to whom the temple was principally dedicated in the Old Kingdom: from Khenti-amentiu, a local jackal god, to Osiris, whose cult was to take on national significance. This aspect of the cult at Abydos, which exemplifies the re-codification of tradition, will be taken up a little later. However, as at Elephantine and Hierakonpolis, the range of votive figures in no way reflects either of these deities that the formal sources of the later Old Kingdom tell us were principally associated with the temple. One model of a portable divine image from amongst the votive collection shows a figure without any of the characteristics of either Khenti-amentiu or Osiris (Figure 3.17 (A31), p. 147).





Hierakonpolis


During the Old Kingdom, a walled town developed at Hierakonpolis (ancient name Nekhen)20 over the site of the final nucleus into which the sprawling low-density predynastic settlement had shrunk (see Figure 2.8, p. 77). The area where the temple developed occupied the southern corner of the town. On the map, this is shown within a separate rectangular enclosure (Figure 3.9, and Figure 5.2, pp. 130 and 198), but its date is not settled. Several periods in this part are represented in a compressed stratigraphy that remains ambiguous. The area has been examined twice, first by a British expedition in 1897 and 1898 (J.E. Quibell, W.M.F. Petrie and F.W. Green), and then by an American expedition of the 1970s and 1980s (W.A. Fairservis). One aim of the latter was to clarify the results of the former, but this proved to be difficult, in part because a rise in the water table had made the lower levels virtually inaccessible.



Figure 3.9The temple remains at Hierakonpolis (see also Figures 2.8, p. 77, and 5.2, p. 198). The scant remains of the Mature Formal temple (Eighteenth Dynasty and later) are in grey. For the earlier brick buildings (cross-hatched) I have preferred the outlines of Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Plate LXXII to those of the later Fairservis expedition, published in Fairservis, Hierakonpolis 1978, Fig. 6. In the former time the buildings were much better preserved, and the latter plan is little more than a sketch. The two are difficult to reconcile. Fairservis was of the opinion that building A was later (and was the foundations for a New Kingdom stone building), whilst B was of the Old Kingdom (on account of abutted settlement walls of this period).



The contents of the enclosure fall into roughly three parts. That on the north-west is largely blank, because the ground had been denuded down to below the main building levels. That in the middle is occupied by part of a dense arrangement of brick walls laid out on a rectangular plan, and overlying a low artificial mound of sand, measuring 48 × 48 m and 2.3 m high, kept in place by a revetment of small roughly cut sandstone blocks. That on the south and south-east contains fewer remains, but amongst them are most of the pieces that derive from a stone temple of the New Kingdom which faced north-eastwards, towards the river, and had initially been built by Tuthmosis III. It includes the remains of a pair of pylons from an entrance, the brick foundations for columns, and a scatter of foundation deposits. Possibly a monumental entrance doorway was added in the Ptolemaic Period. As was usually the case, the New Kingdom builders had removed the walls of earlier constructions to make way for their own. The brick walls of the adjacent middle part of the site are at the same level as the Eighteenth Dynasty temple. Are they of the same period? Although their overlap with the Eighteenth Dynasty temple is slight, it does occur, and seems to bear no relationship to it.

A tempting (though by no means inevitable) interpretation is that two main periods of temple development at Hierakonpolis lie side by side instead of, as was more often the case, superimposed one over the other. Thus the brick walls of the central part are the remains of a planned Middle Kingdom layout of a temple and its ancillary buildings (representing its Early Formal phase) whilst alongside it King Tuthmosis III subsequently added a Mature Formal stone temple. Was the adjacent site so important that it was preferable to leave it visible, the earlier brick buildings perhaps reduced to a mound suggestive of great antiquity (mounds in later periods were sometimes seen as sacred in their own right)? The brick building at its centre may well be the actual shrine, for which the Middle Kingdom supplies the chief parallel (at Qasr el-Sagha in the Fayum) although some see it as earlier.21 In the central chamber a brick-lined pit lay in the floor, covered with a basalt slab. The pit contained a complete divine image: a hawk of thin copper plate, with head and plumes of gold, exquisitely made, yet small in scale (Figure 3.10).22 A second deposit was found beneath the floor of the end chamber to the north. This contained two similar copper statues of standing males (one inscribed for Pepi I), one of the dark stone (greywacke) statues of King Khasekhemui of the Second Dynasty, and a fine pottery lion probably of the Early Dynastic Period. These pieces are all in the formal ‘classic’ Pharaonic style. The straightforward explanation (though not necessarily the correct one) is that the statues had stood within the chambers in which they were buried. This would identify the building as a temple containing an image of Horus in one chamber and statues of kings in another (with the implication that the lion statue also represented a ruler).



Figure 3.10An early divine image: the falcon god Horus of Hierakonpolis protecting the figure of a king. Originally of wood (now perished), sheathed in copper and with a gold head. Found buried in a pit in the sanctuary of the Early Formal Temple at Hierakonpolis (Figure 3.9). After Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Pl. XLVII; Quibell, Archaic Objects, Pl. 65.



Lying not far away in the ground beneath the walls, but in an ill-defined heap instead of in a pit, was the ‘Main Deposit’. Part of it consisted of important artistic material: ‘slate’ palettes (including the Narmer and Two-dog Palettes, Figure 2.10, p. 81, and Figure 2.15, p. 91), carved mace heads, ivory statuettes, and other ivories with designs in relief, a fragmentary limestone statue of the same King Khasekhemui (see Figure 2.18 (5), p. 95 for the design on the base), and stone bowls of his reign (Figure 2.18 (4), p. 95, is a design on the shoulder of one of them). But numerically preponderant were small objects, often crude in execution. The commonest were mace heads, little shallow alabaster dishes, other vessels in stone and faience, including model vessels on tall stands, and animal figurines in various materials: monkeys, including one hugging its young, birds, frogs, hippopotamuses, dogs, a boar, gazelle or ibex, and numerous scorpions or scorpion tails. The material hardly corresponds with the divine attribution of the temple to the falcon god Horus of Nekhen in historic times.

The Main Deposit lay beneath the walls of part of the brick building which is identified above as the Early Formal temple. Beneath another part of it lay the greater portion of an even earlier structure: the circular mound of clean desert sand encased within a sloping wall of rough sandstone blocks already mentioned.23 Its stratigraphic position implies that it was created late in the Predynastic Period. Old Kingdom houses had been built around it, but had not encroached upon it, so that it may well have stood visible and in use for a part of the Old Kingdom at least. Around it had been erected a number of free-standing stone pillars, one of which may have been in the form of a tall striding man (it was found reused in a different part of the site). These introduce a very different idea as to how a significant space could be laid out, seemingly ignoring the linear journey between the hidden and the revealed. The last chapter illustrated a range of early ideal shapes for shrines, made from timber and matting. In neighbouring regions outside Egypt, to the south, south-west and north-east, however, there is evidence for a widespread interest in marking significant places by means of standing stones, either individually (where they were themselves the focus of interest) or arranged in circles (where the thinking was more complex). The presence of standing stones around the central mound at Hierakonpolis shows that this tradition had a role in early Egypt as a way of creating a boundary that dispensed with a surrounding wall.

One way in which such stones were construed will be discussed later in this chapter, in a section on the benben-stone of Heliopolis, the principal survival into later times of significant standing stones (see p. 141, with Figure 3.14). In other contexts (e.g. those beside the simple superstructures of the early kings on the Umm el-Qaʾab) they bore royal names and served as markers of personal identity. When in the form of statues, they perhaps acted more as guardians (e.g. those at Coptos; see below, p. 133 and Figure 3.11, and the one from Hierakonpolis). Certain slabs found in the vicinity of the Hierakonpolis mound may well represent further variations from dynastic times. One was a plain, round-topped granite stela, 2.60 m high (Figure 3.14 (3), p. 142), similar to the free-standing stelae which stood in open courts in the mortuary temples attached to certain of the Old Kingdom pyramids (see also Figure 2.23, p. 106). A second was a granite ‘door jamb’ of King Khasekhemui on which was carved a scene of the temple foundation ceremony,24 and a third belonged to one of the kings of the Sixth Dynasty named Pepi.25

Did anything originally stand on top of the mound? This question, so important to understanding how such a structure was viewed and used, is impossible to answer from direct evidence because a later building occupied the same ground. The options are: nothing at all, a single post or tall stone, a building of timber and matting or one of mud brick. Most of the distinctive objects and one royal statue that formed the Main Deposit were, it should be noted, found beside the mound, not on top. It was clearly a place organized differently from the shrine at Elephantine. The range of deposited objects extended beyond those that were the staple at Elephantine to include some that honoured early kings and their victories. We must be careful with the way that particular words push us towards a more restrictive meaning than the range of characteristics that we are trying to understand. ‘Shrine’ and ‘temple’ are two such words. The Elephantine evidence does seem to show the evolution of a shrine, as we normally use the word, from a casually selected place of inner communication. Hierakonpolis offers a more complex set of possibilities, especially once the ‘ceremonial’ site HK 29A is taken into consideration (see below, pp. 149–51). The combination of ceremonies surrounding a locally based king and the early identification of a god of sky and warfare (Horus of Nekhen) honoured at Hierakonpolis perhaps created a centre with functions that went beyond what we mostly expect from the words ‘shrine’ and ‘temple’ (although this is also true for many later buildings in Egypt that we habitually call ‘temples’). We should not forget, however, the scene of temple foundation of the late Second Dynasty mentioned in the last paragraph.

The final two sites, Coptos and Medamud, have so far not produced collections of objects equivalent to those at the sites already considered. They extend considerably, however, our knowledge of the range of ideas and practices centred at sites which were in the process of becoming temples to gods.





Coptos26


Once again the main source for this site, 38 km north-east of Thebes, is an early excavation report, by Flinders Petrie, who dug out the temple area in 1894. Even by that time most of the temple masonry had disappeared. The remaining traces suggest a familiar combination: a Ptolemaic portico on the front of a stone temple of Tuthmosis III of the Eighteenth Dynasty – thus ‘Late Formal’ added to ‘Mature Formal’. Despite the importance of the cult of Min (whose area of prestige extended to the eastern desert including the Wadi Hammamat, Figure 3.1, p. 113), the temple was never developed to be particularly large. Petrie recognized no earlier architecture at all, but it is not clear what weight should be given to this. Within the soil he did discover a range of figurines, made from stone or poorly baked clay. They seem to be products of a local tradition different in style from much of what has so far been illustrated. Faience was not part of it. The clay figurines included humans, some of them carefully modelled statues, others ‘very roughly pinched into form with the fingers, and have details marked with scored lines’. Crocodiles were another subject. Also made from pottery were ring-stands with relief designs. On one the design included hunting dogs and a pair of lotus flowers tied together.27

The most remarkable objects found were torsos of three colossal limestone male figures, holding a wooden staff or similar object (now missing) in one hand, and erect penis (carved separately in stone and now also missing) in the other (Figure 3.11). A fourth piece was a broad head, heavily bearded yet bald. Their original height was probably around 4.1 m, implying a weight of nearly two tons each. Their overall shape, of a flattened cylinder, gives to them something of the character of a stela. In their present broken and decayed state, they now look crudely fashioned, but where patches of their original surface survive it can be judged that they originally had carefully finished surfaces which bore a good deal of subdued modelling of anatomical detail. The figures wear a broad girdle, and down the right side of each a series of symbols had been carved in relief on a slightly raised panel. They cover an enigmatic range of subjects: a stag’s head, pteroceras shells, the ‘thunderbolt’ emblem of the god Min on a pole, long branching trees (probably), an elephant, a hyena and a bull, all with feet resting on hills. As a group, they belong to a vocabulary of symbols in use during the period immediately prior to the First Dynasty, the period of ‘Dynasty 0’, though quite what they represent is hard to establish. Are they, for example, the names of clan-like subdivisions of the society of this part of Upper Egypt?



Figure 3.11Preformal art on a colossal scale: the limestone statues from Coptos. Top right. The torso and upper legs from one of the pair in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, no. 1894.105e. Its height is 1.93 m. Original drawing by A. Boyce. Top left. Carvings on the side of the colossus in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, JdE 30770: (1) A pair of standards topped with a ‘thunderbolt’ emblem and feather alternating with what might be a pair of saw-bones from the Red Sea saw-fish; a small stork or ostrich has been added. (2) A pair of Red Sea shells. (3) An elephant, its feet resting on conical hills, and a bird (rear part only preserved, perhaps Horus above a spike; see Figure 2.11 (1), p. 82. (4) A lion or hyena and a bull, their feet resting on conical hills. Below. Reconstruction of the original setting of the Coptos colossi. Reproduced from B. Kemp, A. Boyce and J. Harrell, CAJ 10 (2000), 211–42.



The colossal figures represent a substantial achievement of organization. They are large masses of stone brought from quarries that lay some distance away, a likely site being El-Dibabiya, 70 km upstream. They remind one of the well-studied case of the colossi on Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean, quarried and erected by people with a technology and organization probably not much different from that of the later Predynastic Period in Egypt. The vital element is the will to do the work: simple technology and communal effort do the rest. There had also been companion pieces of animal sculpture – crouching lions and a bird – rendered in a highly stylized way. On stylistic grounds the lions can be ascribed to most probably the early First Dynasty.28

The disposition of the standing stones at Hierakonpolis offers a guide to how the Coptos colossi might have been arranged, not as a centre of attention, but as an arc of guardian figures surrounding a central feature of interest, perhaps a simple hut shrine on a low natural mound (Figure 3.11; Figure 3.13 (3), p. 140, illustrates a tradition of an archaic hut shrine peculiar to Coptos). Petrie and others observed the remains of the mound, and it was evidently a distinctive feature of the local landscape in the Sixth Dynasty, to judge from a mention of it in a text of that time.29

Since their discovery the colossi have seemed a particularly alien and ‘primitive’ product of the Nile valley. Yet that is because we ourselves see them with hindsight, our aesthetics moulded by what, in the end, became the sole significant tradition in Egyptian art. The colossi communicate powerfully in their own way, and represented to their creators and admirers an emotional and aesthetic satisfaction of a different kind, in a style that allowed for the existence of shapes not fully determined by nature, a unique achievement of preferred local traditions. It was a style that could have been maintained or developed further into a tradition of somewhat surreal renderings of forms. Instead, the line of development was subsequently turned towards a far more literal style of art that delineated perfect natural forms and helped to cut the Egyptians off from their own roots.

For how long were the statues accepted as objects of veneration? The conservative atmosphere of local temples in Upper Egypt, to judge from the archaeological record, could have accommodated them until a royal edict came ordering their replacement, which could have been at almost any time in the Old Kingdom. Furthermore, even after they had been formally abandoned they probably remained a source ofpower to local people. They bear on their bodies many smooth rounded depressions probably from people grinding away to obtain magically efficacious dust. Many of the depressions can have been made only whilst the statues were lying on the ground.





Medamud30


Medamud (ancient name, Madu) was a provincial town with a temple lying 5 km north-east of Karnak at Thebes. In historic times it was the cult centre for the falcon god Menthu, another god with warlike characteristics. Here we can find, from the superimposed layers of architectural foundations, the four main periods of temple building. The Eighteenth Dynasty saw the erection of a new all-stone temple in the Mature Formal style. In the Graeco-Roman Period a broad courtyard in stone in Late Formal style was added to the front, with a double colonnade. A stone wall had extended back from this to embrace the whole sacred precinct. Beneath this stonework and on the south side of the enclosure, excavations in the 1930s revealed a layer of mud-brick foundations. No final report on the last and most vital seasons, those of 1938 and 1939, has been published, but one preliminary report does contain a general plan (Figure 3.12). It shows a rectangular enclosure with external dimensions of 95.5 × 60 m. The girdle wall was 5.5 m thick. One entrance lay through the middle of the east side. The interior was densely built up with rectangular units, carefully pre-planned in the formally rigid style of the Middle Kingdom (see Chapter 5). Only the foundations have been preserved, below threshold level, so that the positions of doorways have been lost. Thus whilst we can distinguish individual units we cannot tell how their individual rooms communicated with one another. In general they seem to be surrounded by a more or less continuous street running along the base of the wall, as in the Middle Kingdom fortresses constructed in Lower Nubia (see Chapter 5). The solidity of the wall even gives to the enclosure a fortress-like appearance, appropriate when one considers later sources which make more explicit the protective character of temple enclosure walls (Figure 6.3, p. 252).



Figure 3.12Two and a half thousand years of temple worship: the temple site at Medamud, showing the superimposed layers of architecture. After C. Robichon and A. Varille, CdÉ 14, no. 27 (1939), 84, Fig. 2; Robichon and Varille, Temple primitif, folding plan at end. The image of the god Menthu comes from a lintel belonging to a monumental stone portal found on the site, made in the reign of Senusret III and taken over by a later king of the Thirteenth Dynasty, one of the Sebekheteps. After F. Bisson de la Roque and J.J. Clère, Rapport sur les fouilles de Médamoud (1927), Cairo, IFAO, 1928, Pl. VI.



The space to the north is the part where the later temple building had been concentrated, destroying most of the brickwork of this level in the process. The Middle Kingdom temple at Medamud had evidently stood in this location, but we have no direct evidence for its plan. Many stone architectural elements of this date, reused in later constructions, had been discovered during earlier seasons of excavation. These included columns, Osirid royal statues, door elements and statues. Many blocks came from two huge portals that may have stood in the brick enclosure wall. As far as one can tell from the reports, however, there is insufficient masonry to account for a Middle Kingdom temple whose walls were of stone block construction. The walls would have been mostly of mud brick (in Figure 3.12 the area has been left blank for this phase). Where the foundations for walls in the southern part are preserved the plan suggests storerooms and perhaps one or more large houses for senior figures. Men in charge of towns at this time, with a title which it seems appropriate to translate as ‘mayor’, commonly also held a title which put them in charge of the temple. The powerful bureaucratic building machine of the Middle Kingdom could here have been applied to rendering into concise architectural form the local structure of power. Medamud would then become an example of the temple citadel in the Middle Kingdom. The independent rectangular building in the south-west corner could even have been the mayor’s residence, though at 22 × 27 m it is only a quarter of the size of one of the large Kahun houses (60 × 40 m; see Figure 5.11, p. 214).

This Middle Kingdom intervention had left behind in the underlying ground traces of a yet earlier set of structures that challenges our preconceived images of Pharaonic culture, rather as do the Coptos colossi but in a different way. This was excavated in 1939, and again is the subject of only a preliminary report.31 A brick wall had enclosed an irregular, polygonal plot of ground, 83 m across at its widest point. The wall and its associated buildings stood on alluvial soil that had evidently not been built on before, although it contained a few prehistoric implements. The wall had enclosed what was interpreted as a grove of trees, its presence deduced from ‘a layer of ash’ in which, at certain points, there was ‘the dark mass of a burnt tree trunk’ missing its roots. But could this have been an upright wooden post, a counterpart to a standing stone? Also within this irregular area two oval structures had stood, inferred from negative traces on the ground. It was thought they had been simply mounds of soil. A winding corridor of brick, less than 1 m wide, passed to a chamber in the centre of each mound, the floors covered with fine sand. The corridors led from a courtyard by means of a vestibule in each case. Pottery supports for offering-basins or incense-burners stood in these vestibules. The courtyard was closed by a wall containing an entrance flanked by two small brick towers, and there is a temptation to restore the towers as pylons, so making them the earliest examples from the Nile valley (though at just over 3 m wide they are unlikely to have risen much above human height). Subsequently an outer court was added and the towers were replaced by a new pair further to the north. The emplacements for one flagpole were in front of each of the new towers, in one case represented by a circular stone support. This outer court contained two rectangular brick pedestals, covered with ashes. Were they offering-tables or did an image stand on them?

No inscriptions were found relating to this curious building, but pottery seems to date it to the latter part of the Old Kingdom. The reports also make no mention of the finding of figurines or of other material comparable to the groups considered so far, nor have traces of an early settlement (apart from the few flint implements) been reported. It is possible to interpret the twin mounds in terms of an idea expressed in later times, which took the concept of the primaeval mound that had first appeared above the waters of chaos as a symbolic source of regenerative power, including new life beyond the grave. But no later inscriptions link this particularly to Medamud and, as always, we should be cautious in making interpretations using sources from much later times. It still remains the most striking example of Preformal architecture from Egypt. Its date, well within the historic period, is an important reference point for other sites. It adds credibility to historic datings for some of the other material discussed here, and is particularly useful in interpreting the architectural remains at Hierakonpolis.

The evidence we have just considered documents a unique time in Egypt when the elements of one key characteristic of a complex society came together. This is the setting aside of special places where the gods (and statues of human figures of authority) could be encountered and honoured in a way that was parallel to what was proper for living rulers (in their transcendental aspect), namely, the combination of material gifts and formalized deferential behaviour (Figure 2.22 (G), p. 103, captures a moment of this from the beginning of the First Dynasty). Although a common dynamic was at work throughout Egypt, how it manifested itself varied from place to place. The result was a mingling of local traditions with elements common to many places. Somewhere, whether only around the royal residence or more widely distributed, groups of thoughtful, creative persons were working out the formal approach to design which we identify as quintessentially Pharaonic and which we begin to recognize in some of its manifestations during the Early Dynastic Period. It was not applied in a wholesale programme of replacement throughout the country, however. In provincial towns, buildings and objects either inherited from the past or created in styles of the past which allowed communication with gods and other imaginary beings continued to hold interest for a long time. The reasons for the slow and piecemeal progress of transformation may well have included limitations in court resources. For a long time those resources were concentrated on pyramid building and court cemetery construction.

The timescale is no mean one. The beginning of the dynastic period is currently set at c. 3085 BC and the end of the Old Kingdom at c. 2117 BC. Something like a millennium is involved at some of these sites. It means that for about a third of its history, Pharaonic Egypt was a country of two sources of cultural creativity: self-definition versus academic format, almost amounting to two cultures.





The roots of formal culture


The key to understanding formal Egyptian visual culture – architecture as well as art – and its remarkable homogeneity through three thousand years lies in the concept of the ideal type. This is a universal characteristic of the mind. We all have an image in terms of our own cultural experience of what, for example, a traditional king should look like, or a desirable residence, or a proper place of worship. Modernism in art and architecture has been directed towards breaking these ideal types and showing that within the imagination there need be no stereotypes. A different attempt to break visual stereotypes is found in Islam. God is to have no visual image at all, and is to be encountered through a multiplicity of names. The Egyptians were at the other extreme. The ideal type, the visual image of what constituted a proper form, was elevated to the pinnacle of intellectual and aesthetic desirability. Because it was centred in the art of the court, the prime source of patronage, it was a self-perpetuating ideal, automatically selecting and promoting those artists with a natural aptitude for absorbing the range of ideal types into their artistic consciousness and skilled in the translation of these types into the precise graphic style that was so admired.

The history of writing in Egypt aptly illustrates the power that visual archetypes had. The first short groups of hieroglyphs used as writing occur at the transition to the First Dynasty. The signs are pictures of objects that conform in style to the developing canon of formal art. Properly drawn hieroglyphs were not, however, very suited to the rapid writing that is needed for letters or administrative documents. By the Fourth Dynasty, or perhaps before, the Egyptians had developed a more rapid form of writing which we call hieratic (Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.3, pp. 168 and 171, are examples, as is Figure 6.15, bottom, p. 284).32 Individual hieroglyphs were reduced to a few easy strokes of the reed pen, and sometimes run together into groups. Hieratic changed its style over the generations, so that scholars can date texts to within certain limits by handwriting. Some good scribes, particularly in the later New Kingdom, developed elegant flourishes in their handwriting. But in no case can we honestly claim that this represents calligraphic art as developed, say, by traditional Islamic or Japanese culture. The reason is simple: the writing that demanded care and attention was hieroglyphic writing. Although more signs were added from time to time the ideal type never changed. It was the accurately delineated natural form as pioneered in the late Predynastic Period. The artist who wished to lavish his talents on hieroglyphs did so by working harder at the internal details of outlines that it would have been unnatural and improper to change.

The Pharaonic art style is relatively easy to describe and, to judge from the scale of the ancient output, it was relatively easy to acquire, given that there was every incentive to do so. A good artist was amongst the official, scribal class. We can select three essential elements. Whole compositions were given a markedly linear format through subdivision by horizontal lines from which individual figures spring (e.g. Figure 7.5, p. 308, where some of the base lines are modified to convey the uneven terrain). The resulting bands or registers of figures portray themes, but the sequence of registers could contain a more general element of order: of space progressing away from the viewer although no thought was given to diminishing the size of figures with distance; or of time, in a sequence running vertically upwards, the earliest at the bottom. The second element, which also relates to overall composition, is the intimate connection between figures and accompanying hieroglyphic writing. Because hieroglyphs retained their original natural forms and were drawn to the same conventions as other elements in a picture, texts and pictures combined harmoniously into a single channel of communication. This is most apparent when signs are worked emblematically into the actions of the scene, as illustrated by the El-Lisht throne bases (Figure 2.3, p. 67). In the Early Dynastic Period hieroglyphs and pictorial groups tended to mingle more equally than later, when the balance changed and hieroglyphs became more of a commentary upon a dominant pictorial scene.

The third element concerns the conventions of the individual figures, be they humans, animals or pieces of furniture. Each figure or each major component part of a figure is reduced to a characteristic profile, and if necessary recombined to produce a composite image which does not offend common sense too much. For an ox the reduction was into three parts: side profile of the body, front profile of the eye and front profile of the horns. The human body was similarly treated. For birds the shape of tail feathers was profiled as if seen from above. (Examples of all three are in Figure 7.1, p. 299, although the birds’ tail feathers are damaged.)

Because of the limited subject matter and format of Egyptian art, both wall scenes and statues, the reproduction of ideal types was a straightforward matter. Indeed, for certain elements, primarily the proportions of the human figure, a specific canon of proportions was devised which, from the Middle Kingdom onwards, related the parts of the body to a grid consisting of 18 squares from the soles of the feet to the hairline.

The aim of the artist was to render the elements of his pictures truthfully and informatively. The subject matter itself, however, portrayed reality only within frames of reference taken from a world of ideals stored in the imagination. In the case of scenes where gods are portrayed this is self-evident. But Egyptian tomb art also sought to record an eternal environment for the deceased tomb owner. The scenes that were selected created a world of banquets with friends, of hunting parties, and of overseeing the affairs of a country estate that included busy craftsmen. It is easy to conclude from tomb pictures that most ancient Egyptians of all ranks lived in the country, in a society without towns and cities. Yet the archaeological record shows that this was not the case. By the latter part of the Old Kingdom densely settled walled towns had grown up in numerous places, sufficiently so as to suggest that a mature urban framework existed, and that for most educated Egyptians the town provided the basic experience of living, even though a few had country estates to which to escape. But this had no part in dreams of an ideal world, which was that of a peaceful agrarian existence. Such scenes are the staple of the tomb of Ankhtify at Moʾalla, from the early First Intermediate Period, despite the written narrative in the same tomb of civil war and famine which find no reflection in the pictorial decoration.33 Egyptian art (and, as we shall see, architecture also) was a carefully and deliberately constructed style. It was not, however, built upon an empty cultural landscape, but over a pre-existing culture that, if Pharaonic Egypt had advanced no further, we would recognize and study as a viable tradition in its own right. The creation of Pharaonic art and its gradual expansion as a medium of communication involved a complex interplay with the Preformal tradition, selecting some elements and rejecting others. Two examples will illustrate this. The first concerns the iconography of the god Min.

In the formal Pharaonic scheme of gods Min had a prominent place as a god of the eastern desert and also, in a somewhat contradictory way, of procreation, with an important centre at Coptos. In the classic iconography he is depicted as a swathed standing male figure, holding a flail aloft in one hand (symbolizing the power to punish and avenge) and grasping the root of his erect penis in the other (Figure 3.13). His headdress is a pair of tall plumes. Other distinguishing attributes are a strange tall version of the primitive tent shrine (see below) and a bed of growing lettuces, the milky sap of which was apparently interpreted as the god’s semen. He was also given an emblem on a carrying-pole, an object still not positively identified but called conveniently a ‘thunderbolt’.



Figure 3.13The formalized images of the god Min. Nos 3–5 exemplify the classic image of Min as fertility god, adding to the ideal anthropomorphic image of god the elements of erect penis and brandished flail derived from the Coptos colossi (Figure 3.11, p. 134). The tall plumed crown is also common to the image of the god Amun from nearby Thebes. Behind Min in no. 5 is a stylized bed of tall lettuces, their white sap regarded as a symbol of semen; behind no. 3 (and originally behind no. 4) is a depiction of a tent shrine (or hut shrine) peculiar to the Min cult: a tall cylindrical tent linked by a rope to a staff topped with bovine horns (the basis for the reconstruction in Figure 3.11). No. 5 is from a decree from the Coptos temple of the reign of Pepi I of the Sixth Dynasty (c. 2265–2219 BC), after R. Weill, Les décrets royaux de l’Ancien Empire égyptien, Paris, Geuthner, 1912, Pl. VII; no. 4 is from the same site, but of the reign of Senusret I of the Twelfth Dynasty (c. 1974–1929 BC), after Petrie, Koptos, Pl. IX; Stewart, Petrie Collection 2, Pl. 39. No. 3 derives from a kiosk of Senusret I at Karnak, after Stevenson Smith, Art and Architecture, 92, Fig. 162. The earliest recognizable image of Min in the formalized tradition is no. 1, an ink drawing on a sherd from a stone bowl from the tomb of King Khasekhemui of the Second Dynasty (c. 2611–2584 BC) at Abydos, after Petrie, Abydos I, 4, Pl. III. 48. No. 2 is the ‘thunderbolt’ symbol of Min also used for the name of the Coptos nome. It was the only one of the symbols carved on the Coptos colossi (see Figure 2.11 (1), p. 82), which was taken into the formal canon of images used for Min. This example is from the Valley Temple of Sneferu at Dahshur (c. 2520–2470 BC), after Fakhry, Dahshur Reliefs, 20, Fig. 9.



This stock set of images had been codified by the late Old Kingdom. Indeed, the basic image of the god Min himself appears as early as the late Second Dynasty.34 The Preformal colossal statues found at Coptos provide us with some of the raw material from which the classic stereotyped image was fashioned. We can see how the court systematizers went to work. The basic pose was retained, but details and overall style were remodelled to produce a variant of the single standard image of a god that the court style of art dictated. Thus, for example, the distinctive appearance of the head and thick long beard were discarded. A number of emblems were associated with the original cult, carved on the sides of the colossi. The systematizers chose one, the ‘thunderbolt’, and ignored the rest. The overall result of their work was a collection of attributes pinned, as it were, on to the stock all-purpose model of a god. In this condition he became amenable to a language/image-game. The combination Min-Amun appeared, in which a degree of merging took place with the god Amun from the nearby town of Thebes. At Abydos, in the Middle Kingdom, a cult of ‘Min-Horus the Victorious’, which brought the cult of Min into association with the cult of Osiris, achieved some popularity.

The second example is the sacred benben-stone. It seems to have stood in a shrine at Heliopolis and was presumably an example of the widespread ancient cult of individual stones thought to have peculiar properties. The original is now lost, but pictorial evidence suggests that it was an upright stone with rounded top (Figure 3.14 (1), (2)). The stone became the prototype for a range of architectural symbols, and as such reappears spasmodically through Egyptian history in its primitive shape. King Akhenaten, for example, set up a round-topped benben-stone in one of his sun temples at Amarna (Figure 3.14 (5)). An earlier elongated version was erected in the Fayum, at the site of Abgig, by King Senusret III of the Twelfth Dynasty (Figure 3.14 (6)), and other examples were noted in the section on Hierakonpolis. But the rounded shape more frequently jarred on the aesthetics of the Egyptians. It lacked geometric purity. They preferred to convert the rounded top into a geometric shape of straight lines, a pyramid, and the complete stone into a truncated obelisk. Monumental versions in this form were built as the focal point of solar temples associated with the pyramids of Fifth Dynasty kings near the site of Abusir (Figure 3.14 (7)), and the pointed tops of pyramids and obelisks were called by a feminine form of the name: benbent. They could even be added (incongruously from our point of view) to the tops of replicas of tent shrines (Figure 3.15, p. 143, and see below).



Figure 3.14Artistic transformation of a symbol: the sacred benben-stone of Heliopolis. (1) Hypothetical original sacred stone. (2) Early depictions as hieroglyphs in the Pyramid Texts (Pyr 1652b, 2069a). Artists preferred to give it a symmetrical, geometric shape, creating two traditions, one of flattened rectangular section with a rounded top (3–6), and another of square section and with a pointed top (7–10). (3) Round-topped stela from Hierakonpolis temple, height 6 m, after Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Pl. LXVII. (4) Writing of benben-stone in the tomb of Meryra at Amarna, Eighteenth Dynasty, after LD III, 97e. (5) Depiction of a benben-stone erected in a sun temple at Amarna, tomb of Meryra, after Davies, Rock Tombs I, Pl. XXXIII. (6) Granite standing stone at Abgig, Fayum, erected by Senusret I, Twelfth Dynasty, height 12.62 m, after LD II, 119. (7) Profile, partially restored from ancient depictions, of the central feature of the Fifth Dynasty sun temples at Abu Ghurab. (8) Writing of benben-stone on an inscription from Amarna, after Pendlebury, COA III, Pl. CIII.48. (9) Top of a pyramidion from the top of the pyramid of King Khendjer of the Thirteenth Dynasty at Saqqara. On it is carved the winged disk of the sun. After G. Jéquier, Deux pyramides du moyen empire, Cairo, IFAO, 1933, Fig. 17. (10) Granite obelisk of Senusret I at Heliopolis itself, height 20.4 m, after LD II, 118h.





Figure 3.15Combining unrelated symbols. A naos (or inner shrine for a divine image) in the form of a tent shrine with a pyramid placed on top, something structurally incongruous, but aesthetically satisfactory as a combination of symbols. Thirtieth Dynasty, after G. Roeder, Catalogue général des antiquités égyptiennes du Musée du Caire: Naos, Leipzig, Breitkopf und Härtel, 1914, Taf. 16b.



But what is the reason for the solar connection? The word benben had a similar consonantal sequence to the verb weben, ‘to shine’, ‘to rise’ (of the sun). Verbal similarity supplied a logical linkage. From the practice of language-game the benben-stone became a symbol of sunrise and the renewal of life. For the same reason, the heron (‘phoenix’), which in ancient Egyptian was called benu, was brought into association with the cult of this stone, so that the temple at Heliopolis could be called ‘The Mansion of the Phoenix’. The statement which linked them all together and implied that a cogent meaning was present ran as follows: ‘O Atum-Kheprer (god of creation), you became elevated on the height, you rose up (weben) as the benben-stone in the Mansion of the Phoenix (benu) in Heliopolis.’35 By this kind of thinking, more akin to poetry and arousing no further curiosity in the Egyptian mind, order was imposed on a small part of the Egyptians’ inheritance from prehistory. The practice of language-game replaced the meaning that that particular stone had once held and is probably permanently lost to us. The ideal type was recast in both shape and meaning. In this instance, as with the history of the god Min, we are witnessing the invention of tradition, something that the Egyptians enthusiastically pursued until the end of their civilization.

We can recall a further example. By the early Middle Kingdom Abydos had become the centre for the cult of Osiris. For reasons that we shall probably never know, court thinkers, in the process of systematizing and rationalizing the diverse local traditions in Egypt, had already made a connection between Osiris and Abydos during the late Old Kingdom. We know this from statements in the Pyramid Texts. Yet on the ground, in the temple which actually stood in the town of Abydos, the first known reference to Osiris dates only to the Eleventh Dynasty. In the Old Kingdom the temple belonged to a local jackal god associated with the great cemetery nearby, called Khenti-amentiu, ‘Foremost amongst the Westerners’, the second element a reference to the blessed dead. From the Middle Kingdom onwards, this name becomes principally an epithet for Osiris, as ‘Osiris, Foremost amongst the Westerners’. For the earliest period of the Abydos shrine’s existence a similar complex relationship seems to have existed between Khenti-amentiu (assuming that his cult was of this antiquity) and popular practice as revealed by the votive objects. They contain no image of this god, although a model shrine depicts a human-headed deity to which we are unable to give a name (Figure 3.17 (4), no. P243, p. 147).

From the range of evidence available it is all too apparent that intellectual intervention shaped Egyptian culture, including knowledge of the gods, over a long period, stirring the cauldron of tradition and adding new ingredients. The problem for modern scholarship in too ready an acceptance of the results is that it undermines the principal method of research: that of carefully following the sources backwards in time from the better understood later ones to the more fragmentary and elusive earlier ones, and assuming that the meaning always remained the same. We tend to work by trying to identify fossils of early knowledge embedded within later sources. Yet if we take this easy course we run the risk of substituting for ancient language-game a modern scholarly game.





Folk culture?


The urge for purity of form and consistency of style came to have a generally debilitating effect on spontaneity. The modern world recognizes that cultural expression appears at more than one level. Whilst great or high culture originates from centres of established patronage and inevitably makes the greatest general impact, popular culture, which is ‘folk culture’ when of the past or of agrarian origins, although less intellectual, has a vigour and originality of its own and is a legitimate aspect of the whole culture of a people. It can find its energy through expressing deliberate rebellion against ‘high culture’. We should be prepared in studying ancient societies to encounter the same plurality of expression.

The problems that arise for the distant past are, however, peculiarly large. Popular culture uses music, oral tale and dance as much as figurative arts. These are lost to archaeology except when caught in rare ancient pictures that cannot, in any case, convey more than the briefest programme note. This is true for ancient Egypt. Tomb pictures and occasionally temple scenes show dances and acrobatics, and singers and musicians performing. But we cannot reconstruct living shows from them. The life that surrounded local shrines kept local tradition alive. But outside these cultural enclaves the success of court art and the tendency towards mass stereotyped production of artefacts sapped local creativity.

We can apply a simple test. Pottery has survived abundantly from all periods of ancient Egypt and had common use in the households of rich and poor alike.36 It has also become in other cultures a vehicle for artistic expression. Predynastic Egyptian pottery contains the beginnings of just such a tradition. A class of Nagada II pottery, actually called ‘Decorated Ware’ by early archaeologists, combines a distinctive shape with a range of simple painted designs that belong to the same tradition that created the scenes in the Hierakonpolis Painted Tomb. It is easy to imagine that this type of decorated pottery could have become the archaic phase of a long history of decorated ceramics in which the characteristics of the medium produced distinctive derivatives from the Pharaonic art style with a life of their own, matched in modern times by detailed analysis by art historians. It did not happen. The development, in the late Nagada II period, of the low relief carvings which represent the beginnings of court art and the codification of ideas seems to have undermined any further interest in ceramic art. The decoration on pottery declines into simple squiggles and then vanishes altogether. Henceforth pottery decoration was a rarity, except for a brief interlude in the mid-New Kingdom. Pottery became a utilitarian product. It is sometimes well made, notably in the case of fine orange-burnished bowls produced in the Old Kingdom, but nevertheless still falls short of an artistic tradition offering individual expression. There was an element of regionalism in pottery styles. But none of this amounts to a tradition of ceramic folk art. The Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom pottery types of the provincial towns that possessed the local shrine cultures outlined above are regional variants of utilitarian objects ranging from the coarse to the bland.

If we look carefully, however, we can find exceptions. One concerns the art of carving seals. The cylinder seal was a foreign idea early brought to Egypt. The first ones occur in the late Nagada II and are either imports from or copies of imports from the contemporary cultures of western Asia (the Near East). From the First Dynasty the Egyptians began to carve hieroglyphs on them and to use them as implements of administration, sealing letters, jars, doors, boxes and so on with distinctive official designs (Figure 3.16). Carved cylinders continued to be, however, objects of interest in their own right, with a value that was not straightforwardly administrative. Numerous private seals are known from the Early Dynastic Period bearing designs which use both hieroglyphs and other design elements in a somewhat surreal manner, displaying an interest in developing designs away from the natural models which normally so entranced the Egyptians. By the latter part of the Old Kingdom they had become a minor art form, occurring occasionally in court cemeteries and sometimes accompanying hieroglyphic inscriptions. They then passed through a sudden transformation, abandoning the cylinder shape for a flat disc with a shank or a prism shape, becoming stamp seals (‘button seals’, Figure 3.16 (7)–(9)) bearing designs in the same non-formal tradition on their bases. The centre of this industry seems to have been Middle Egypt. Further steps in design development can be observed through the First Intermediate Period, and by the end the characteristic Egyptian scarab-shaped seal had evolved. Moreover, it had also been taken up by the administrative class as a more convenient way of applying seals, and so the scarab replaced the cylinder seals altogether. With official recognition came the application of proper formal designs, and the snuffing out of this minor provincial art tradition.



Figure 3.16The makings of an alternative art style, which failed to develop, revealed by small carvings on Old Kingdom objects. (1)–(3) Seals, from Abusir, Staatliche Museen, Berlin, 15600; Egyptian Museum, Cairo, JdE 72610; Staatliche Museen, Berlin, 16433. After H.G. Fischer, MM Journal 6 (1972), 5–16, Figs 4, 18, 21. (4)–(6) Faience votive plaques from the temple at Elephantine, after Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, 151, Abb. 60, Taf. 57. (7)–(9) Button seals from Middle Egypt, after Brunton, Qau I, Pl. XXXIII.118, 121, 112.



This particular case illustrates how court culture could, on occasion, continue to take on board new designs of provincial origin. It was part of the success of the Egyptian state that it managed to build local traditions into a national framework of myth and design. The process took time and, as discussed in the first part of this chapter, in provincial shrines local tradition continued to thrive until well into the Old Kingdom. In later periods when new elements appear, such as the popularity of the domestic god Bes from the New Kingdom onwards (Figure 8.20, p. 373), or the huge interest of the Late Period in sacred animal burial, we are entitled to suspect a derivation in popular consciousness and behaviour: folk culture surfacing only when taken up by official patronage and made explicit and visible in sources that we can understand.





Ideal types in architecture


Architectural ideal types were less amenable to mechanical reproduction, and had a more complex evolution. They had a very real existence in the minds of the Egyptians, but gave rise to broader scope in their realization as structures and buildings. Even more than with art, Pharaonic architecture reveals how tradition was invented.

By the Early Dynastic Period the normal material in use for building was mud brick. People used it for houses, for town walls, for the linings of tomb pits, and for the memorials and offering-places built above them. The potential of brick for creating interesting patterns in the method of laying was realized for palaces, and for court tombs, in the palace-façade style of architecture (Figure 2.20, p. 99). Its most important monumental survivor, copied in stone, is the great plaza and token palace in front of the Step Pyramid at Saqqara (Figure 2.21, p. 101). It seems not, however, to have been used for temples. It appears suddenly, its details fully developed, at the beginning of the First Dynasty. This has led to a theory that it derives from the temple architecture of Mesopotamia where the style was deeply rooted with a long history of evolution behind it. This is not so far-fetched as it might seem at first, for there is other evidence for contacts with southern Mesopotamia during the later Nagada II period, although their nature and significance are now hard to judge.37

Alongside the palace-façade style of brick architecture, however, we have to recognize the existence of a second architectural tradition that was to have, in the end, the determining influence on Egyptian stone architecture to the end of Pharaonic Egypt. This was the architecture of structures built of wooden frames covered partially or wholly with plain wooden panels or with sheets of woven matting or bound reeds (Figure 3.17). To appreciate the technology we can turn to early artistic representations that are inevitably ambiguous in communicating to us their details, but better still, actual examples have survived from the Old Kingdom. The two most famous are the cabins on the funerary boat of Khufu (Cheops) at Giza, and the cube-shaped tent of Queen Hetep-heres, Khufu’s mother, from her tomb also at Giza.38 The various sources agree as to structural form: slender wooden supports often with papyrus-bud finials, wooden roofing-ties to join them together, being equally slender and either flat or evenly (though only gently) curving upwards, or curving asymmetrically. At the front, these formal tents could be completely open, or only partially so through the use of a screen covering the lower part. The ancient word for such a structure was seh, and one of the hieroglyphic signs used to write it was a simplified picture of the structure itself.



Figure 3.17The early tent shrine: prototype for Pharaonic formal architecture. (1) An early tent shrine for the cult of a ram statue, set within a panelled brick enclosure. Ivory tablet from the tomb of King Den at Abydos, First Dynasty. After Petrie, Royal Tombs II, 25, Pl. VII.8. (2) Reconstruction of a tent shrine for the revealed image of god, based on the brick dais in the Old Kingdom temple at Elephantine; see Figure 3.4, p. 119, and Photograph 3.1, p. 120. (3) Ancient depiction of a tent shrine with the profile of an animal, perhaps on a carrying-frame and thus portable. Part of the design on a mud-seal impression from the tomb of King Hor-aha, early First Dynasty. After W.B. Emery, Ḥor-aḥa, Cairo, Government Press, 1939, 27, Fig. 23. (4) Models of early tent shrines. P131, P132 and P243 are in faience and from early deposits at Abydos. After Petrie, Abydos II, Pl. VII.131, 132; Pl. XI.243. A29a–c are in faience and A31 in limestone, all from an uncertain location. After H.W. Müller, Ägyptische Kunstwerke, Kleinfunde und Glas in der Sammlung E. und M. Kofler-Truniger, Luzern, Berlin, Hessling, 1964. They vary in size between 4 and 10 cm.



The Hetep-heres tent was made for temporary use and to be portable. The whole structure could be taken apart, packed up in a box and transported. This fact probably explains the widespread use of this type of structure. It was suitable for royal occasions outside the brick palace; for funerals, where the burial equipment could be laid out for display and possibly even for the preparation of the body prior to burial; and for the comfort of the official class when visiting the countryside (Figure 3.18 (3)). Their use in private funerals has a striking analogy in modern Egypt, where large portable tents consisting of decorated cotton coverings laid over a rectangular framework of poles can be hired to accommodate mourners paying their last respects and listening to a Quranic recitation. Some representations of what seem to be portable tents mounted on carrying-frames are also known from the Early Dynastic Period, as in the scene on the Narmer mace head (Figure 2.22 (G), location b2, p. 103).



Figure 3.18Ideal types in architecture: the open-fronted tent shrine (see also Photograph 2.2, p. 105). (1) Rendered into stone at the Step Pyramid of Djoser at Saqqara. After Borchardt, Tempel, Bl. 10. (2) Likewise, but in a more developed form, at the Roman kiosk at Philae, the broken roof line representing a now perished curved wooden roof. After Borchardt, Tempel, Bl. 5. (3) The same architecture retained for convenience as a portable framed tent for visits to the countryside, from the tomb of Werirni, Fifth Dynasty, at Sheikh Said. After N. de G. Davies, Rock Tombs of Sheikh Said, London, EEF, 1901, Pl. XV.



By the First Dynasty brick architecture was well established in Egypt, and from the material reviewed in the first part of this chapter it seems fairly clear that built shrines of various kinds made early appearances in provincial towns. It seems unlikely, therefore, that the image of the tent shrine reflected the common appearance of provincial shrines. Yet some early representations of what appear to be shrines are of tent form (Figure 3.17 (1)). One class seems to have been made to look like a horned animal (Figure 3.17 (3)). How are we to explain this contradictory evidence?

Part of the answer is provided by some of the objects from early shrines (Figure 3.17 (4)). They actually depict little tent shrines with curving tops, in three cases (P243, A29a on the outside, A31 on the inside) showing the criss-cross pattern on the cover. The same appears also in the early depictions, and is probably a pattern, or a method of binding, in the matting used as covering material. Three examples (P132, P243, A31) seem to rest on frames with legs (A31) or projections representing carrying-handles that made them portable. Two of them (A29a and b), however, rest on pedestals with sides decorated with panelling, making it likely that the pedestals are of solid, mud-brick construction. Two of them (P243, A31) contain a human-like figure, in the latter case with a face very similar to those which top the Narmer Palette, provided with cow’s ears and wearing what looks like a knotted sash around the neck. It is labelled with the hieroglyphic word Repit. Whether this is a proper name for a goddess or a term for a type of image or essence of a divinity is hard to tell. The face is also that of the goddess Bat, who had some prominence in early times, although eventually a goddess named Repit did appear.39 Occasional hieroglyphic writings of this word use a sign depicting the same small portable shrine, and in so doing imply that portability was of its essence.

Institutions that are basically irrational thrive on an interaction between a hidden and a revealed element. The carefully staged drama of formal appearances of the king illustrates this. In New Kingdom and later times, when the nature and rhythm of temple life is much better known, we can see it reflected in temple architecture and ceremonial. The hidden aspect of divinity required a sanctuary, removed as much as possible from contact with normal human life, in which resided the most sacred of images. Revelation was achieved by careful theatrical management which brought a tangible symbol of the divine presence into the public, or semi-public domain, yet still behind barriers, both physical and psychological. By the New Kingdom the means of public manifestation was by portable boats borne on carrying-poles and supporting, in place of a cabin, a small and partly enclosed shrine (Figure 6.1, p. 250). The word used for this shrine on a boat was kariy. It is reassuring to find that the earliest known writing of the word, in the Pyramid Texts of the late Old Kingdom, uses as its hieroglyphic determinative a picture of a portable tent shrine of the Early Dynastic type; reassuring because the two are functionally the same.40 Wherever the later portable images were rested, a special platform or a complete building was constructed. In the New Kingdom they, too, could be called a ‘tent shrine of the god’ (using the word seh), although built of stone (e.g. the processional way-stations of Figure 6.2, p. 251). Within them the actual resting-place was marked by a more-or-less cubic pedestal of stone with ornamental top on which the portable boat shrine was placed.

We can therefore look to earlier periods for functional equivalents, and if we do this, some of the key pieces of evidence fall into place. Portable venerated images were already widespread, but carried not in boat shrines but in carrying-chairs of the kind used by the nobility, sheltered by a canopy of matting on a curved wooden frame. Wherever they were set down, a pedestal was needed, often built of brick, with either plain or panelled sides. This could have its own canopy similarly constructed. The one complete early shrine that we possess, at Elephantine, can be interpreted along these lines (Figure 3.4, p. 119). Here, in a simple and modest way, is visible the duality of domain that arises when sacred images play a major part. At the rear, between the granite boulders, we find the enclosed sanctuary for the hidden images (or purely imagined presence); in the courtyard in front is the pedestal for the portable, revealed image, complete with poles for the canopy support.

The portability of the revealed images (called generically Repit) took them not only on localized journeys, but also from time to time to the royal court for the Sed-festival, where they were likewise housed inside tent shrines erected on larger brick pedestals. At the Step Pyramid, along the east side, such a congregation of temporary shrines was rendered in stone (Figure 2.21 and Photograph 2.2, pp. 101 and 105). Although the design of these tent shrines was basically a common one, they were sometimes given a distinctive appearance by varying the shape slightly, or by adding details, including pairs of vertical poles.

Was there ever a time when important buildings were actually made from timber posts and panels made from plant materials, erected in a setting in which mud brick and stone played only a minor part? We have already encountered the answer at Hierakonpolis. Chapter 2 introduced two localities at this place, HK6 and HK29A, which seem, in different ways, to mark events in the lives of the ruling group. Both of them relied largely on timber posts to give shape to various structures. At locality HK6 (the elite cemetery, Figure 2.17, p. 93) they were halls with roofs supported on many columns, as if prototypes of later hypostyle halls of columns in temples. Locality HK29A (Figure 3.19) was a part of the predynastic desert town site (which was itself surrounded, at least in part, with a wall or palisade made from upright timbers). It remained in use through the Nagada II period to the First Dynasty, a span of up to five centuries. Its main purpose, to judge from the huge quantities of animal bones found in adjacent pits, was to act as an enclosure for the ceremonial slaughter of animals, domesticated and wild. At its centre was an elongated space (measuring 45 × 13 m) with a curving end which sloped upwards towards the east and was surfaced with packed mud. It was surrounded by eroded traces of walls, fences and palisades, the product of many alterations. Some of the post holes were large (in one case, belonging to Structure III, still containing the base of a wooden post, perhaps 30 cm in diameter), and forming a monumental gateway. At the south-east end of the oval stood an upright object, either a stone slab or a large post. The north-west end had been overbuilt by a thick wall enclosing a polygonal space.



Figure 3.19Plan of locality HK29A at Hierakonpolis, an early ceremonial centre. The irregular mud-plastered space was surrounded by a palisade with a monumental wooden gateway (Structure III) in one side. The thousands of animal bones from rubbish pits located just outside derive from domesticated species and wild animals. Their slaughter implies not only feasting but a demonstration of how the element of chaos in the world that wild animals symbolized could be overcome by the ruler and his agents. After R. Friedman, JARCE 45 (2009), Fig. 1; Nekhen News 15 (2003), plan on p. 4.



These are larger and more elaborate examples of a style of building based around wooden posts which has been found at other predynastic sites, especially in the delta where, during the latter part of the Predynastic Period, they gave way to architecture of brick. The earlier style, which gave a different appearance to buildings, nevertheless survived, both as temporary buildings and as the protection for portable images, and in the imagination as the ideal type of building set in an imaginary primaeval world in which the gods dwelt.

The originality of the Step Pyramid lies in the way that its architect created a style of permanent stone architecture from this vestige of a more ancient way of building. The vocabulary of forms now rendered into stone became henceforth the ideal type of building to which later temple architects almost invariably looked. We can recognize three versions at the Step Pyramid. The most common, with more than 20 examples, depicts a rectangular wooden-framed tent with curved roof, standing on a pedestal (Figure 2.21, p. 101, and Photograph 2.2, pp. 101 and 105). Some are small and with plain fronts; the fronts of the larger ones, however, display carved poles supporting the roof, implying that they are really depicting tents that are open at the front. From this we can guess that the smaller ones were thought to have open fronts as well. In two cases at least, a flight of narrow steps ran up to the top of the pedestal or platform on which the tent stands. In examining the Step Pyramid architecture we must not forget that we are seeing the fruits of modern reconstruction. When excavated, the all-important façades of the buildings inside the complex were found reduced to the lowest courses of stonework. That said, the study and partial reconstruction of these buildings is based on a close examination of loose blocks found in the rubble as well as on ancient depictions of traditional shrines. Although the result makes this particular group of shrines look very similar, from the evidence of ancient pictures we must hold in our minds the possibility that some or all of them bore some distinguishing mark to make them look individual (e.g. a wooden figure on a projecting wooden pole or base), since they probably represent the temporary festival shrines to house divine images assembled from provincial towns.

The second type is a larger variant, and directly on the ground instead of on a pedestal. There are two examples, the so-called North and South Houses. Again they depict an open-fronted building displaying the outer row of slender carved roof supports. But privacy of the interior is provided by a screen running between the roof supports and broken only by a doorway (Figure 3.18 (1), p. 148). The screen was imagined as made from reeds, a message conveyed by carving in stylized form the knots tied in the loose top ends. This general design was a potent one, particularly in the use of the screen wall linking columns, and in the row of stylized knots which, as the kheker-frieze, passed into general use as a decorative motif.

The third version of the temporary wooden structure at the Step Pyramid had perhaps four examples. One of them, ‘Temple T’, is of particular significance since it is one of the very few ‘real’ buildings of the Step Pyramid, having a complete interior of rooms and corridors. The exterior of Temple T is a severe version of the wood and matting style (Figure 3.20 (1)). All four exterior walls look the same: plain rectangular surfaces, topped by a narrow horizontal rolled binding and above this the loose tops of reeds reduced to a plain frieze. All four corners of the building were protected by further bound rolls of reeds set vertically. The interior, however, is incompatible with a building of these materials. Its complex internal plan resembles the funerary palaces at Abydos constructed of mud brick. Although pilasters have been added, decorated after the style of bundles of reeds, it is the plan of a building of solid materials, an impression reinforced by the ceilings, which were carved in imitation of closely set logs of wood. This is a type of roof that, from its weight, demands solid walls of brick or stone. Light timber frames and matting screens are structurally unsuited.



Figure 3.20Ideal types in architecture: the enclosed tent shrine. (1): Temple ‘T’ at the Step Pyramid of Djoser. After Lauer, La pyramide, Pl. LV, and Fig. 157. (2) The temple-tomb of the God’s Wife Amenirdis I at Medinet Habu (c. 715 BC), in which one tent shrine is nested within another, a common Egyptian architectural ploy. After Hölscher, Medinet Habu V, Fig. 24. (3) Scene of King Tuthmosis III purifying the temple of Amada in Nubia by sprinkling natron over it, before the god Horakhty. The temple itself is symbolized by a picture of a tent shrine (marked by arrow). After H. Gauthier, Les temples immergés de la Nubie: le temple d’Amada, Cairo, IFAO, 1913, Pl. XVII.



Temple T, with its wrap-around application of tent architecture to a building of more solid form, set the style for centuries to come. Externally it shows the essence of the ideal type of later Egyptian temples. This is occasionally made explicit in temple scenes where, in a ceremony of purification of the temple building, the building itself is depicted as if a hieroglyph and in this simple original form (Figure 3.20 (3)). It was, however, primarily the model for temple exteriors. The severe rectangular wood and matting building became a façade, the proper wrapping for a building whose interior reflected the practical needs of the occasion.

Just how the reconciliation between form and function was achieved by later architects becomes, in effect, the remaining history of Egyptian temple architecture (Figure 3.21). Internal plans accommodated needs that changed from time to time and from place to place. In Chapter 6 we shall see how the New Kingdom taste for portable boat shrines, and various aspects of the royal funerary cult, created distinctive plans that were still kept uncompromisingly inside the jacket of the old ideal type. For the moment, this point will be illustrated by examples that show just how enduring the imagery created at the Step Pyramid was. The first is the almost intact temple-tomb of the God’s Wife Amenirdis I at Medinet Habu, which dates to the Twenty-fifth Dynasty (c. 750 BC; Figure 3.20 (2)). Essentially the building consists of two tent shrines nested inside each other. The shrine that covers the entrance to the tomb of Amenirdis is a simple version, a single chamber which approximates to the original form in both interior and exterior. This is set within a larger building that includes a colonnaded courtyard, a favourite element in the design of temple interiors. For the final external impression, the architect has returned to the tent-shrine prototype, though emphasizing the front of the building by making the wall taller. This was also a favourite device, though on larger buildings the tall façade was normally, from the New Kingdom onwards, divided in the centre to create the characteristic pair of ‘pylons’, a limited gesture of reinterpretation of original form. It is particularly to the kind of inner shrine found here that the Egyptians gave the name ‘tent shrine of the god’ (seh-netjer), although from the New Kingdom onwards it was also used more loosely as a synonym for ‘temple’ generally. This was not illogical since the whole building externally was modelled on the same ideal type.



Figure 3.21The sources of Egyptian architectural styles. Figure 8.10, p. 342, illustrates the appearance of a wood-and-matting phase at the Great Aten Temple at Amarna.



We can gain the most impressive idea of how strong was the hold of the ideal types from Egypt’s beginnings by looking at buildings from the very end of ancient Egyptian civilization, when Egypt was ruled first by the Ptolemies, Greek-speaking inheritors of Alexander the Great’s Egyptian province, and then by the Roman emperors following the death of the last of the Ptolemaic line, Queen Cleopatra VII. In the rural hinterland of the Nile valley these alien rulers encouraged the building of traditional temples in which they themselves appeared in the guise of the divine Egyptian kings of old, featuring in similar scenes of divine birth as had occurred in New Kingdom temples.

The finest example of Ptolemaic temple architecture is the temple of the falcon god Horus at Edfu (237–57 BC). Outwardly the body of Edfu temple faithfully recalls the plain box-like form of the archetypal tent shrine, the front magnified into two pylons. Inside, the architectural vocabulary continually pays deference to this ideal, from the ornate screen wall and canopy in front of the main columned hall, to the shrine in the sanctuary carved from a single block of black granodiorite which renders this form in miniature, although a pyramidal benben-stone has been carved on the top (very similar to the one in Figure 3.15, p. 143). The arrangement of the elements of the plan, however, is characteristic of the time and could not be mistaken for a temple of a much earlier period. Equally distinctive of the period is the mammisi (a Greek word), or birth house, outside the front of the temple. Its purpose was to celebrate the divine birth of the king, and for its form the architects returned to the idea of the semi-open tent shrine with screen walls. Some of these buildings even had curved wooden roofs in closer deference to the ideal type, something apparent from the surviving holes for timber beams (Figure 3.18 (2), p. 148).

For the Egyptian priests this was a time of threat to traditional culture. The scenes and texts that cover the walls of Edfu as of other Ptolemaic temples reveal an enhanced awareness of their own rich inheritance of mythology and cult practices. They are far more informative in these areas than are earlier temples. The texts on the walls are not, however, the complete originals. Rather they are extracts from or summaries of several longer ‘books’, often referred to by their names, which must have been held in the temple library. One set concerns the building itself.41 These building texts are rich in language-game and symbolic geography, and incapable of resolution into a single scheme of logical narrative. They do reflect, however, a common viewpoint. This was that the new stone temple that was being built, although designed in the style of the times, embodied a range of ideal types whose existence could be counted on through the descriptions and allusions of the texts themselves. The texts, which actually contain the dimensions of the ideal buildings expressed in cubits, represented knowledge which had the power, on its own, of holding the essence of these mythical constructions in place. Their history was set in a mythical time, ‘The early primaeval age of gods’, and within a mythical geography wherein the temple site itself was the ‘Seat of the First Occasion’, a reference to a creation myth. The term ‘reign of Tanen’, an earth god, is also used, recalling the historical scheme of the Turin king list which began with a series of reigns by gods. The setting is devoid altogether of human life. In places it recalls instead the time of the creation of the world, which began with the appearance of a mound from the all-covering waters. The mound, or mounds, became the site or sites of the original shrines. One of these contained the perch of the falcon god to whom the temple was dedicated, Horus the Behdetite, which originated as a slip of reed planted in the primaeval water. For the mythical shrines, brief descriptions with dimensions are given (Figure 3.22). One of the terms used for the sanctuary (seh) is the common Egyptian word for the tent shrine, and helps to reinforce the view that these primaeval buildings were seen as the timber and reed constructions of which the Ptolemaic Edfu temple was a reincarnation in stone.



Figure 3.22Temples of the mind. Centre. Plan of the temple of Horus of Edfu, Ptolemaic Period, 237–57 bc. Left and right. Outlines representing mythical temples invented through speculative processes by temple staff, and expressed as written descriptions complete with dimensions in cubits. Left. The primitive temple of the sacred falcon (Horus). The opening text reads: ‘Laying out the foundation made in the temple of “Uplifter of God” in the reign of (the god) Tanen, in the presence of Ra, according to what is in the book called “Specification of the Sacred Mounds of the Early Primaeval Age”.’ Right. The temple of the sun god. Although these temples (and others) are set in a mythical primaeval age of gods before mankind existed, in their overall scale and proportions they reflect the architectural perspective of the Ptolemaic Period. They are unlikely to be records of early real buildings. After Reymond, Mythical Origin. Other Edfu texts which describe the foundation of the real temple provide a description, with cubit dimensions, which is fairly realistic; see S. Cauville and D. Devauchelle, BIFAO 84 (1984), 23–34.



It is, of course, tempting to take these accounts literally, particularly since dimensions are given, and to regard them as containing something of the real history of Edfu temple.42 It is, indeed, true that Edfu stood on a mound of natural sand and rock within the alluvial floodplain, and so became at inundation time an island. However, the archaeological record shows that until the Old Kingdom it was not a place of significant settlement. The archaeological record of early temples shows great variety in construction, but also the use of brick and of informal plans in the earliest ones that can be identified. The earliest shrine at Edfu, therefore, is likely to have been of brick and very small. The precedence of the tent shrine in the Ptolemaic texts as the exclusively correct and original temple design arose because it fitted exactly the myth-world of the primaeval age of the gods. As to where the measurements in cubits of the primaeval temples came from, we cannot tell. They could be records of buildings which had been erected on the site at various times since, say, the Middle Kingdom, or they could be inventions of the Ptolemaic priests themselves (perhaps arrived at through a symbolic-numbers game).

Egyptian visual culture strove consciously to create the impression of a direct transfer from nature. But it was far from being a spontaneous celebration of natural or inherited primitive forms. It involved a deliberate process of selection and modification in order to create a set, a vocabulary, of ideal types possessing internal consistency. This latter aspect was sufficiently achieved to produce a degree of interchangeability which gave scope to an endless (and for us bewildering) recombination of elements which lay at the heart of the constant invention of tradition.

Nor were the limits of recombination ever reached. The process is continued, unintentionally, by modern scholars as we try to ‘explain’ Egyptian culture. For the relationship between modern study and ancient source is not quite what it appears to be at first sight. We like to think that the sources are inert, and ourselves objective observers. But the interplay is much more complex. Ancient thought is not dead: it lies dormant in the sources and within our own minds, and when we study the former the latter begins to move within us. One example will suffice to illustrate this. Excavations at western Thebes early in the twentieth century led to the discovery of a combined tomb and temple of King Nebhepetra Menthuhotep of the Eleventh Dynasty (c. 2066–2014 BC) at the site called Deir el-Bahari (Figure 3.23). The centrepiece was a square mass of stone masonry standing on a huge podium and surrounded by a colonnade. The excavator, E. Naville, restored a pyramid on the top of the square base, the reconstruction drawing passed into textbooks and for over half a century remained a very familiar element in Egypt’s architectural history.43 It fitted within the general line of architectural development, and could even be seen as echoing the landscape, for a natural pyramidal peak rises above the cliffs and was regarded as the dwelling-place of a god by the Egyptians themselves. The building was later re-examined by a new expedition. Finding that there was no specific evidence for preferring a pyramid on top of the base, the excavator (D. Arnold) restored it as a flat-topped construction, and linked it, with ample scholarly reference, to the notion of the primaeval mound.44 Later still came a reconstruction that added an actual tree-covered mound of earth on top.45 Whichever solution we adopt we can justify it by learned references to specific Egyptian sources. Thus, although only one (or none of them) must be technically correct, all are true to Egyptian cultural roots and were potentially present in ancient times, even if they have had to await three thousand years before being realized.



Figure 3.23Language-game resumed: scholarly manipulation of Egyptian symbols for modern didactic ends. Three reconstructions of the mortuary temple of King Nebhepetra Menthuhetep at Deir el-Bahari, Thebes, Eleventh Dynasty. Each is ‘true’ to the spirit of Egyptian thinking and can be supported by scholarly argument, and thus they continue the realization of the potential of ancient Egyptian thought. Whether any of them is ‘true’ in the sense that it was actually built at Deir el-Bahari we shall probably never know. (1) A true pyramid, after Naville, XIth Dynasty Temple II, Pl. XXIV. (2) A flat-topped mound made of stone, proposed by Arnold, Tempel Mentuhotep, Frontis. (3) A mound of earth supporting trees, proposed by R. Stadelmann, Die Ägyptischen Pyramiden, Mainz, von Zabern, 1985, 229, Abb. 74.



There is a parallel of sorts here in the revival of classical culture in Renaissance Europe, and, limited more to architecture, the later Gothic and Egyptian revivals. Here artists and architects strove to use the spirit and the visual vocabulary of a dead culture in pursuit of a living art, and thus realized the potential latent for further development within a past culture, though producing an overall effect that the ancients would not have thought of. The gifted forger of antique art is doing the same. And sometimes scholars unintentionally pursue the same path in constructing hypotheses to explain a very fragmentary past.

Egyptian temple architecture recalled a lost and largely mythical past of primitive simplicity. What we know and the builders of Edfu temple did not is the relatively late and to a degree artificial nature of the myth behind the ideal type of shrine. The Step Pyramid shows that it arose from the rejection of Early Dynastic brick architecture that had demonstrated, in the palace-façade style, potential for proclaiming places of power. By the Third Dynasty this style had been in Egypt for at least three to four centuries and could well have remained the model for all formal architecture, including temples, as it did in Mesopotamia. Instead, after the Step Pyramid, it was retained only in token form in funerary architecture: in the offering-places of tomb chapels, as a way of decorating sarcophagi, and as decoration for a section of wall around the royal burial chamber. Henceforth, formal temple architecture looked for inspiration to what the Egyptians considered to be their roots, a world of tent shrines and no palaces, blotting out a distinctive aspect of the early state. Just as the political history of ancient Egypt was shaped by a mythical view of the past, so the history of Egyptian formal temple architecture is a record of deference to another myth.

The re-codification of architectural form in the Third Dynasty did not, however, provide a model for ceremonial architecture which all desired to follow at once. No general rebuilding programme followed in the provinces, as the first part of this chapter showed. The new style was an intellectual creation of the court. It was confined at first to the royal tomb, and was used as a guide elsewhere only in cases of fitful royal patronage. The form of the royal tomb itself underwent major re-codification again at the end of the Third Dynasty, though this was as much a matter of function and meaning as of style. The eternal palace, which is what much of the Step Pyramid enclosure was intended to be, was replaced by a temple to the king’s spirit and to the sun dominated by the true pyramid, a geometrically rendered version of the benben-stone in deference to grand and more abstract knowledge which increasingly made the sun god into the source of all power. But now and later new ideas remained true in forms to the ideal types that we first meet as monumental architecture in the Step Pyramid. Ceremonial architecture well illustrates the Egyptian genius for clothing change in traditional costume.





The role of individual initiative


The instrument of change was personal intervention. We have to think in terms of great artists and architects. But the ancient myth that whatever was new and admirable was in fact true to the past allowed no room for the recognition of individual genius. The initiative in art and architecture was articulated by royal decree. The process is documented in the Berlin Leather Roll.46 This is a New Kingdom copy of a building text of King Senusret I of the early Twelfth Dynasty. It begins with a formal ‘appearance’ of the king in his palace, before his assembled courtiers. He opens with an oration on his own divinely appointed destiny, then announces his plan: the construction of a temple for the god Atum. The motive is not disinterested concern for the gods. It is expressed in the pragmatic observation that the best means of immortality is a building constructed in one’s own name. ‘A king who is evoked by his works is not doomed.’ His courtiers offer deferential support for the scheme, emphasizing the personal benefit for the king himself: ‘When your temple is built, it will provide for the altar. It will give service to your image. It will befriend your statues in all eternity.’ Finally comes the action. The king appoints the architect:

the royal seal-bearer, sole companion, overseer of the two gold-houses and the two silver-houses, and privy-councillor of the two diadems: It is your counsel that carries out all the works that my majesty desires to bring about. You are the one in charge of them, who will act according to my wish … Order the workmen to do according to your design.



This is, for an Egyptian text, an unusually frank statement on royal delegation of creativity. But it is notable who the architect was, or rather was not. No name is given, and the man’s titles have no specific reference to building at all. We cannot, on the basis of his titles, call him an architect. We know of dozens of officials with titles of this kind from the Middle Kingdom, but if they were great artists or architects we cannot tell. The great architect’s skill was perceived as admirable performance of a royal commission, on the same level as organizing a large and difficult quarrying expedition, or clearing navigable channels through the rocky barriers of the First Cataract at Aswan. It was not a deliberate anonymity. Some draftsmen and builders who did little else with their lives used these callings as their official titles, and so we can identify them. It reflects more the Egyptian lack of awareness of or interest in abstract divisions of knowledge. Art and architecture were parts of the stream of directed activity that emanated from the court. The process worked simply because an intuitive appreciation of what was really good ensured that good artists and imaginative architects were promoted at the expense of bad ones. But they were applauded for their success as good officials rather than as good artists or architects.

The case of the builder of the Step Pyramid provides another angle from which to view the question of who the real creators were. We have no ancient account of the building of the Step Pyramid, yet we instinctively recognize in it a work of architectural genius. This remote and poorly documented period has in fact provided us with the name of a great man of Djoser’s court, Imhotep.47 On the base of a statue of Djoser from the Step Pyramid Imhotep’s name is carved, together with his titles: ‘seal-bearer of the King of Lower Egypt, first one under the king, administrator of the Great Mansion, prince, chief of seers’. On the wall of the unfinished step pyramid of Djoser’s successor (King Sekhemkhet) his name occurs again, simply as ‘Seal-bearer of the King of Lower Egypt, Imhotep.’ From the discovery of this material Egyptologists have made the not unreasonable assertion that Imhotep was the man behind the Step Pyramid. Imhotep was also one of the lucky few who achieved long posthumous fame in ancient Egypt. His name was honoured 1,500 years later in the New Kingdom, but not as an architect. He was famous as the author of a set of thoughtful sayings. ‘I have heard the words of Imhotep and Hordedef, with whose discourses men speak so much,’ says one song, pairing him with another famous sage of old, one of the sons of King Khufu. Imhotep’s fame did not stop here. By the Twenty-sixth Dynasty he had become a minor god, the son of the god Ptah of Memphis, and healing was to become his speciality so that the Greeks identified him with their god of healing, Asklepios. In some late texts he is given a set of titles, but they are creations of the day: ‘vizier, overseer of works, mayor’. He was correctly placed in the reign of King Djoser, and credited with the ‘invention of building with hewn stone’, but the history of Djoser’s reign was recast into more modern shape. A papyrus of the first or second century AD, for example, sends Djoser and his vizier, Imhotep, off on a campaign to Assyria, a piece of pseudo-history that is out of keeping with the world of Egypt’s Third Dynasty.

We are probably right to identify Imhotep as the Step Pyramid’s architect (though having done that we have simply played the ancient game of elevating names into knowledge; it really tells us nothing about him). Through this he achieved fame as a great official, and it was as a great official, with the inevitable attribute of being ‘wise’, that he was remembered. It was the fact of his success that counted, not the means – architectural genius – by which he acquired it. Indeed, it would have been contrary to the myth-world of his architecture if it had been given a historical point of origin. This raises another conundrum for ourselves. We must accept that from time to time the Egyptians produced figures of great intellectual ability responsible for major changes in traditions. Yet the Egyptians remained without the means to conceptualize this. Tradition is not wholly a mechanical repetition of ancient forms that thereby provide a key to past times. It is subject to modification as time passes, which sometimes amounts to invention. Traditions can thus obscure the past as well as illuminate it. They answer current needs and are the products of ingenious minds.

When we look at Early Dynastic brick palace architecture and Preformal shrines and their associated objects it is possible to imagine that they could have formed the beginnings of a cultural and artistic tradition very different from the one that actually did develop. Or if, as with the Indus Valley civilization, Early Dynastic Egypt had advanced no further along a straightforward cultural trajectory and the early material was all that we had, our evaluation and interpretation of it would be rather different from the way it actually appears now: as a formative stage to something much richer and greater later on. This is another way of saying that Pharaonic culture was not a naturally evolved tradition. It was invented, but so successfully that it left the Egyptians (and to some extent ourselves) feeling that it was all somehow rooted in the country and in the psychology of the people in a most fundamental way.

At the heart of a cultural tradition is a trade-off between respect for past achievements and the accommodation of fertile and creative minds who look for something new. Ancient Egypt provides an early case history of the dynamics of the Great Tradition of culture: how it arose and was maintained as a living system, how it expanded at the expense of local traditions, and how it achieved the difficult balance between past and present. It also enlarges our understanding of the scope of myth in society. The previous chapter was devoted to showing how the Egyptians wrapped history and political power in myth. This chapter has attempted to do the same with material culture. Myth is not only a narrative form of expression. Myth statements that do not require verbalization can be conveyed powerfully through art and architecture. They provide a distinctive dimension to the assault on the senses that lies at the heart of state ideologies.





Notes

1E. Bloxham, CAJ 25 (2015), 789–814 surveys the ancient Egyptian interaction with this quarry landscape.

2Translation is in Breasted, Ancient Records I, 211–17.

3G. Castel and G. Soukiassian, BIFAO 85 (1985), 285–93; Régen and Soukiassian, Gebel el-Zeit; Bard, Encyclopedia, 324–8.

4D. Zahan, The Religion, Spirituality, and Thought of Traditional Africa, Chicago, IL, and London, UCP, 1970, 19.

5M.C. Jedrej, Ingessana: the Religious Institutions of a People of the Sudan–Ethiopian Borderland, Leiden, New York and Cologne, Brill, 1995, Ch. 11, 99–115, the quote being from p. 100.

6Vercoutter, Mirgissa I, 307–62; J. Vercoutter, RdÉ 16 (1964), 179–91; Pinch, Votive Offerings includes discussion of most of the Hathor shrines.

7P. Munro, ZÄS 88 (1962), 48–58. Quirke, Exploring Religion, 62–5, discusses the evidence for a shrine near Badari where small glazed objects had been left, and makes a possible link with the god Seth, in the form of a hippopotamus, known to have been honoured in the nearby town.

8J.F. Borghouts, Ancient Egyptian Magical Texts, Leiden, Brill, 1978, 32; Pinch, Votive Offerings, 211–21 provides an extensive discussion of the meaning of such figurines.

9Dreyer, Elephantine VIII; a convenient summary of the early development of the town in general is Elephantine: the Ancient Town. Bussmann, Provinztempel is a detailed treatment of most of the shrines and associated material discussed in this chapter. For the temple of Senusret I, see W. Kaiser et al., MDAIK 44 (1988), 153, Abb. 7.

10W. Kaiser, G. Dreyer, R. Gempeler, P. Grossmann, G. Haeny, H. Jaritz and F. Junge, MDAIK 32 (1976), 67–112, esp. 78–80; Strudwick, Texts, 134.

11R. Bussmann, ‘Pepi I and the temple of Satet at Elephantine.’ In R. Mairs and A. Stevenson, eds, Current Research in Egyptology 2005, Oxford, Oxbow, 2007, 16–21; Strudwick, Texts, 133.

12Both figure in the scenes beneath the Step Pyramid at Saqqara, for example (Figures 2.21 and 2.22, pp. 101 and 103). Baboon and scorpion images were still included amongst the temple furniture of the pyramid of King Neferirkara of the Fifth Dynasty at Abusir, see Posener-Kriéger, Les archives, 87–98.

13D. Eigner, ‘A temple of the early Middle Kingdom at Tell Ibrahim Awad.’ In van den Brink, Nile Delta, 69–77; W.M. van Haarlem, EA 18 (2001), 33–5; W.M. van Haarlem, EA 20 (2002), 16–17; T.A. Sherkova, ‘Seven baboons in one boat: the interpretation of iconography in the context of the cult belonging to the temple at Tell Ibrahim Awad.’ In Z. Hawass and L. P. Brock, eds, Egyptology at the Dawn of the Twenty-first Century: Proceedings of the Eighth International Congress of Egyptologists, Cairo, 2000 2, Cairo and New York, AUC Press, 2003, 504–8; Bussmann, Provinztempel, 105–8, 118–19.

14It has been argued that the Middle Kingdom Tell Ibrahim Awad building has a plan influenced by shrines from Early Bronze Age Palestine, M. Bietak, ‘The Early Bronze Age III temple at Tell Ibrahim Awad and its relevance to the Egyptian Old Kingdom.’ In Z. Hawass, Peter Der Manuelian and R. B. Hussein, eds, Perspectives on Ancient Egypt: Studies in Honor of Edward Brovarski, Cairo, Conseil Suprême des Antiquités de l’Égypte, 2010, 65–77.

15Chłodnicki et al., Tell el-Farkha; K.M. Ciałowicz, ‘The Predynastic/Early Dynastic Period at Tell el-Farkha.’ In Teeter, Origins, 55–64.

16Petrie, Abydos I, II; B.J. Kemp, MDAIK 25 (1968), 138–55; B.J. Kemp, GM 8 (1973), 23–5; B.J. Kemp, Antiquity 51 (1977), 186–9; Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, 47–58; Bussmann, Provinztempel, 87–90, 117; Strudwick, Texts, 98–101, 102–3, 106.

17Mond and Myers, Temples of Armant, 29, and the section drawing on Pl. II.

18A.J. Spencer, Catalogue of Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum V. Early Dynastic Objects, London, BM, 1980, 67, Pl. 55, no. 483.

19A small factory which actually made these figurines and which dates to the Old Kingdom and possibly into the Middle Kingdom has been found beside the ancient town of Abydos. See M.D. Adams, ‘The Abydos settlement site project: investigation of a major provincial town in the Old Kingdom and First Intermediate Period.’ In C.J. Eyre, ed., Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Egyptologists, Cambridge 3–9 September 1995, Leuven, Peeters, 1998, 19–30, p. 28.

20Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I; Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II; Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis; Fairservis, Hierakonpolis 1978; W.A. Fairservis, Excavation of the Archaic Remains East of the Niched Gate, Season of 1981, Poughkeepsie, NY, Vassar College, 1986; Adams, Ancient Nekhen; Dreyer, Elephantine VIII, 37–46; Bussmann, Provinztempel, 48–50, 117; R. Bussmann, JEA 100 (2014), 311–37; L. McNamara, ‘The revetted mound at Hierakonpolis and early kingship: a re-interpretation.’ In Midant-Reynes and Tristant, Origins, 901–36.

21Arnold, Qasr el-Sagha, 22–3, where a Middle Kingdom date for the Hierakonpolis building is preferred.

22The date of this image is not easily discernible from its style, to the extent that a New Kingdom date can be argued; Bussmann, Provinztempel, 51, 198; M. Eaton-Krauss, GM 42 (1981), 15–18; U. Rössler-Köhler, MDAIK 34 (1978), 117–25. Beyond this, the date and meaning of almost every aspect of the site have been questioned at some point. I have followed a fairly conservative line of interpretation.

23Photographs taken at the time are in B.J. Kemp, ‘Architektur der Frühzeit.’ In Vandersleyen, Das alte Ägypten, 99–112, 104, Abb. 1; Adams, Ancient Nekhen, 60, Fig. 21.

24Quibell and Petrie, Hierakonpolis I, 6, Pl. II; Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, Pl. LXXII; R. Engelbach, JEA 20 (1934), 183–4; Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis, 17.

25Quibell and Green, Hierakonpolis II, 53, Pl. LXXII; Adams, Ancient Hierakonpolis, Frontis.

26Petrie, Koptos; B.J. Kemp, A. Boyce and J. Harrell, CAJ 10 (2000), 211–42; B. Williams, JARCE 25 (1988), 35–59; L. Baqué-Manzano, BIFAO 102 (2002), 17–54.

27B. Adams, Sculptured Pottery from Koptos in the Petrie Collection, Warminster, A&P, 1986. The quotation is from Petrie, Koptos, 5. Also Bussmann, Provinztempel, 82. In view of the circumstances of finding, no clear date can be given to this material, although Petrie claims that Old Kingdom pottery lay in the vicinity. A similar piece was amongst the material found by Petrie at Abydos, see S.P. Harvey, ‘A decorated protodynastic cult stand from Abydos.’ In Manuelian, Studies I, 361–78. The suggested date for this piece is from before the First Dynasty.

28B. Adams and R. Jaeschke, The Koptos Lions (Contributions in Anthropology and History 3), Milwaukee, WI, Milwaukee Public Museum, January 1984.

29Modern and ancient references to the hill are collected in W.C. Hayes, JEA 32 (1946), 9, n. 5.

30C. Robichon and A. Varille, CdÉ 14, no. 27 (1939), 82–7; D. Arnold, ‘Architektur des Mittleren Reiches.’ In Vandersleyen, Das alte Ägypten, 161–3, Abb. 36; Arnold, Tempel Mentuhotep, 7–8, 22; Bussmann, Provinztempel, 76, 118.

31Robichon and Varille, Temple primitif. F. Relats Montserrat, GM 240 (2014), 123–5 reports on work on the documentation from this largely unpublished excavation; see also the comments by Arnold, Temple Mentuhotep, 76–8.

32I. Regulski, SAK 38 (2009), 259–74.

33J. Vandier, Moʾalla; la tombe d’Ankhtifi et la tombe de Sébekhotep, Cairo, IFAO, 1950.

34Petrie, Abydos I, 4, Pl. III.48. Note also the entry on the Palermo Stone, Wilkinson, Annals, 138, Fig. 1.

35Pyramid Texts, Utterance no. 600. R.O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1969, 246; Pritchard, Texts, 3; Allen, Genesis in Egypt, 13–14.

36A good introduction to ancient Egyptian pottery is J. Bourriau, Umm el-Gaʾab. Pottery from the Nile Valley before the Arab Conquest, Cambridge, CUP, 1981.

37For the somewhat enigmatic Mesopotamian connection, see H. Frankfort, The Birth of Civilization in the Near East, London, Williams & Norgate, 1951, 100–12; H. Frankfort, AJSL 58 (1941), 329–58; H.J. Kantor, JNES 1 (1942), 174–213; H.J. Kantor, JNES 11 (1952), 239–50; H.J. Kantor, ‘The relative chronology of Egypt and its foreign correlations before the First Intermediate Period’, in R.W. Ehrich, ed., Chronologies in Old World Archaeology, 3rd edn, Chicago, IL, and London, UCP, 1992, I, 3–21; II, 2–43; H.S. Smith, ‘The making of Egypt: a review of the influence of Susa and Sumer on Upper Egypt and Lower Nubia in the 4th millennium BC’, in R. Friedman and B. Adams, eds, Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to Michael Allen Hoffman, Oxford, Oxbow, 1992, 235–46; B. Teissier, Iran (Journal of the British Institute of Persian Studies) 25 (1987), 27–53; P.R.S. Moorey, ‘On tracking cultural transfers in prehistory: the case of Egypt and Lower Mesopotamia in the fourth millennium bc.’ In M.J. Rowlands, K. Kristiansen and M.T. Larsen, eds, Centre and Periphery in the Ancient World, Cambridge, CUP, 1987, 36–46; P.R.S. Moorey, ‘From Gulf to Delta in the fourth millennium BCE: the Syrian connection.’ Eretz-Israel 21 (1990), 62*–69*; J.A. Hill, Cylinder Seal Glyptic in Predynastic Egypt and Neighboring Regions, Oxford, Archaeopress, 2004.

38N. Jenkins, The Boat Beneath the Pyramid: King Cheops’ Royal Ship, London, T&H, 1980; P. Lipke, The Royal Ship of Cheops, Oxford, British Archaeological Reports, 1984; Landström, Ships, 26–34; G.A. Reisner, A History of the Giza Necropolis II. The Tomb of Hetep-heres the Mother of Cheops, Cambridge, MA., HUP, 1955, 23–7, Pl. 5.

39On the goddess Bat, see H.G. Fischer, JARCE 1 (1962), 7–24; H.G. Fischer, JARCE 2 (1963), 50–1; Nekhen News 15 (2003), 8–9; 17 (2005), 15; S. Hendrickx and R. Friedman, GM 196 (2003), 95–109; also W. Kaiser, MDAIK 39 (1983), 261–96.

40P. Spencer, The Egyptian Temple: a Lexicographical Study, London, KPI, 1984, 125–30.

41Reymond, Mythical Origin; C. Rossi, Architecture and Mathematics in Ancient Egypt, Cambridge, CUP, 2004, 161–73.

42Recall the warning that arises from the texts quoted in note 70 to Chapter 1!

43Naville, XIth Dynasty Temple II, 14–19, Pls XXIII and XXIV.

44Arnold, Tempel Mentuhotep, 28–32, 76–8.

45R. Stadelmann, Die ägyptischen Pyramiden: Vom Ziegelbau zum Weltwunder, Mainz, von Zabern, 1985, 229, Abb. 74.

46A. de Buck, Studia Aegyptiaca I, Rome, Pontificium Institutum Biblicum, 1938, 48–57; Lichtheim, Literature I, 115–18.

47Ray, Reflections, 5–22; D. Wildung, Imhotep und Amenhotep – Gottwerdung im alten Ägypten, Berlin, Deutscher Kunstverlag, 1977; D. Wildung, Egyptian Saints: Deification in Pharaonic Egypt, New York, New York University Press, 1977.





Part II

The provider state





