Who were the ancient Egyptians?



Books about ancient Egypt take for granted that the ancient Egyptians were already, in essence, a nation. It is natural to say that the Egyptians believed in such and such a thing and acted in a certain way. Modern historians, however, might not altogether agree and ask: ‘Are you sure? Are you not being naive?’ For they tend to see the concept of nationhood and national consciousness as having begun in western Europe in the eighteenth century, and as having been somehow linked to the decline in the power of religion. Nationhood is, from this point of view, to be contrasted with large cultural systems that preceded it, in particular the ‘religious community’ and the ‘dynastic realm’. Mediaeval Europe supplies the pre-modern norm. Christianity and the Latin language, and the transfers of rulership of huge swathes of territory through dynastic marriages and conquests, created loyalties and enmities that transcended boundaries of shared inheritance and common language. Henry II, King of England (and Wales), spoke French as his first language and owned and ruled almost the same amount of territory in France. This seems the antithesis of circumstances in which nationhood exists. Another example, very relevant to Egypt, is the Ottoman Empire which, in its heyday, extended from Budapest to Baghdad, from Cairo to the Caspian Sea and held within its embrace many diverse societies, separated by language and local history. What unified them was Islam, the Arabic language (and to a lesser extent the Ottoman language of state business), and loyalty to the Sultan and to his representatives. Only in the wake of its collapse came the assertion of local identities which either transformed themselves into nations (as with Greece and Egypt, and the Ottoman heartland of Turkey) or have struggled to do so through more than a century of communal violence, particularly in the Balkans and more recently in Syria and Iraq.

Collective identity is an ancient, deeply felt, and sometimes murky attribute of humanity. It begins on the very local scale, and much of human history is concerned with its evolution although, as pointed out in the Introduction, the move from hunter-gatherer groups to societies in which dominance hierarchy was the rule is thought to have begun relatively late and has proceeded with different degrees of intensity and on different scales ever since. Nor is the nation-state necessarily the final grouping. Beyond it lies the potential of transnational or transregional groupings which have been achieved in the past (often in the form of empires). India, the USA and China are examples of very large territories that have managed to become ‘natural’ units. The voluntary union of European states aspires to something like this status (and also illustrates the point that moves towards harmony engender perverse opposites, in the shape of national political movements dedicated to weakening it). Furthermore in the 1960s the short-lived political unions linking Egypt with Syria, Iraq and Libya (to create a United Arab Republic) had the same aim. We still live in a politically transitional time.





The imagined community


Central to the concept of the nation is

an imagined political community … It is imagined because the members of even the smallest nation will never know most of their fellow-members, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion.1



People live in a world of their imagination whilst simultaneously negotiating daily realities. By this definition of the nation ancient Egypt passes the test reasonably well. The ancient Egyptians, speaking and writing a common language, occupying a territory with a well-catalogued geography centred on the Nile valley and subscribing to a distinctive culture, imagined themselves as a single community. Central to that imagined community – and it is here that we meet the principal difference from modern nationhood – is that it was presided over by a line of divine kings, Pharaohs. Yet we should not emphasize this difference too much, for Egypt had an existence separate from Pharaoh, and rulers were heavily obligated to maintain the integrity of ‘Egypt’. They served it and were ‘the herdsmen of mankind’, the latter term meaning, of course, Egyptians (just one version of the conceit that anthropologists have found to be widely spread in the world of tribal societies; that is, ‘we’ alone are synonymous with true humanity). Moreover, kings owed their own unique position to the continuing existence of the country called Egypt that they ruled and of its wealth of traditions. The line of the Pharaohs and all the marks of their legitimacy to rule continued through the first millennium BC, even though by then the holders of the office were mostly of foreign origin, from Libya, the Sudan, Assyria, Persia, Greece and Rome.

The imagined community of the nation contrasts itself with the world outside. ‘We’ are special, ‘they’ are inferior and do strange things. The sense of community in the modern world is developed and maintained by diverse means, including the reading of newspapers the editorial policies of which promote national identity, most strongly by disparaging foreign peoples and nations. The Egyptians took pleasure in this kind of thinking, too. We meet it well developed in a piece of ancient Egyptian fiction, the Story of Sinuhe, a tale of temporary exile in Palestine endured by a courtier of the early Twelfth Dynasty who feels the need to flee as a result of accidental implication in a conspiracy to thwart the royal succession. The assumed readership is the Egyptian literate class and, although seemingly composed around 1950 BC, the story was still being copied as a school exercise seven centuries later.2

To leave his country, Sinuhe has to creep by night past the frontier fortress named ‘The Walls of the Prince’, which, he states, ‘was made to repel the Asiatic and to crush the Sand-farers’ (i.e. the Bedouin). Close to death in the desert he is rescued by one of these very same people, a passing cattle nomad who offers hospitality. In his subsequent exile in Palestine he exchanges his persona as an Egyptian courtier clad in fine linen for that of the head of a tribe, and is eventually forced to adopt the role most antithetical to that of the Egyptian scribal elite, the warrior who becomes the hero of personal combat. Despite his local success, there is no mistaking the sense of longing for the distant homeland, which is both a place and a community, namely Egypt. ‘Come back to Egypt!’ are the very words of the king’s subsequent personal advice. At the heart of this longing is the thought that Egypt is the only proper place in which an Egyptian can be buried. Much emphasis is placed on this. To ease the pain of exile, the Palestinian ruler who befriends Sinuhe tellingly remarks on the linguistic aspect of community: ‘You will be happy with me; you will hear the language of Egypt’, evidently from other Egyptians who, he states, were already with him. Eventually, pardoned by a benign king, Sinuhe returns to Egypt, to an enthusiastic welcome and to a self-indulgent shedding of the taint of foreignness: ‘Years were removed from my body. I was shaved; my hair was combed. Thus was my squalor returned to the foreign land, my dress to the Sand-farers. I was clothed in fine linen; I was anointed with fine oil. I slept on a bed.’ And a magnificent tomb with a gilded statue in its chapel was made for him at the king’s expense.

It is all there: geographical frontiers, language, dress, bodily cleanliness, even sleeping on proper beds; and were not Egyptians lucky to be ruled by so powerful yet benign and generous a king? By these marks Egypt was defined as a nation, which could still be imagined in these terms centuries later as the text was copied and read. It should be noted, none the less, that Sinuhe’s picture of the ‘Asiatics’ is essentially a kindly one. They might be uncouth, but they behave with honour and kindness. They do not commit acts of savagery. Sinuhe inhabits a world, or at least a literary dimension, of civilized manners.

The term which Sinuhe uses throughout for ‘Egypt’ (Kmt) means literally the ‘black land’. In other sources it is often contrasted with the ‘red land’, as in the reference to a mythical partitioning between the gods Horus and Seth: ‘The whole of the Black Land is given to Horus, and all of the Red Land to Seth.’3 It is thus reasonable to understand the pairing of the two terms as a contrast in basic soil colour: the black soil of the alluvial plain of the Nile and the sands and rocks of the desert which Egyptians included within a colour term which we conventionally translate as ‘red’ but which really embraced a wider palette. As for themselves, the Egyptians often used a term which is sometimes to be appropriately translated ‘the people’ (as in ‘people of Egypt’ in Sinuhe) or more broadly as ‘mankind’. It made them the centre of the universe; they were the norm. In a myth recorded in several royal tombs of the New Kingdom ‘mankind’ rebels against the ageing sun god Ra, who is called ‘the King of Upper and Lower Egypt’.4 From his wrath they flee into the desert and are there pursued to destruction by an avenging goddess whose lust for blood is assuaged by red-pigmented beer being poured over the fields as if it were an inundation of the River Nile. The imagined location is clearly Egypt and ‘mankind’ are the Egyptian people. As the norm of humanity Egyptians as ‘mankind’ were to be contrasted with specific groups who lived in the other parts of the world known to them. At the furthest limits were the inhabitants of Punt (modern Eritrea) who were said to ‘know nothing of mankind’.5

Egyptians delighted in type-casting their subdivisions of foreigners, and did so with deft stylization (Figure 1.1). By means of clear conventions of classification, using facial shape, skin colour and dress, they identified particular groups: Nubians, Asiatics, Libyans, peoples from the Aegean, and from the eastern Sudanese/Eritrean land of Punt. These stereotypes came to life again in the nineteenth century AD as western scholars began to record the ancient monuments and thus to explore the ancient Egyptians’ world through their eyes. It produced, for a while, a mood of over-confidence, in which the ancient Egyptians’ portrayals of foreigners were regarded as almost photographic representations of ‘racial types’, a subject then high on anthropologists’ research agenda. ‘The same form of head is characteristic of the Armenian to-day, though with a larger nose’ was one such early twentieth-century comment on a relief at the temple of Abu Simbel.6 We have become more cautious with the evidence since then.



Figure 1.1Foreigners in the Memphite tomb of Horemheb (c. 1320 BC) at Saqqara. From left to right, in three groups, Asiatics, Nubians and Libyans. After G.T. Martin, The Memphite Tomb of Ḥoremḥeb, Commander-in-Chief of Tutʾankhamun I, London, EES, 1989, Pls 116 and 117.



To complement racial stereotyping the Egyptians from time to time expressed demeaning opinions. ‘The Asiatic is a crocodile on his bank. He snatches from a lonely road. He cannot seize from a populous town’ is part of the advice of one king to his successor (Merikare, c. 2050 BC).7

A coward is he (any Egyptian king) who is driven from his border, for the Nubian responds to the tone of voice. To answer him back is to make him retreat. Attack him, and he will turn his back. Retreat, and he will start attacking. They are not people to respect. They are wretches, craven-hearted …



announces King Senusret III on his southern boundary stela at Semna, in Nubia (c. 1870 BC).8 Libyans who, in the time of Rameses III, threatened Egypt (c. 1170 BC), are made to admit their folly after their defeat:

We have heard it said of Egypt from the time of our father’s father: ‘She is the one who breaks our back’. We have begged our own death by our own choice. Our very own legs have carried us to the fire.9



More often, the foreigner, when in the position of a foe, is simply designated by an adjective which seems most appropriately translated as ‘vile’.

From pictures and words of this kind – and the examples are very numerous – we might paint a picture of the ancient Egyptians as racially exclusive. By the first millennium BC outsiders were already claiming this to be so. The Greek travel-writer and historian Herodotus, observing that ‘no Egyptian, man or woman, will kiss a Greek, or use a Greek knife, cooking-spit, or cauldron, or even eat the flesh of a bull known to be clean, if it has been cut with a Greek knife’, put this down to Egyptian distaste of any people who were prepared to sacrifice cows, sacred to the goddess Isis.10 In a similar tone the Jewish historians who put together the Old Testament around this time or even later, in composing their parable-like tale of Egypt and Israel, explained the seating arrangements for a meal at Joseph’s house by saying: ‘for the Egyptians cannot eat with the Hebrews, for that is detestable to the Egyptians’.11 To what extent these are themselves caricatures made to pander to the intended home audiences is now hard to tell. For by contrast, sources from within Egypt point to a much greater variety of Egyptian response to foreigners in day-to-day affairs.





Building frontiers


The Egyptians attempted, by means of border controls at the corners of the delta and across the Nile in the south, to check the immigration of the Asiatics, Libyans and Nubians. The ‘Walls of the Prince’ which Sinuhe had to avoid was one such control. It has yet to be identified with an archaeological site, but its probable successor in the New Kingdom, by then named Tjaru (Sile), has been located at Tell el-Hebwa on the east side of the modern Suez canal (Figure 1.2; see also the map, Figure 1.10, p. 43).12 From a few reigns later than Sinuhe the massive fortifications which the Egyptians erected to mark their southern frontier at Semna in Nubia survived to a remarkable degree until the 1960s (for notes and a plan see pp. 234–6 and Figure 5.22). A short text inscribed upon a stone tablet by the king who built them (c. 1873 BC) makes their purpose explicit:

The southern boundary which was created in the 8th year under the Majesty of King Senusret III to prevent any Nubian from passing it when faring northwards, whether on foot or by boat, as well as any cattle of the Nubians. An exception is a Nubian who shall come to barter at Iken (a fortified trading-post), or one with an official message.13





Figure 1.2The frontier defences in the north-eastern Nile delta, depicted in part of the battle reliefs of Seti I at Karnak, Nineteenth Dynasty, c. 1290 BC. The scene captures the ambiguity of such defences. The fortress and the crocodile-filled canal are to keep out foreigners who wish to enter Egypt of their own accord, but when captured and under Egyptian control the same foreigners are herded across to be forcibly settled in Egypt. The hieroglyphic label within the fortress in the bottom left corner reads: ‘The lion’s den’; that within the buildings on the left side of the canal: ‘The fortress of Tjaru (Sile, the site ofTell el-Hebwa)’ (note its Window of Appearance at the top); that actually within the borders of the canal: ‘The dividing canal’. Waiting to greet the returning king are the ‘chief priests and mayors of Upper and Lower Egypt.’ After The Epigraphic Survey, The Battle Reliefs of King Sety I, Chicago, IL, UCP, 1986, Pl. 6, with additions (including all below the dotted line) from nineteenth-century AD copies provided by A.H. Gardiner, JEA 6 (1920), Pl. XI.



This is an echo of an even earlier text (an entry on the Palermo Stone, c. 2590 BC) which records ‘building the wall of the south- and north-land (called) “the mansions of Sneferu”’.14

When immigrant pressure in the west, from Libyan tribes, became acute in the Nineteenth Dynasty and was supported by landings of raiders from across the Mediterranean, a line of fortified settlements was constructed along the Mediterranean coast westwards from the Nile delta.15 On the other side of the delta, in the reign of Merenptah (c. 1212–1201 BC), a fortress controlled the eastern end of the Wadi Tumilat which offered an entry point from a more southerly crossing of the Sinai Peninsula (the text is translated below).

None the less, it was not feasible to surround the whole country with a wall. There were innumerable entry points from the deserts to east and west and, of course, it was also possible (as Sinuhe did) to sneak past the border posts which did exist and which lay across commonly used routes of access. Their effectiveness depended to some extent upon patrolling the desert around them. One ancient witness to this practice is a papyrus roll of neat copies of letters sent to a central office (perhaps at Thebes) from Semna and from other fortresses which were spaced along the Nile in Nubia. One topic concerns a people whom the Egyptians called the Medjay and who lived in the valleys of the eastern desert. The Egyptians employed some as desert trackers as they sought to collect intelligence about the movements and intentions of strangers. One letter reports that a little group of other Medjay had been brought in for questioning; another that a different group of two men and three women had approached one of the forts asking for employment but had been sent away again.16 Surveillance is the subject of a model letter included in a scribe’s set of practice pieces which deals with the fortress mentioned above at the eastern end of the Wadi Tumilat (Tjeku: perhaps the archaeological site of Tell el-Maskhuta; see the map, Figure 1.10, p. 43):

We have finished letting the Shasu tribes of Edom pass the fortress of Merenptah which is in Tjeku en route to the pools of Pi-Tum of Merenptah which are in the province of Tjeku, in order to sustain them and sustain their flocks through the good pleasure of Pharaoh … I have sent details to the place where my lord is, as well as other dates when the fortress of Merenptah in Tjeku was passed.17



It was acceptable to let them in for a while, but then to keep watch over them.





Opening the gates


These measures reflected a wish to control those who might enter and pose a threat to the lives and property of Egyptians. They did not aim to keep the country racially separate. Demeaning generalizations about foreigners and attempts to bar them from entering did not express absolute values but were heavily dependent upon context. Whatever their sense of superiority, Egyptians did not translate it into exclusion laws or into customs and behaviour which formed an effective barrier. Throughout its history Egypt took in and absorbed outsiders. For one thing, they could be useful. Through the recruitment of soldiers and through the capture of prisoners on foreign campaigns the numbers of those brought to the Nile valley who were available for the (to the scribal elite) distasteful tasks of fighting and labouring were swelled. Transferred to the Egyptian side, the cowardly foreigner became a valued warrior.

In the direction of Nubia, to the south, and towards the adjacent deserts, the practice of recruitment to serve in Egypt began at least as early as the Old Kingdom. Commissioned to raise a national army to counter a threat in Palestine, the high official Weni (reign of Pepi I, c. 2265–2219 BC, a classic ‘scribe’ who bore civil and not military titles) extended his demand for soldiers beyond the provinces of Egypt to the peoples of five named Nubian homelands (one of them, Medja, the homeland of the Medjay, probably in the eastern desert) and of ‘Libya’, a conventional modern translation of a vague term for the western desert. Whether, when released from military service, they returned to their homes or settled in Egypt the source does not tell us. But the continuing presence of Nubians in Egypt as a recognizable group who could, in a reversal of roles, actually force Egyptians to work for them was recognized by a royal decree of the same period which gave protection against them (they are called ‘friendly Nubians’, which might actually also translate as ‘Nubian mercenaries’) as well as against a wide range of others who might prey on the property belonging to certain established temples.18

Perhaps a century and a half later still, a group of Nubian bowmen were settled upstream from Thebes, in the vicinity of Gebelein, where a number of them were buried. Our only means of identification are small gravestones, the idiosyncratic hieroglyphs of which point to a date in the First Intermediate Period (Figure 1.3, right). They identify themselves as Nubians by sometimes using for themselves the clear Egyptian ethnic term for those who lived in the Nile valley south of Aswan, ‘Nehesy’ (which gave rise to the personal name Panehsy/Pinehas). They are shown with bushy hair, darker skin colour, and a distinctive sash which hangs down the front of their kilts. They carry bows and arrows and are sometimes attended by dogs. As riverine Nubians their cultural background is well known from excavations in Nubia itself and is distinctive. Some traces of it have been found to the north of Elephantine (Kubbaniya and Hierakonpolis are two sites, perhaps Gebelein is a third). In most of the material necessities of their lives they must have used things of Egyptian style, including the carved and inscribed gravestones furnished with the standard Egyptian offering-formula. Even further to the north, an Egyptian nobleman of this same time (First Intermediate Period), named Mesehet, included within his tomb at Asyut wooden models of a troop of Nubian archers and another of Egyptian spearmen (Figure 1.3, left). We identify them as Nubians on account of the darker paint used for their skin and their costume, but nothing from local archaeology has so far identified the presence of a Nubian population.19



Figure 1.3Nubian bowmen locally employed in Egypt in the First Intermediate Period. Left. One of the figures (35 cm high) in a wooden model of a Nubian troop, from the tomb of Mesehet, Asyut (Egyptian Museum, Cairo, CG 257). His skin colour is a darker red than that of Egyptian spearmen in a companion model from the same tomb. Whilst the latter wear a white, undecorated loincloth, most of the Nubian garments consist of a red loincloth held in place with a green-blue waistband, over which is tied a broad red sash the ends of which hang down the front. Both the loincloth and the sash are decorated with large diamond shapes. There is sound archaeological evidence for interpreting the colour and decoration of the loincloth and sash as deriving from myriad tiny coloured beads stitched to a cloth backing. After M. Bietak, in Posener-Kriéger, Mélanges Gamal Mokhtar, Taf. IIIa. Right. Limestone tomb stela from Gebelein (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, MA, 03.1848), 37 cm high. The hieroglyphs identify the owner (1) as a Nubian (Nehesy). He carries a bow and a bunch of arrows, dots around the edge of his hair distinguish it as tightly curled (as with figure no. 4), and he has a long sash over his loincloth. His wife (2) stands behind, and a son (3) in front, whose sash is shown as with a fringe. Behind him is a Nubian woman (4), perhaps a daughter, and two dogs; above (5) a ‘butler’ presents a drinking-bowl. The skin colour of (1) and (3) are a darker red than that of the butler (5), who is presumably an Egyptian. Both women are given a yellow skin colour. The hieroglyphic names are not easy to read but seem to be, in part, Egyptian. After H.G. Fischer, Kush 9 (1961), 57.



These are examples, and they occur repeatedly, of a basic aspect of the archaeology of ancient Egypt. Even if immigrants retained for a time their own style of dress and other habits, and perhaps their own language, they tended rapidly to abandon the kind of cultural markers which survive best on archaeological sites, most particularly their own pottery. The history of the important subject of immigration has to be written largely from texts and from artistic representations, neither of which provides anything like a continuous and representative record.

From periods prior to the New Kingdom come sporadic records of Palestinians (‘Asiatics’) in Egypt, too. Some were brought as prisoners of war. A granite slab from the temple of Memphis (the Mit Rahina Stela), in recording court events of the reign of Amenemhat II (c. 1932–1896 BC), states that one campaign netted 1,554 ‘Asiatics’; another reference (to the same group?) deals with the dispersal of ‘Asiatic women’.20 One consequence of such dispersals is to be found in a papyrus (now in the Brooklyn Museum, USA) of the Thirteenth Dynasty (c. 1745 BC) which includes a list of slaves in a large household, probably that of the vizier Ankhu. There were originally 95 of them, for whom the slightly damaged text preserves the names and/or ‘titles’ of 79, two-thirds of them women. More than half of the names are preceded by the masculine and feminine variations of the word ‘Asiatic’ (i.e. ‘Asiatic man’/’Asiatic woman’). In the remaining cases the term used is either ‘king’s servant’ (male) or ‘servant’ (female), an indication that they are Egyptians. Already some of the Asiatics had taken the first steps towards assimilation. Eight of the Asiatic women are listed as having with them a son or daughter who bears an Egyptian name. One of the boys, whose Asiatic mother also bore an Egyptian name, is stated to have been the son of a ‘skipper’ whose non-ethnic designation and Egyptian name probably identify him as an Egyptian, too.21 A later part of this book (Chapter 5, pp. 211–21) describes the large planned Middle Kingdom town of Kahun, a royal foundation. That, too, supported contingents of Asiatics, male and female. This is known from papyri, but their presence is not to be deduced independently from archaeology.22

In the New Kingdom foreign campaigns were pursued with greater vigour and probably on a larger scale. The battle texts gloat over the massacre of enemies and of the terror they feel when the Pharaoh attacks. Those who were captured, however, immediately became assets, were carefully counted and were sent back to Egypt to become part of the property of the Pharaoh, or of the temples (virtually the same thing), or of men rewarded for their bravery by the king with gifts of prisoners. A temple text describes Rameses II (c. 1279–1212 BC) as the king ‘who carries off the land of Nubia to the Delta, and the Asiatics to Nubia. He has placed the Bedouin (Shasu) in the land of the west and has settled the Libyans (Tjemehu) in the hill country (the east).’23 Something similar is said of Rameses III (c. 1185–1153 BC) concerning the Libyans, who, once captured, were ‘made to cross the Nile, transported into Egypt and turned into garrisons of the victorious king’.24

Initially, at least, they could be kept together in ethnically distinct camps. Two stelae from the mortuary temple of Tuthmosis IV (c. 1398–1388 BC) record the foundation of settlements for prisoners captured by the king, one group from the Palestinian city of Gezer and another from the Nubian lands of Kush. His son, Amenhetep III (c. 1388–1348 BC), surrounded his mortuary temple with settlements of Hurrians (Palestinians?), whilst a place name at Memphis, ‘field of the Hittites’, perhaps derived from another such camp.25 Rameses III, in summarizing his achievements, adds telling details about the fate of captured groups: ‘I established their leaders in strongholds bearing my name. I appointed among them chiefs of bowmen, leaders of the tribes, (they being) branded – made as slaves – with the cartouche of my name; their wives and children were treated similarly.’26

To assess the impact which this process had on the overall population of Egypt we need some indication of scale, although numbers from ancient texts are notoriously difficult to use with confidence. We have already encountered 1,554 as the number of ‘Asiatics’ captured on a Middle Kingdom expedition. Papyrus Harris I lists the following donations made by Rameses III to the temple of Amun: Syrian and Nubian settlements containing 2,607 persons; to the temple of Ra: 2,093 chariot-warriors and others (including Aperu, a Palestinian people); to the temple of Ptah: 205 Syrians and Nubians; and also a general donation of 971 Libyans (Mashwash) for looking after herds.27 We cannot, of course, check the reliability of these numbers. They are, however, hardly likely to be underestimates given that the purpose of the text was to record the achievements of the recently deceased king. Yet although hardly overwhelming they have to be set against the relatively small population of Egypt in antiquity. On a larger scale Merenptah (c. 1212–1201 BC) claims to have netted from his Libyan war, as its principal batch of captives, an apparent total (the text is damaged) of 9,376 persons.28 Even larger figures are given for the second Palestinian campaign of Amenhetep II (c. 1424–1398 BC) (Memphis Stela), totalling around 100,000, including 36,300 Hurrians. Although they are said to be ‘plunder which his majesty carried off’, the numbers are sufficiently disproportionate to raise the suspicion that they are guesses at the total numbers of the populations involved. For one thing, if all were brought back and settled in Egypt the problems of dispersal and support would have been huge, given that this figure is around one thirtieth of the total population (of around 3,000,000) which has been estimated for Egypt at this time.29 A rare example with numbers from an even earlier period is the result of a Nubian campaign of King Sneferu (c. 2520–2470 BC) of the Fourth Dynasty recorded on the Palermo Stone: 7,000 captives (as well as 200,000 sheep and goats).30 If one chooses to accept the figure then one can make the case that this was a move to boost the labour force needed for the exceptional building programme of Sneferu, which embraced two major pyramids at Dahshur and a third at Medum.

One can form the impression that at times, and in places where large groups of people were gathered to work on great projects, especially monumental building, foreigners would have predominated (Figure 1.4). One witness document is a work record scribbled on a flake of limestone, which tells us that a gang labouring with stone blocks for a temple in western Thebes in the reign of Tuthmosis III (c. 1479–1424 BC) comprised 60 Palestinians and only 20 ‘men’ (i.e. Egyptians).31



Figure 1.4Brick-makers (left) and bricklayers and carriers (centre and right) as depicted in the tomb of the vizier Rekhmira, mid-Eighteenth Dynasty. The text on the right reads: ‘The captives which His Majesty brought back for the projects of the temple of [Amun]’; the text to the left of the middle reads: ‘Making bricks to rebuild the workshops [of Amun] in Karnak’. The modern copyist of the scene commented: ‘Fair-skinned Syrians with blue or red (for brown) eyes mingle with darker Nubians, whose hair is dyed (?) red or blue and whose loincloths are of leather, and with others who are scarcely distinguishable from Egyptians’, adding that the blue eye colour could stand for grey. After Davies, Rekh-mi-rē ʾ, 54–5, Pls LVIII, LIX; colour Pl. XII.



Where the battles were in Palestine and Syria, the captured places and defeated armies belonged, as was the case in Egypt, to societies in which some people were under obligations to work in servitude (whether or not we consider the term ‘slavery’ to be appropriate; see the discussion below, p. 180). For some of the prisoners, therefore, capture will have meant only an exchange of masters. The process continued in times of peace, when people from the same areas were sold into captivity in Egypt, although when numbers are cited they are relatively small. The annual tribute of ‘Syrian slaves’ listed in the annals of Tuthmosis III at Karnak varies between 51 and 702.32 Some of the Amarna Letters of the late Eighteenth Dynasty, which are likely to be more realistic than temple texts, occasionally mention slaves either as gifts to the Pharaoh or given in exchange for gold or silver, and these numbers are also not large. The prince of Jerusalem, for example, sends 10 slaves, 21 girls and 80 prisoners (all of whom would presumably have been assigned tasks over which they had no control when they arrived).33 By contrast, when we read of 2,093 chariot-warriors assigned to the temple of Amun by Rameses III (the implication is that they are the king’s captives from his battles), we are clearly dealing with men, probably mostly young men, from among the local elites now experiencing a great change of fortune.34 The same social stratum is depicted in the tomb of Rekhmira, the vizier to Tuthmosis III:

Leading in the children of the princes of the southern lands, together with the children of the princes of the northern lands, carried off as the pick of the booty … to fill the labour camps and to be the serfs of the temple estate of his father Amun.35

