Introduction



The Invention of Consciousness: ‘In English we use the word “invention” in two ways. First, to mean a new device or process developed by experimentation, and designed to fulfill a practical goal. Second, to mean a mental fabrication, especially a falsehood, developed by art, and designed to please or persuade. In this talk I’ll argue that human consciousness is an invention in both respects. First, it is a cognitive faculty, evolved by natural selection, designed to help us make sense of ourselves and our surroundings. But then, second, it is a fantasy, conjured up by the brain, designed to change the value we place on our existence.’

Professor Nick Humphrey, announcement for a lecture at Wolfson College, Cambridge, 13 May 2016



In the mid-1980s the then history commissioning editor of Routledge, Andrew Wheatcroft, asked me to write a general book about ancient Egypt, which I duly did. I recall a wish somehow to convey an angry feeling that the story of ancient Egypt is simultaneously a record of human achievement in the distant past and a pointer to a future failure of humanity – which is with us now – to face the destructive consequences of many of those achievements. I would like history to be a record of the struggle to be free of the craving for power already evident in the Bronze Age and subsequently twisted into even more awful shapes by fierce creeds and strict ideologies. Progress is there, to be sure, but it is painfully slow, fitful and subject to reversal. Rightness of cause, as seen across the us-versus-them divide, still ensnares too many minds. ‘Nationalism and tribalism and faith – these are the driving forces now, and they are tearing apart transnational institutions all over the world.’1

Since, however, I had not been asked to write a polemic, my wish broke the surface only occasionally, and the same remains true of this further revised edition. None the less, the longer view which archaeology and ancient history affords does invite one to take stock of how humanity has been faring for the past five thousand years. Remote though one’s studies might appear to be, they are of events and processes which are parts of the continuum of which the current world is a product. Many deep-seated aspects of ancient societies have proved to be remarkably enduring, changing their clothes as fashions have moved on so that they ever seem a natural part of the contemporary landscape. They are mostly to do with collective identity and sources of authority, and especially deserve to be held up to critical scrutiny, for they are often the least benign parts of our inheritance.

In producing a revised edition for the second time I have tried to accomplish several things at once. One is simply an update on discoveries and newer publications, though I have again been less thorough than I should like. Recent years have seen an outpouring of discoveries and studies that requires almost full-time attention properly to embrace whilst, at the same time, my own priority has been continuing field research at Tell el-Amarna (Amarna for short). For the first revision, I responded to a suggestion that the later centuries be included as well, although this is not my speciality, but I have now (again in response to outside suggestions) reverted to something closer to the original scheme. In consequence the book ends with a separate chapter on Amarna.





Seen through the lens of culture


The opportunity to revise is also another stage in personal exploration (and thus something of a luxury), an attempt to clarify the meaning of the studies upon which I have been engaged for over half a century. I have found myself returning time and again to ask myself the question of just what, whether we study ancient Egypt or our own present society, we are really looking at. I find a beginning in the most obvious fact of all. Past and present, we are all – readers of this text and ancient Egyptians alike – members of the same species, Homo sapiens, equipped with a brain that physically has remained unchanged since our species emerged. Abundant written sources from ancient Egypt confirm the conclusion that we all share, and have in the past shared, a common consciousness and substratum of unconscious behaviour. We all face the same basic experience, that of existing as a uniquely important individual, looking out into a world that recedes away from the circle of daily life to a wider society of common culture, to more distant and ‘foreign’ societies lying beyond, all within the context of earth and heavens and the powers of luck, fate, destiny, the will of supernatural (I would prefer to say imaginary) agents and, now that we have become conscious of them, the immutable forces of scientific laws. We search for a theory of everything. Its components come mixed up together, jostling for attention, and in thought and conversation we flit easily from one to another. We live and keep our reason by virtue of the way that our minds select from the ceaseless flood of experiences that crowd around and flow past us from birth to death and arrange what appears to be significant into patterns. Those patterns, and the responses that we make – fleetingly in speech and more permanently in the shape of institutions and monuments – are our culture. Culture begins as a mental therapy, a filter passed to us from recent generations, to protect us from being overwhelmed by the information that our senses collect, and through it we make sense of the world. On the one hand, therefore, I am trying to be an objective observer, examining evidence from ancient Egypt as if I were a botanist looking at species of ferns. Yet I can only make sense of the evidence by accepting that I myself am part of it, and how I join up the fragments depends upon the fact that I am human, too, living within my own cultural sphere. There is no clear and absolute answer as to where the line should be drawn between too much empathy and too little.

One could argue that, since differences in personality and in local and temporal setting combine to ensure that no two people are ever quite the same, there have been as many cultures as there have been human beings. But in practice culture is a collective phenomenon. Its nature encourages generalization (in which process we, as observers, are easily led to emphasize common features and to gloss over the extent to which people develop their own personal views of the world). A characteristic of being human is a wish to be part of a broader group with a distinctive identity, founded in language, religion, citizenship, guild, local society and so on. Moreover, through hearsay and some of the written and visual signals of culture people imagine that they belong not only to the community which surrounds them but also to a broader ‘people’ or ‘nation’ which defines itself, at least in part, by how different it appears to be from others. Shared identity is one of the most powerful and alluring sources of mental order. It provides a ready-made answer to the question: who am I? It also provides a basis for separating myself as observer from the people who are the object of my study. Chapter 1 explores for ancient Egypt what that collective identity was, attempting to separate culture from ethnicity.

Creative minds within the community strengthen the bonds of identity by the exercise of the imagination. They invent (though it might seem at the time to be revelation) myths, symbols and ideologies which are, in their time, essential knowledge. Ambitious individuals create from the framework a basis of power, establishing systems of conduct which direct the energies and resources of others. The history of the world is not an account of the development of innumerable pools of merging cultures and points of consciousness. It is the record of the subjugation of people to polities of increasing size, ambition and complexity, sometimes with and sometimes without their consent.

The instrument of subjugation is hierarchy, or more precisely dominance hierarchy. This sustains a way of life in which people commonly have unequal access to resources and unequal degrees of authority over others. The balancing mechanism is deference. Deference is an inbuilt scale of sensitivities through which many people find satisfaction in serving those whom they see are more powerful than themselves whilst, at the same time, accepting the services of those less powerful. Deference also, however, co-exists with its opposite, angry rejection of subservience. Dominance hierarchy is common in nature. It is present to different degrees amongst primates, although it is not an automatic consequence of complexity amongst living things. It can be contrasted with a common way of life amongst (for example) ant colonies, in which self-organization or self-management of work arrangements is prominent, allowing worker ants to be, in their varied tasks, interchangeable with one another.2 Despite what is common in primate societies, for the greater part of the time that fully evolved humans have lived (at least 200,000 years) dominance hierarchy probably barely existed. In their hunter-gatherer groups (of a few dozen individuals) it was (to judge from studies of surviving societies of this kind) kept in check through various forms of sanction that achieved socio-political levelling and thus a way of life in which some measure of equality prevailed.3 Moreover, the way we give priority to the wielding of power in studies of the past (and present) tends to obscure the power of self-organization which developed human societies also possess. An example (the building of Amarna) will be explored in Chapter 8, which is to be contrasted with settlements where the shape expresses hierarchy (Chapter 5 is largely about examples from the Middle Kingdom).

Signs in the archaeological record of the Near East that groups were breaking away from self-restraint, allowing dominance hierarchies to establish themselves, begin to appear in the ninth millennium BC (though considerably later in Egypt, seemingly by as much as four thousand years). Once started, the process – still the subject of much speculation – reinforces itself almost irreversibly. Individuals appreciate the scope that exists for ever grander ambitions and, in a time that is short by the timescale of prehistory and human evolution, states begin to appear. States entrench dominance hierarchies not only through the wielding of coercive power but also through the development of specialist groups to whom the power of sanction is delegated: scribes, priests, soldiers and so on. Most inhabitants of a state thus take their place within a system of varied opportunities. The state provides both the most practical framework within which we can study culture, and is, at the same time, one of the most conspicuous aspects of culture. The nature of the ancient Egyptian state and its wealth of devices – myth, symbol and institution – to manipulate minds and to direct the lives of its people are at the centre of this book.

In this way also the lives and views of a whole population are reduced to a singularity. This serves as a great convenience to all, including ourselves when looking at ancient Egypt. In treating them as a bloc we can say ‘the ancient Egyptians did this’, or we can move to a personification of the kind: ‘Egypt in the New Kingdom expanded her empire’ (though never ‘his empire’, at least in the English language). What is at work here is the style of thinking that is unique to Homo sapiens: the perspective-taking capacity of the imagination – the ability inwardly to see oneself as an observer of people who are primarily held only within the mind and can be generalized to the point of singularity – and its boundless ability to invent. Together they allow for people, things and abstract concepts to be incorporated within an imaginary world in which they have a role which gives them attributes beyond whatever can be immediately sensed. They have, more precisely, a transcendental role.4

The transcendental potential of the imagination creates kings from dominant individuals; and not only kings but the abstract concept of kingship, explored and expressed through myth and performance and providing the concept of ‘legitimacy’, which in turn allows individuals less personally given to dominating others to succeed to the office of king, so helping the maintenance of an orderly society. It creates states and nations from agglomerations of people, and priests from persons who act in a particular way in a shrine (and who, when not doing this, might, at least in ancient Egypt, be a neighbour with whom one otherwise has normal dealings). Each king, each state, each priest is something which gathers in the imagination colourful and ornate characteristics which convey the respect, even awe, inherent within deference. Moreover, in the imagination these generalized groups can act out dramas, narratives in which dynasties rise and fall and battle honours are exchanged. It helps if named individuals are present, but archaeologists, like social scientists, are used to creating narratives about groups of people who are defined, not by names or personalities, but by their place in society, something which again transcends their individual characteristics.

Generalizing allows dialogue to occur. It also obscures an awkward truth. Variety is an intrinsic part of organic life, in appearance and, when it is present, in consciousness. It provides cats with individual characters, makes political trends hard to analyse and predict, polarizes society on occasion and guarantees that every orthodoxy produces its heresies. The inconsistency, compromise, overlap and fuzzy boundaries that are inherently present in human thinking can be covered up but not suppressed. That covering-up need not be purposely done. The development of a dominant narrative – such as we find in ancient Egypt centred on Pharaoh and his subjects – can unconsciously have the same effect.





Seen through the lens of knowledge: theories of everything


Narratives built around transcendental roles carry us into the realm of myth and thus into the nature of knowledge. We live by myth and should not regard it as standing in opposition to rational knowledge. Myth and rational knowledge overlap when we use phrases like ‘I am generally aware of’, ‘I have a smattering of knowledge of’, and try to explain to others (assuming we are not experts) how genes and chromosomes work or what is the nature of electricity. Many of the facts are likely to be wrong, some of the elements misunderstood, and the general picture woefully incomplete. What matters to the teller is that it has the shape of a story and that is what myth really is. Myth is the more obviously story-telling form of what is otherwise metaphor. It pervades the sciences although its presence in a particular form is often not wholly apparent until it has been discarded. The history of the sciences reveals how the imagination includes the essential ability to produce knowledge which, in retrospect, is provisional. It meets the expectations of researchers for a time, but is later seen to be incomplete or even false in the light of further observation and thinking. What are those discarded explanations but myths? Much of what we think we know is provisional and relies upon our remarkable capacity to join up fragments, find patterns and turn them into stories. Lack of observational knowledge is no hindrance, for invention and myth-making seamlessly fill the gaps. ‘Belief’ is the acceptance of provisional or unverifiable knowledge.

If I am truthful with myself much of my knowledge of my special field – Egyptology – is of this kind. The sources that I work with are tangible things, ‘facts’. They are tombstones in museums, pictures on temple walls, drawings of excavated pots. How they fit into a sensible set of explanations, however, requires a huge amount of creative infilling now embodied in traditions of understanding, nurtured in university departments, which have been growing for more than two centuries. My ancient Egypt remains, none the less, very much an imagined world, though I hope that it is, like a marquee in a wind, pegged to the ground at many points. The pegs in the case of this book are the endnotes which relate my statements to a large body of literature which stores factual information and often instructions as to where, in a museum or at an archaeological site, the original source is to be found. This is the crucial difference between what we might term ‘rational myth’ – my ludicrously inadequate working-knowledge of nuclear physics, or my better informed but still largely speculative account of, say, the workings of the ancient Egyptian economy – and myth based wholly in the mind, on thought experiments. The history of thought has been of an increasing multiplication of myths, mostly of the former kind, allowing us to choose amongst them, and so giving us the power to discard those that we find inappropriate.

In its craving for knowledge (and thus for complexity of thought) the human mind fills itself with a mix of what is verifiable (e.g. the cost of a goat that is based upon personal dealings with neighbours and in the marketplace; the repeatable experience that, if one follows instructions in a manual of arithmetic concerning the distribution of rations (pp. 177–8), the result is always the same) and what is not but is accepted anyway. This latter is the category of weird knowledge (or magical knowledge) – ‘the illusion of something with extraordinary otherworldly properties’5 – which simultaneously is the price we pay for having, through evolution, developed consciousness, and is the source of our inspirations and goals. In this category comes knowledge of ‘the gods’, the identification and usually the naming of the parts of a universe which exists within the imagination and is the response to the feeling that the ‘world is in fact not what it appears to be, but behind the world of appearances there lies a reality utterly unlike the world of our senses’.6 What ‘the gods’ are is not the same across cultures. Perhaps a definition which recognizes the one thing they have in common is ‘imaginary beings to which people ascribe extraordinary properties’.7

In developing an understanding of their world Egyptians with an enquiring mind considered its constituent elements. What did and what did not possess an animating force? ‘Divine’ is a common modern translation of a key word but does not properly correspond to ancient experience, which could, for example, apply the word to the many elements, visible and invisible, of which a human individual was composed, and also to parts of the landscape (e.g. the eastern and western deserts; see below, p. 321). A healer, when preparing to confront an illness, instead of asking for help from the gods, for the moment assumed the identity of some of the most powerful of them in order to make effective threats against the demons of disease. It was as if the realm of the ‘divine’ were an invisible medium which all Egyptians occupied and which they easily shared with gods and the natural world. Over all knowledge and experience loomed the unstable balance between order and disorder, between justice and fairness and their opposites. In the absence of a more analytical style of thinking which was enriched by sceptical observation of the natural world (it would appear in Greece in the sixth century BC) the Egyptians had little more than the creative power of their imagination. Over the course of three thousand years, in a search for complexity in understanding, they invented richly detailed but fanciful knowledge of the elements of which the universe was composed, and ways in which people could interact with it.

There is a widespread modern view, sometimes illustrated by pie-charts or in the pages of atlases, that the world and its population can be classified according to religion. It reflects the notion, which is of fairly recent origin, that ‘world religions’ is an important field of study.8 It can, moreover, be extended into the past, even to ancient Egypt, where ‘ancient Egyptian religion’ takes its place in a kind of genealogical tree of religions. The subject was initially defined by Christian thinking and then easily developed to embrace Islam. The concept works less well when the net is spread further, particularly to East Asia. What the components of ‘world religions’ have in common is that they offer a path of understanding, a route to knowledge of the self and to the world as a whole. But so do many other paths, from academic pursuits (even Egyptology) to ideas that attract the term ‘alternative’, their provability by logic and observation ranging from zero to the maximum point on the scale (with Egyptology somewhere in between; I hope towards the high-scoring end).

The common habit, to which I have been prey for much of my life, is to put the ancient Egyptians’ path (or paths) of understanding under the heading ‘religion’. ‘Religion’ at first sight seems to be a useful descriptive category, one drawer in a cabinet of classification which holds all of human experience. Yet it is difficult to avoid imbuing the word religion, as well as related words such as faith, belief, piety, spirituality and, of course, their opposites, such as superstition and blasphemy, with values that arise from two millennia of life within an official belief system (Christianity) that was, for a long time, forcefully imposed. The energetic promotion of religion for so long has conditioned us to give to its vocabulary (the terms of which presume that the reader shares with the writer a similar deferential feeling towards gods) a particular weight which hinders rational consideration of people like the Egyptians who strove to attain understanding without feeling that they were following a special path. Religion, like so many concepts, can gain in clarity of definition when set against opposites, such as the pairings: religion/atheism, ‘true’ religion/‘false’ religion. But when such opposing modes of thought are absent (as was the case in ancient Egypt) ‘religion’ becomes almost synonymous with ‘life’. Why burden oneself with unnecessary terminology? Moreover, the gods that a person recognized – including one’s local god, one’s ‘city god’ – were not a strong part of their identity, of the kind that divided one person from another whose imaginative configuration was not the same. Another person’s preferences amongst the gods did not create an ‘otherness’. Yet this is the characteristic that most marks ‘religions’ as they subsequently developed and is, on its own, a reason for not defining an Egyptian religion.

The unhelpfulness of conventional vocabulary surfaces in another way. Studies of many modern societies, through census returns and questionnaires, claim that religion (at least in ‘western’ societies) is waning or declining. But it is not declining into a vacuum of the imagination, which is where religion has its home. It is dissolving into myriad fragments of personal knowledge, in part collected from rational, including scientific, education and in part from the inventions of people’s consciousness. In its place is an increasing diffusion of ideas as to what (outside human agency, if anything at all) governs existence and to whom or to what one should offer deference other than idealized or transcendent fellow humans. It is a search for a theory of everything, of which ‘religion’ is one version (and this book is my version). The perceptions of the ancient Egyptians were similarly composed, but drawn from a far more limited pool of possibilities, necessarily so because they lived much further back along the path of development of human consciousness and of the creative powers of the imagination.

Ancient Egypt was also part of the world in which monotheism developed. Monotheism is still very much with us. If you accept its central tenet it creates an evolutionary path into which ancient Egypt can be fitted.9 The figure of King Akhenaten stands out as particularly significant (Chapter 8). The path proceeds from the incomplete revelation of ‘false gods’ to the truth of a single god defined in a particular way and by a particular group. But other paths developed in the ancient world which eventually were eclipsed by monotheism, but never really went away and have gradually come back and now largely shape people’s outlook. They, too, can be seen as ancestral to parts of the broad spread of contemporary personal quests for understanding. One is illustrated by the teaching of the Greek philosopher Epicurus (342–270 BC), known mostly from a long poetic discourse, On the Nature of Things, in Latin, of a Roman follower of his philosophy, Titus Lucretius Carus, who is thought to have died around 55 BC. Epicurus accepted that gods existed, as a natural phenomenon and an integral part of the universe, a universe composed of nothing but atoms and voids. They were, however, remote and wholly lacking interest in humans. According to the Epicurean view, ‘religion’ (Lucretius uses the word religio) referred not to belief in gods. That was to be taken for granted. Religion defined human behaviour when, vainly thinking that gods had an interest in people, humans sought to communicate with them and, by means of sacrifice, to influence their actions. (The word ‘religion’, used in this way, was thus what we might term ‘cult’.) Epicureans saw this as foolish and degrading. Moreover, they subscribed to the broadly held view in the classical world that the universe was governed by an interplay of two forces, Love and Strife. ‘Both, it would seem, are necessary for the world to flourish: without Love there would be no coherence or continuity, without Strife no activity or new creation. So Love and Strife need to be in balance or harmony. But the universe as a totality needs to cohere, and so the sum of things, we may infer, is the prevailing of Love over Strife.’10 The philosophy of Epicurus offered the individual a path towards greater understanding based upon close observation of the world, including natural phenomena, and through discussion with like-minded friends in pleasurable surroundings. Its elitist outlook limited its appeal, so that it is only since the Renaissance that it has quietly taken its place in mainstream culture, at least in the ‘west’.11 It is instructive that, although Epicurians accepted the existence of gods, they are regarded as followers of a philosophy and not of a religion. Their polite acceptance that the gods existed but were powerless cleared the field for a rational universe. Omnipotent gods make this more difficult.

For the ancient Egyptians the gods were also elements of knowledge of the universe. In some texts the Egyptians display an attitude of ironic distance from them. Moreover, the great theme of Egyptian thinking was how the universe stood on the edge of disorder but was saved by the achievement of harmony between its opposing forces, an earlier version (in a different cultural setting) of the opposition between Love and Strife. Although the Egyptians seem not to have had the intellectual clarity of classical philosophers they were mapping a pathway towards acceptance that the universe could be described by naming its parts, which followed cycles of action and reaction in which humans played no part, except in so far as they could, by their personal behaviour, influence the balance between chaos and order. One of the sets of parts which the Egyptians imagined comprised the irreducible elements of the universe took the form of four pairs (male and female) of abstractions. These were given collectively a name which must mean something like ‘the Eight Eternals’,12 and for which only tentative translations are possible, as with ‘timelessness, inertness, insubstantiality and blackness’; or even simply ‘no time, no energy, no mass, no light’, the conditions that cosmologists now ascribe to what preceded the ‘big-bang’ creation of the universe.13 The male aspects were accompanied by a picture of a frog and the females by a picture of a snake. Elements in the writings point to an underlying concept of wateriness. They came into existence within an imagined initial state, ‘primaeval time’, by means of a single act of creation by a creator god, Shu (sunlight as it passes through the air). As a piece of abstract speculation on the origin of matter it should command some respect, even though its categories do not coincide with anyone else’s, including our own. This impersonal universe had a blurry overlap (which tends to confuse us) with imagined but approachable spirits of particular localities which slowly developed into places which drew in major resources to support a cult (some examples are given in Chapter 3).

Half of the content of religion is knowledge (a theory of everything) which, with hindsight (as in the case of ourselves regarding ancient Egypt) or from the perspective of the outsider, has emerged wholly within the imagination. The other half is deference, a psychological determinant of dominance hierarchies and evidently what Lucretius had in mind when using the word religio. It manifests itself in responses to the feeling of awe when in the presence of superior authority, which is partly visible (kings) and partly in the imagination (gods). With those two concepts – knowledge and deference – the subject area of ‘religion’ (for which the Egyptians themselves had no word) becomes redundant. ‘To explain religion is therefore a fundamentally misguided enterprise. It is rather like trying to explain the function of headlights while ignoring what motor cars are like and for.’14 And so another change in this revised edition is that I have abandoned the word ‘religion’ for pre-modern contexts and have been careful in the use of related words. One of them is ‘ritual’. In the words of one anthropologist: ‘“What use does a term [ritual] have which brings together a man shaking hands, a man praying to his god, a man refusing to walk under a ladder, a man clapping at the end of a concert, a man placing medicine on his crops?” As there is almost nothing which such a category would reliably exclude, we can only agree that the answer is, “None at all”.’15

I do not deny that the Egyptians experienced what is conventionally called religion; far from it. But if one wants to understand the nature of consciousness and its history starting as far back as one can (and ancient Egypt offers some of the world’s earliest direct sources), then ‘religion’ is an unhelpful partition to introduce into the continuum of knowledge; it is an obstacle and a distraction.





Seen through the lens of human agency


When looking at human societies, behind our imagined views of them, our extreme generalizations and the stories that historians compose, there lies a reality that is altogether very hard to come to terms with: the endless variety that generalizations obscure. A society is a system composed of all of its people, in the case of ancient Egypt somewhere between one and three million of them. As people they are individuals and within the system they are agents, each and every one, living within a matrix of opportunities for interaction. Yet no two are exactly the same, they are not equal performers. If we take one of the simplest physical attributes, body height, and plot a graph for how it varies in a population, we will find that most people’s heights will group together towards the centre of the graph, but that increasingly fewer people will have heights which register further and further towards the taller and shorter extremes. The graph will shape itself like the profile of a bell. What is true for height is true for everything else, from assertiveness to resistance to illness, from intelligence to athletic prowess, from being motivated more by altruism or by selfishness (although it seems in this case that the ‘bell’ is skewed more towards the positive attribute of altruism). Each person is situated at a particular point on an innumerable array of curves which describe different human characteristics. Moreover, from population to population the norms themselves vary, whether they concern body height or willingness to die in a cause, and within the same population some degree of variation is to be expected over time and as circumstances change. In considering the themes of this book, an important variable is interest in complexity within the mind. In some people a mixture of exploration and invention creates complex explanations for the nature of their existence; in others less so or hardly at all.

With each individual possessed of a unique set of attributes, people act out their lives within their opportunity space, at the very least with the purpose of survival and often of improvement to their lot. They unwittingly exchange illnesses, they communicate information, from gossip to revelations, they seek to emerge with satisfaction from a transaction, even if that transaction consists only of getting across a point of view. It is something one cannot avoid: lying low and attempting to do nothing is itself an act with repercussions, especially if many people choose that course. Yet that matrix of opportunities for interaction – normal human life for a population – is far from being an even field. People are born into family groups which are themselves lesser systems and which, over the years, waver between increasing their standing and their property as a unit and subdividing again into new families, sometimes through disputes. The process tends to be self-cancelling. One family’s promotion is likely to be at the expense of another’s decline so that a general degree of equilibrium maintains itself, but sets of circumstances arise – good fortune for those involved – which propel one family beyond normal expectations to a more longer-lasting prominence, perhaps even, in traditional societies, to the founding of a ruling house. Those few individuals in which, say, the urge to excel and dominate is unusually strong (Rameses II perhaps, and, of course, Akhenaten), will have a measurable effect on the system as a whole and might, for a brief time, drive it in a new direction or beyond its previous boundaries. But the system remains, albeit in an altered state, preserved through memory and cultural tradition. Families are only one kind of lesser system, and perhaps more influential in the past than now. Institutions are another kind, and ancient Egypt possessed many. Most conspicuous (to us) were the royal court, the many temples and, in the later centuries, the army. They take a prominent place in Chapter 6. But also of great importance in the lives of many, especially in the earlier periods, were patriarchal families based in provincial centres who at least outwardly articulated the combination of local authority and moral responsibility for their communities. The heads of such families often identified themselves with titles which we translate as ‘mayor’ or ‘nomarch’ (nome being a Greek word for a unit of provincial government).

As the full population of the country constantly interacts, the system which they inhabit does not remain stable, as if it were a pot of water endlessly simmering on a low heat. It develops complex swirls of activity that, described at an instant of time, form the profile of that society. When followed over time, changes in the system’s configuration are seen to feed back and become in turn influential, to tiny or to large extents, producing self-reinforcing trends. We first see it in Egypt in the emergence of the state towards the end of the fourth millennium BC (Chapter 2). Certain patterns recur, but not in a way that is wholly predictable. Collective behaviour, which becomes history as the years pass, takes a non-linear course. Causality becomes hard to follow. If we keep to the metaphor of the simmering pot and substitute oil for the water, and turn up the heat, we will see the oil develop structure, in the form of visible hexagon-shaped flows which disperse the heat more rapidly. Those structures have their human counterparts in changes in belief and behaviour that usually come to our attention only by the time that they are fully formed and their genesis is lost.

How a mass of individuals interacts within a system in a way that becomes a fragment of history is apparent in modern stock markets in which, day by day, many thousands of transactions are made, each involving an element of judgement by the human actors or agents (or by computer-based algorithms constructed to follow their logic). Moods of confidence and uncertainty are the self-reinforcing factors. On seeing that many others are buying or are selling in a determined way, an individual is very likely to join them. In consequence of such herding behaviour, broad movements in favour of expansion alternate with broad movements in favour of contraction, the oddly named ‘bull’ and ‘bear’ markets. The stock market is measured daily in a single way, through the value of the individual stocks and of the companies whose credibility they represent, so it is possible to model and to simulate it with computer programs which incorporate the mathematics of complex non-linear systems.

Why is this not done for contemporary society as a whole? To have an adequate working model, constantly updated, ought to be hugely useful to social scientists, to politicians and to people who sell things. In the years that have passed since I wrote the first version of this Introduction the shadowy outline of such a scheme of universal monitoring has begun to appear as people have voluntarily linked themselves to networks of electronic communication (and become subject to involuntary schemes of monitoring). One publicly acknowledged scheme of archiving is that of the Library of Congress of the USA, which announced in 2013 that approximately 170 billion public ‘tweets’ had already been collected; around 400 million new ones are said to be created each day.16

Through this quantity of source material (doubtless to be extended and enhanced as time passes) will the focus of history writing alter? Contemplating just the possibility brings home how, for the more distant past, history cannot be anything other than a colossal approximation, a crude puppet-show. This does not prevent it from being both instructive and enjoyable, but it is important not to lose sight of the fact that the more we choose a narrative style of history, locate heroes and villains, identify causes and generally tell a good story, the more we veer towards soap opera and away from contemplating the infinitely complex human biomass that is a society and that is, in reality, almost beyond our reach.





Perversity and disorder


Embedded within the myriad points of consciousness which lie at the heart of a population is the one factor which makes any study of human behaviour, whether it is ancient history or the modern stock market, so resistant to precise modelling and prediction even if we are armed with adequate data. That factor is perversity, the human manifestation of the tendency of the universe towards disorder. Whilst one direction of human endeavour is towards inhabiting a stable system – a cosy home in a harmonious community under a benign government, at every level a triumph of order over chaos – it stands constantly in tension with jagged moments or long-nurtured schemes of rejection. In most parts of the world the past five thousand years is a documented record of perversity and conflict. It has not been just the clash of armies. Fears of disorder and of alienation in a hostile world were a theme of thoughtful ancient Egyptian literature as far back as the early third millennium BC,17 and from time to time Egyptian society took on a more fragmented mode which promoted internal conflict. These are the so-called Intermediate Periods of ancient Egyptian history. In the end what remained of Egyptian culture was not destroyed by conquerors but from within. In the early centuries AD enthusiastic Egyptian adherents of Christianity rejected their cultural inheritance altogether (by that time a mix of the Pharaonic and the Greek) and celebrated, in tales to encourage the faithful, the smashing up and burning of what survived of old knowledge and places of cult. Indeed, what mostly characterizes the history of humanity as a whole since the Neolithic is the conscious search for improved systems, and their simultaneous or subsequent compromise and even rejection. People are forever seeking to wreck and dismantle what others have built up or even what they themselves, in another mood, will approve of. Triumphs bring mockery, the tragedies of others provoke relish, and iconoclasm destroys what others revere. It is not a simple cleavage into good and evil, for it is perversity which equally undermines inhumane and unpleasant systems. And it is through dissatisfaction that innovation arises.

What long-term function does contrary behaviour serve? Why are people so perverse? The creation of orderly regimes has been a regular aim of government since very early times, and it is very noticeable in ancient Egyptian sources (Chapters 4 and 5 deal with this). Why then are we not more ant-like than ants themselves? That many people evidently find the idea of a safe, ordered but at the same time controlled existence unwholesome only underlines the puzzle: why do we not like the idea of living an ordered and perhaps very comfortable hive-like existence?18 In the long run, it seems, complacency is an unsustainable condition, and hard-won stability an abhorrence. When a time of tribulation has passed, people grow bored with consensus and prosperity. One answer comes from within the scientific community. There is a view that the ‘purpose’ of all activity including that of life itself is to disperse the universe’s energy towards an ever greater number of possible states, in effect towards uniformity, and that complex ways do this ever more effectively. Life steers itself towards ever more ambitious combinations of turbulence and complexity which yet require at the same time the constraints of order against which to react. This is the great paradox of existence. Everything provokes its opposite; everything needs its opposite in order to survive.
