Egypt in microcosm: the city of Amarna





The founder: Akhenaten, ‘the heretic king’


The human mind is generally a marvel of accommodation, compromise and scepticism. These characteristics enable people to live in communities. In a few individuals, however, this moderating psychological cushion is held in check and overridden by a passionate and uncontrollable fixation which tells them that the inventions of their minds are truths that others must accept. Most of these individuals pass through their lives unheeded. But in Akhenaten we have such a person in a position of great power – a king who seems to have rejected the principal field of speculative knowledge built up over centuries and, in its place, to have promoted the recognition of a single creator god, the Aten, visible as the disc or the orb of the sun.1 By what agitation of mind Akhenaten came to step outside the perspective of his time he nowhere makes explicit, although we can recognize the likelihood of a sudden acceptance of an idea, spontaneously generated or picked up from others, which he could not resist. Yet although he appears at first to be an uncompromising figure, the closer one looks the more one can see that his foray into absolutism in ideas was compromised by a level of inconsistency which seems greater by comparison with equivalent figures from later periods of history.

Egyptian thinking on the hidden aspects of the world offered a path of understanding, or rather a network of paths, sometimes branching, sometimes running in parallel and constantly tempting the imaginative thinker towards new cross-linkages. It was an open system of speculation. It allowed people to make their own connections. In a time before authoritarianism in knowledge had appeared (when false knowledge could be identified and condemned, and holding it bring persecution and death), it was open to change. The main, perhaps only, instrument of change lay in the work of serious-minded men who read and copied old texts, sometimes adding explanatory glosses, and who from time to time felt stimulated to compose fresh material. Their ideas arose not through ecstatic visions but, so it seems, within a normal working, scholarly atmosphere. They drew upon a large store of traditional images concerning the world of the gods. When new variants spontaneously emerged in their minds they accepted them as knowledge to be preserved and respected, and to be incorporated into the stock of themes by which their knowledge was ordered. The result was a body of ‘books’, written on rolls of papyrus, which explored the otherwise hidden workings of the cosmos. One of them, the ‘Coming forth by Day’, we know more commonly as the Book of the Dead. The contents of these books, which are partly pictorial, provided the source material for areas of painted decoration inside the tombs of the Valley of the Kings (Figure 2.16, Above, p. 92, is an example). One aim was to allow the king, in an afterlife, to participate in the triumphant voyage of the sun god through the dangerous regions of the Otherworld. In their day they stood at the peak of serious knowledge. Now, more that 3,000 years later, they well justify the term ‘weird knowledge’ which I used in the Introduction (p. 5), not least because the details defy rational explanation, although explanations based on intuition and the imagination of the modern commentator are not uncommon. Those who composed them saw the potential for further development; we cannot follow them because the ‘rules’ are lost.2

The names of those responsible for maintaining and adding to this stock of knowledge are not easy to identify. This was the proper work of men attached to temples. Educated Egyptians were, on the whole, more impressed with people who offered sensible advice on conduct and morals, or who were particularly noted for practical achievements. The way to fame and to becoming a household name generations later was to write an ‘instruction’, which had little to say on the world of the gods but provided a message that people generally could understand, or at least find arresting. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians still lived in so secure and confident a world of the mind that speculation on the hidden forces that kept the universe running was left to scholars following a path of free-thinking which always produced acceptable answers because of their innate respect for their own traditions. Respectful evolution was the process by which change occurred. Something might be new, but it was just what the ancestors would have approved of.

The fruits of their labours probably went over most people’s heads, although, in the course of their lives, many Egyptians (at least from the New Kingdom onwards) would have acquired a copy of at least one text that was a guide to the hidden dimension, the Book of the Dead. It is a text without narrative form, though with illustrations. Through a series of unconnected sections – ‘utterances’ – it provided the reader with statements of knowledge, the essence of which was contained in names: of animate beings (gods) and of objects which accompanied them (e.g. the parts of their boats). Knowing the names gave the reader power, and so the text was a means of personal empowerment over a realm which, although it could be accessed only through the imagination, underpinned the world of visual reality and daily experience.

The Book of the Dead did not preach. The centre of authority was not an external voice but the reader’s own, with his authority coming from the act of reading. The text embraced personal morality, but it was presented from the viewpoint of the reader who clears the way for a positive outcome of judgement after death by making his denials of bad conduct a statement of knowledge in itself. The emotional content seems to have been on a par with that of a modern textbook, although the nature of its knowledge was very different. The Book of the Dead was available for purchase or could be commissioned, the price reflecting the care that was bestowed on preparing it. It is hard to think that owners would not have read it and so become acquainted with what, to the Egyptians, was knowledge that was essential to a full existence, now and for eternity.

The Book of the Dead illustrates a fascination with names, of beings and of things. The same is true for a composition which appears on the walls of some of the tombs in the Valley of the Kings. Known as the Litany of Ra it invokes the sun god Ra under his 75 names, which are those of other gods.3 Thus he is the ‘body’ (the ultimate reality) of Atum, Shu, Tefnut, Geb and Nut – the deities who are the main elements of nature. In this developed form of word-game, involving the handling of the names of gods as units of knowledge, a balance and harmony of thought were sought in which the potential incompatibility of the historical multiplicity of divinities on the one hand, and the perceived unity of divine power on the other, was avoided. The idea of many gods was held within a mental shell of ultimate unity, whose essence was the power of the sun. Whatever it was that Akhenaten stood for was rapidly rejected after his death and he seems to have been widely regarded as a villain. But rejection did not extend to the Aten. A text in the Ramesseum, Rameses II’s mortuary temple at western Thebes (Figure 6.6, p. 259) and carved about a century after Akhenaten’s death, records that offerings are to be made to the sun god, Ra-Horus-of-the-Horizon (Ra-Horakhty).4 But here Ra-Horakhty is not a single ‘god’. He has component parts, to a total of 38, each of which is entitled to subdivisions of the offerings. These parts are a mixture of tangible things, such as the ‘eastern desert’ and ‘the western desert’, and elements identified through abstract thinking, such as the creator god Atum and ‘Hathor at the prow of the barque of Ra’. A sequence of six names amongst the group gives us: ‘Ra – his disc (Aten) – his body – his hand – the twin horizons – Maat in the barque of Ra’. Here we see the Aten’s nature in conventional thinking, one element amongst several of the sun god. Of such is the universe composed: not of atoms (as the Epicurians later came to suppose) but of elements (mostly imagined), each with a name, to whom (or to which) deference in the form of offerings is due. If we draw a distinction between philosophy/science on the one hand and religion on the other, we arbitrarily separate a continuous process of human striving towards understanding which has, at different times and amongst different cultures, identified any number of variations of what the constituent parts of the universe are, sometimes gods, sometimes not. In Akhenaten we have a rare example from pre-classical antiquity of a named individual creating an interpretation of his own.

Of the ‘gods’ of the Ramesseum list, only the sun (the Aten) and a few parts of the landscape (the horizon and the deserts) belong to the ‘real’, external world. Akhenaten promoted the Aten, so we must suppose, because it was the only demonstrable manifestation of transcendental power. Its image was a disk (sometimes carved in such deep relief as to suggest a sphere) from which many rays descended, each one ending in a hand (Figure 8.1). This aspect symbolized the animating power that descended in the form of sunlight. Yet he could not wholly discard the mental habit of buttressing a single name with alternatives. Like a king, the Aten was given a name written in a pair of cartouches, the wording of which was changed part of the way through his reign (of 17 years). The first version translates as: ‘The living-one, Ra-Horus of the Horizon (Ra-Horakhty), who rejoices on the horizon, in his name of “Shu who is the Aten”’. Shu was the name given to the element of the sunlit atmosphere. The revised version translates (with slight uncertainty) as: ‘The living-one, Ra, ruler of the two horizons, who rejoices on the horizon, in his name of sunlight that comes from the Aten’ (or possibly ‘Ra the father who has come as the Aten’). The repeated emphasis on the word ‘horizon’ is notable, the two horizons (east and west) being amongst the elements of which the sun god was composed. The change in writing the word ‘sunlight’ involved dropping the proper name Shu. Both versions of the cartouches seem to give pre-eminence to Ra, the Aten being his visible form.



Figure 8.1Two perceptions of the Aten: as a physical manifestation of life-giving power, revealed at sunrise; and as an abstract upholder of order and righteousness, the ‘prince of truth’. In the sunrise picture the Aten rises above the desert horizon, its rays penetrating the ‘House of the Aten’ as attendants prepare food offerings on offering-tables. On the open land, animals (who run between large flowers) and birds (ostriches) greet the sun. The sunrise picture is after Martin, Royal Tomb II, Pls 34, 35; the hieroglyphic text is in the entrance of the tomb of Ay (no. 25 at Amarna).



Akhenaten saw the Aten as the universal creator of all life, and celebrated this in hymns which have survived amongst the carvings in the rock tombs of some of his courtiers at Amarna.5 They offer a panorama of the world, its forms of life, its different peoples and the ways that they were sustained by waters which came from beneath the earth. Everything was made to live and kept in daily motion by the Aten (who also had the responsibility for maintaining order (maat)). The sentiments were not new. A well-known hymn on a papyrus in the Egyptian Musuem, Cairo, and dated to before Akhenaten’s reign, addresses the Theban god Amun in similar terms of universal power and solar imagery.6 Where Akhenaten’s hymn differs is in the absence of references both to Amun and to other gods which, in the older hymns, were seen as complementary aspects of Amun. In the Aten Akhenaten found a simple, unintellectual answer: the source of life was nothing but what he could see for himself, the disk of the sun. Mystery – the promise that there was always more to be discovered by delving into one’s imagination – had no place in his thinking and had no place in the new temples. The sun’s disk, devoid of human features apart from its many arms and hands, became the only divine image in Akhenaten’s new temples and in the decoration within his own tomb at Amarna. This latter, in particular, shows the extent of his dismissal of current knowledge. Here we can make a direct comparison with what his predecessors and successors accepted. In the case of his father, Amenhetep III, his large tomb in the Valley of the Kings (no. 22) confined most of its decoration to the burial chamber (as did Akhenaten’s). Its walls were covered with painted scenes and texts from the ‘Book of What Is in the Otherworld’ (Figure 2.16, Above, p. 92, illustrates a portion of this composition, in the tomb of Tuthmosis III).7 Akhenaten’s burial chamber bore scenes only of himself and his family offering to the Aten and, in one place, mourning the death of a woman of the royal family, probably his mother, Queen Tiy.8 The elaborate depictions of an imaginary universe populated by gods had no place. Knowledge was to be found only in what was directly comprehensible to the external senses. The great cosmic balancing act between chaos and order, with its nightly adventures surrounding the sun boat, which had transfixed Egyptian minds for centuries, now no longer mattered. The animated forces – good and bad – which acted as parts of a semi-mechanical universe were not needed. It was enough to be in awe of one omnipotent god.

Moral teaching was long established in Egypt, and tended to be separate from the world of the gods, where the prime interest was in how the universe functioned. There was, however, a link. This was maat, which can be translated ‘truth’, ‘justice’ or even ‘righteousness’ when applied to human conduct. It also embraced the stability and harmony of the universe. In a characteristic transformation of an abstract into something tangible the Egyptians had made Maat into a goddess, daughter of the sun god Ra. Maat, however, was a concept to be held in mind as a guide to behaviour, for commoners and kings alike. Maat did not intervene in lives although it acted as the standard against which one’s life would be judged after death in the presence of Osiris. The Aten took over the proprietorship of Maat, becoming ‘the prince of truth’ (although, in a nice example of inconsistency, her name could still be written in the old way, as a goddess, Figure 8.1, p. 323). The epithet ‘who lives on maat’, which once was a prerogative of the gods, was used by Akhenaten regularly to describe himself. ‘Who lives on truth’ is one of the set phrases of Akhenaten’s inscriptions, the words meaning that ‘truth’ was a substance which he consumed.9 From the way that some of Akhenaten’s officials, in their tomb inscriptions, praise the king for teaching them to distinguish maat from wrong-doing we might conclude that part of his vision was a moral cleansing of society and that he was the author of an ‘instruction’.10 Yet, as far as we can tell, Osiris and judgement of the dead had no place in the new order. Obedient listening to the king’s words and taking his exhortations to heart seem to have been enough. We have no sources, however, to reveal in what detail, or with what examples, Akhenaten expounded his teaching.

The implied destiny of the individual after death – of the royal family and of commoners alike – was the survival of an essential part of oneself but no longer facing imaginary dangers. This emerges from absences rather than from statements, however. Although Osiris is not to be found in funerary contexts of the period, he seems not to have faced iconoclastic attack. Even in his early Eighteenth Dynasty temple at Abydos the few images of Osiris to have been discovered seem not to have been damaged.11

In our own modern perceptions of the world, ancient Egyptian speculative thought has no place. It represents a colourful (weird if we are honest) example of how the pre-scientific mind sought knowledge that reached beyond common experience. Akhenaten can appear to us as a remarkable and somewhat tragic figure because he seems to have perceived the irrelevance of much of the thought of his day. By denying it he gave his contemporaries what was almost a blank sheet, a tabula rasa. But neither he nor anyone else who has left a record seems to have had a spread of knowledge of a different kind to put in its place, knowledge which satisfied the universal desire for a path of greater understanding which had depth and complexity and one which also fastened on the observable world of nature. Akhenaten seems to have been satisfied with the act of deletion and with the thought of a god alone keeping all in order. But the urge to find complexity cannot be denied of others. The idea that the material world, without its gods and demons, could be the platform for logical reflection on interrelated processes, leading to a picture of a more mechanical universe (as would come, in time, with Greek philosophy and, beyond that, the knowledge that we have now) did not arise. Instead, after Akhenaten the need for complexity returned but it was of the old kind, and continued to flourish and to develop new forms into the period of the Ptolemies. Then, through the Library at Alexandria, philosophical complexity of a whole new kind became available.

Because of the later history of intolerance, people are inclined to see Akhenaten as not only ignoring accumulated knowledge of the world of the gods but actively attempting to destroy its institutional foundations by attacking their temples. This is visible in the defacement of the name and images of the god Amun or Amun-Ra, whose form was human. But most of the old temples were largely left alone and may have continued to function. We cannot even be sure of what happened to the main temples of Amun at Karnak and Luxor and to their personnel (although redeployment to Aten temples would have been a straightforward matter). Continuing study of Karnak has located a likely site for the first of Akhenaten’s new constructions, the ‘Mansion of the Benben’, which featured Nefertiti extensively. It was a colonnaded courtyard added to the then front of Karnak temple (the Third Pylon recently completed by his father, Amenhetep III). It would have enhanced the monumental portal to the three existing pairs of standing granite obelisks. This suggests that, once the images and name of Amun had been removed, Karnak temple remained usable as a monumental setting for ceremonies.12 In our world consistency might well demand that existing temples, especially Karnak, be closed. But Egyptians of this time acquiesced in inconsistency of thought to a greater extent than we are generally comfortable with.

When Akhenaten’s family line eventually failed (probably a little less than 20 years after his death), kingship passed to men with military backgrounds, at first the general Horemheb and then the head of a family from the north-eastern delta, Rameses, who began the line of kings that we know as the Nineteenth Dynasty. They resumed the traditional patronage of temple cults, including that of Amun of Thebes, and, by extension, acceptance of the body of knowledge which defined the hidden aspects of existence (visible, for example, in the decoration of the mortuary temple of Rameses II at western Thebes, the Ramesseum, as in the example cited above, p. 321). No later stories or traditions concerning Akhenaten survive, although a later reference to him as ‘the enemy of [i.e. from] Akhetaten’ (the name of his city) and a characterization of his reign as ‘the rebellion’ suggest that they circulated.13 At the official level, after his death the uncomfortable simplicity of his ideas together with his eccentric style of rule and portrayal of kingship were rejected, the statues of himself and family members were smashed and his stone monuments were demolished. He became a non-person, although the Aten itself escaped opprobrium and was absorbed back into mainstream thinking as an aspect of Ra. That we know about Akhenaten at all arises from the sheer quantity of the sculpture of his reign which later generations reused in foundations for other buildings, and from his creation of a complete city on a desert site (Amarna) which lay abandoned down to modern times. Because Akhenaten had been a prolific builder his existence could not be obliterated. But this points to a question which we can never hope to answer: did Akhenaten represent a small and usually undemonstrative, but nevertheless enduring, tradition of scepticism, even of intellectual dissent? Were there always those who found, say, the Book of the Dead an unconvincing exposition? Did Akhenaten’s uniqueness lie simply in being king and thus able to bring an alternative vision into the public domain?

The lack of background sources cripples the historian. It has proved impossible to write a history of Akhenaten’s reign which does not embrace an element of historical fiction. It is as if one has to decide which actor would best play the part: an effete, limp-wristed dreamer, or a fearsome, despotic madman. If the idealism points to the former, his approach to his own position and the simple fact that he achieved what he did takes one to the opposite pole. For Akhenaten’s escape from the past had its limits. It was not his intention to diminish the power of Pharaoh. Between the simple vision of a life-giving sun on the one hand, and humanity and nature on the other, stood the king and his family as prime intermediaries. Here, too, came innovation. Akhenaten showed himself ruling at the head of a group of three. The next in order of precedence was his principal queen, Nefertiti (her name also written in a cartouche). The third was their eldest daughter, Meritaten, who in some of the royal buildings is the only person named (though without use of a cartouche) other than her father, and seems to have had the role of administering the household. Together with other daughters (to a maximum of six) they were portrayed in a variety of styles, ranging from the relatively conventional to one intended to subvert the Egyptians’ conceptions of good form (Figure 8.2).



Figure 8.2An official picture of the royal family relaxing at home. The picture was itself, however, an object of private veneration. It came probably from a chapel in the grounds of a private house. Limestone, height 32 cm. Akhenaten sits on the left, holding the eldest daughter Meritaten (who, married to Smenkhkara, became queen after her father’s death). Nefertiti sits opposite, with the second daughter Meketaten (soon to die) on her lap, and cradling the third daughter Ankhsenpa-aten (later the wife of Tutankhamun) in her arms. Berlin Museum 14145.



The remains of temples which he built at Karnak very early in his reign show that the most extreme departures from convention were developed at this time. For Akhenaten they amount to a list of distortions: long, forward-leaning neck, pendulous jaw, narrowed eyes, swollen belly and hips. The king always wears a crown, but when the characteristics are transferred to female members of his family they also include a rear elongation of the skull. This strange physique is most impressively seen in colossal statues where the viewer stands below, easily overwhelmed by the sheer weirdness of the overall effect (Photograph 8.1). It is less successfully translated into two-dimensional carvings on flat surfaces.



Photograph 8.1Sandstone statue of Akhenaten from his early building programme at Karnak. He wears the standard headdress of kings and above this a tall set of four plumes (mostly broken away) which, when seen from the side, resolve themselves into a single stylized feather. The statue is now in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, with the catalogue number JE 49528. Height 1.85 m.



Many people have seen in the distortions to his body a faithful attempt to portray the effects of a serious disease from which the king suffered. A more plausible alternative, however, is that we are seeing a bold attempt to define kingship as a force possessed of characteristics that place it outside the normal plane of human experience. There was little tradition in Egypt of using sculpture to convey an intellectual sensation more complex than that the life-force that animated, in varying degrees, gods, kings and ordinary humans was materialized in the form of the ideal, youthful, physically taught human body. What normally distinguished the statue of a god from that of a king or of a high official was the name written somewhere on the statue, and items of dress and insignia. They were to be experienced, however, in the same straightforward and unprovocative way. Akhenaten’s self-images were experimental and surreal, made against an unsuitable cultural background. And it is a central point in assessing his intentions that this attempt to portray the mystery of superior force through surreal art rather than through word-game was confined to himself and his family. The shape of the Aten held no mystery. The divine force that passes understanding was revealed to mankind primarily through the Aten’s earthly agents: the king and his queen. Hence the standard cartouche group: a large pair for the Aten, a smaller pair for Akhenaten and one for Nefertiti, the cartouche design itself defining beings who possessed the special authority of rulership. As we will see, however, the Aten was not shut off from the concerns and approaches of ordinary people.

The colossal statues of the king stood making their statement through their form. In some examples of two-dimensional art – palace paintings, wall reliefs and stelae – the royal family group was portrayed in scenes of relaxed informality, adopting postures of languor but also of mutual affection. Highly placed officials set up such images in their houses (Figure 8.2, p. 326). It is part of the puzzle of his reign to ask, how did Akhenaten and at least the senior figures on whom he depended regard each other? He expected deference in the age-old manner, yet at the same time promoted images which, at least to us, subverted it. According to the testimony of their prayers in their tombs his courtiers and officials loved and honoured him, and felt gratitude for the favours by which he had promoted them to their positions. This need not be empty flattery. History provides many examples of leaders with the power to attract slavish devotion. A simple generalization might not be appropriate.

Akhenaten’s first major initiative in establishing the new vision of the state was carried out at Karnak, at the centre of the cult of Amun. This took the form of several named constructions (one of them the ‘Mansion of the Benben’, mentioned earlier, p. 324) decorated with statues and wall scenes in the startling new style, with the whole operation being brought to a climax by a royal Sed-festival years before its traditional time. Thousands of small (52 cm long = 1 cubit) stone building blocks (commonly called talatat blocks) have been recovered from these early constructions, as well as pieces of colossal statues of the king. These are mostly in the most extreme artistic style of his reign, and, as already noted, show that it was developed at the beginning. The creation of Akhetaten was thus the further development of a scheme to which much thought and many resources had already been devoted.





The foundation: Akhetaten, ‘Horizon of the Aten’


In the fifth year of his reign Akhenaten moved to establish a perfect home for the Aten, where it could be worshipped on clean ground uncontaminated by previous divine or human ownership. He gave it the name Akhetaten, ‘The Horizon of the Aten’. Its location was roughly halfway between Memphis and Thebes: initially an unoccupied stretch of desert on the east side of the Nile, which was expanded a year later to include a broad tract of farmland, with its villages, across the river on the west side (Figure 8.3). Its essential human component, the king and his family, would worship in temples and occupy palaces set on the riverine edge of the desert, and be buried in tombs almost lost within steep-sided desert valleys even further to the east (beyond the cliff edge which defined the local horizon). Around the king and his family would gather officials and a supporting population that would eventually form a whole city. Modern terminology has given to the remains on the east side of the river, which include the city, the name Amarna (an abbreviation of Tell el-Amarna; a hybrid name invented by early European visitors).



Figure 8.3Map of the Nile valley at Amarna showing the extent of Akhetaten, as defined by the Boundary Stelae (each of which is identified by a capital letter). The tomb of Petosiris near stela A, although of a much later period, is marked as being a well-known local landmark.



Akhenaten recorded his intentions on two series of tablets (the Boundary Stelae) carved at intervals in cliffs on both sides of the Nile, the first set (only on the east side) dated to the king’s fifth year, the second set (on both east and west sides) to his sixth (Figure 8.4).14 The latter contain an oath of the king:

My oath of truth, which it is my desire to pronounce, and of which I will not say: ‘It is false’, for ever and ever: Akhetaten extends from the southern tablet as far as the northern tablet, measured between tablet and tablet in the eastern mountain, likewise from the south-west tablet to the north-west tablet in the western mountain of Akhetaten. The area within these four tablets is Akhetaten itself; it belongs to Aten my father: mountains, deserts, meadows, islands, high ground and low ground, water, villages, men, animals and all things which the Aten my father shall bring into existence eternally and forever. I will not neglect this oath which I have made to the Aten my father eternally and forever.15





Figure 8.4Akhenaten’s new city, Akhetaten, ‘Horizon of the Aten.’ Above. Reconstruction of the Eighteenth Dynasty landscape showing the extent of cultivated land on the west side of the river which lay between the Boundary Stelae. Below. Reconstruction of the original appearance of one of the Boundary Stelae, ‘N’. The stela, 3.9 m high, is flanked by statues. Each set depicts Akhenaten and Nefertiti holding in front of them a narrow vertical tablet inscribed with the names of the Aten and of themselves. They are accompanied by their two eldest daughters, Meritaten and Meketaten. Much of the stela and parts of the statues still survive.



On two of the tablets a second similar oath was repeated after another two years. One passage in the tablets has sometimes created the impression that Akhenaten swore never himself to leave the confines of the city. This, however, is a misunderstanding. The relevant passages, in stating that he will not go beyond the boundaries, mean that he will not extend the limits of Akhetaten beyond them. Another of the passages contains the very clear provision for his death when outside the city: ‘If I die in any town of the north, south, west, or east, in the multitude of years, I will be brought and my burial be made in Akhetaten.’16 This could mean that Akhenaten (and Nefertiti and Meritaten about whom the same is said) followed the age-old practice of travelling through the country, from palace to palace, to exert royal authority.17 The statement is also the ultimate sign of Akhenaten’s sincerity and his break with the past: the promise to site tombs for himself and for his family in the eastern hills, a new Valley of the Kings, with its security dependent upon the permanence of the new city. His courtiers were expected to site their decorated rock tombs in the hillsides facing towards the city and the Nile.

Why choose this particular location? Although he does not phrase it in quite this way in the Boundary Stelae, the chosen place had to satisfy certain criteria. The general tenor of imagery at Amarna (developing a long-established theme) was that the moment of sunrise above a clearly defined desert horizon was the beginning of the daily cycle of life and was to be appreciated with awe (Figure 8.1, p. 323). An Upper Egyptian location, on the east side of the valley, was thus to be assumed, even though the ancient centre of the cult of the sun, at Heliopolis, was in the north and lacked the dramatic setting of nearby desert cliffs. (This did not prevent the name Akhetaten from being applied in the Amarna Period to a location at Memphis and possibly also to Heliopolis itself, showing that it was not a name unique for one place). That it was to be a place of first usage, where the Aten could be discovered on land which had known no previous claims to ownership, immediately limited the options. On making a journey between Memphis and Thebes Akhenaten would have found few satisfactory locations. He would have seen many desert amphitheatres on the east where the sun rose above a clear horizon line, but most of them were already places of human settlement and homes to local gods. The choice of Amarna was probably the result of a process of elimination, which left him with the feeling (expressed in the Boundary Stelae) that the Aten had led him there.

The nature of Amarna has gradually been revealed by excavations and surveys which began at the end of the nineteenth century, continued with breaks until 1936 and resumed in 1977. The city itself covered only a very small part of Akhetaten, as defined by the Boundary Stelae. Nevertheless, apart from the information it gives us about Akhenaten’s concepts, the city is a major source for the study of ancient urbanism and of the lives of its inhabitants. Few archaeological sites of this size exist in the pre-classical world where the ground plan is as clear or as well documented, where large samples of material culture have been excavated and where a significant sample of buried human remains from the people who lived in the city has been retrieved for study. Although the circumstances of its founding are unique, it forms an apt basis for considering certain aspects of ancient Egyptian society, and for illustrating the impact which kingship could have on it. Modern visitors might be struck by the absence of clearly visible monuments, however. Starting in the reign of Horemheb all architectural stonework, from entire temples to the doorframes of houses, was systematically removed for re-use elsewhere. Many of the blocks were taken across the river to El-Ashmunein (Hermopolis), where hundreds have been recovered and more can be seen incorporated in the standing masonry of later temples.18 By contrast, the greater part of the city, extending to portions of palaces, was built from sun-dried mud brick, and these buildings, once their door frames and columns had been removed, were left to decay by natural processes.

The Amarna Boundary Stelae do not actually mention a city. In the initial vision of the first set of stelae, the place Akhetaten was a tract of clean and empty land dedicated to the sun god. But it required human participation for it to function properly. In the first rank stood the royal family. The first set of stelae provides a list of constructions essential to the royal family’s presence:19 a ‘house’ and a ‘mansion’ of the Aten (the two main Aten temples that have survived); a ‘Shade of Ra’ for Nefertiti (her sun temple, the archaeological site of Kom el-Nana); a ‘House of Rejoicing’, which is here probably a poetic reference to the Great Palace (at this time it seems to have referred to a place where the king was and had been used, for example, for part or all of Malkata; see pp. 272, 273); and ‘apartments’ for Pharaoh and for the ‘Great King’s Wife’ (Nefertiti). There are also provisions for tombs, both of the royal family and of cult personnel who turn out to have been Akhenaten’s courtiers and senior officials. The king was both the leader of the daily adoration of the Aten and the centre of government for Egypt and for a substantial empire. There was an inescapable need for a court, for an administration, and for a population who would serve them and supply their wants. Akhetaten, presented as an idealistic vision, developed into a city as we understand the term, with large housing areas that also acted as centres of manufacture, served by an inland port (a length of the river bank) although, in Akhenaten’s eyes, these aspects did not merit specification in the announced blueprint.

It is doubtful whether Amarna was laid out in anything other than a simple, pragmatic way without reference to an overarching design concept.20 What appeared on the ground was a confluence of planning and self-organization, and a retreat from the urge to create a layout in accordance with a geometric scheme which peaked in the Middle Kingdom. The boundary to Akhetaten on this side of the river was the curving line of cliffs in which the stelae were carved. Nothing was built along it, nor was a perimeter wall constructed on the desert plain below nor, from the way the city developed, does it seem that an edge of any kind was marked. The lack of a city wall, with gates, suggests that Akhenaten carried through his plan in the confidence that his rule was not going to be opposed. The main act of foundation seems to have been a long, straight line which came to serve as a thoroughfare and which positioned the main royal buildings (Figure 8.5). Its northern half now runs approximately parallel to the course of the river, and ancient depictions of the Amarna landscape suggest that the river has not changed its course significantly.21 The northern end of the line was fixed where the desert begins to rise steeply as the cliffs approach the river. This choice necessitated angling the line towards the river. The southernmost building to follow this line is the enclosure at Kom el-Nana (the sun temple of Nefertiti), 6.5 km from the northern starting-point. The southern part of the line (south of the Small Aten Temple), however, was quickly lost beneath the largest of the housing zones, to which the street plan paid no heed.22 The map suggests that this southern stretch of the line became inconveniently distant from the river, the main housing area following the curve of the river bank more closely. North of the Small Aten Temple the line seems to have been maintained as a continuous road linking the royal buildings and providing a route on which Akhenaten and his family, accompanied by a bodyguard, could process in their chariots (Figure 8.6). In modern times it has been called ‘Royal Road’, with a length of c. 4 km (much of it now lost beneath modern fields).



Figure 8.5Diagram of the principal structural element at Amarna, the royal processional route, ‘Royal Road’ (a modern name). On the left is a reconstruction of the plan of the stone portion of the Great Palace based on surviving foundations. Numbered elements in the Central City: (1) King’s House; (2) ‘Bureau of Correspondence of Pharaoh’ (records office); (3) bakery, part of the large central provisioning depot; (4) administrative base for Panehsy, ‘first servant of the Aten’; (5) stables and barracks for police; (6) scribal village; (7) bridge linking the Great Palace with the King’s House; (8) private apartments for the king, with garden and painted pavements (Figure 6.14, p. 281); (9) hall of 544 brick columns from the time of Smenkhkara. Despite our detailed knowledge of the foundations of the Great Palace, some of the key identifications remain conjectures, including those of the Window of Appearance and the throne room.





Figure 8.6The royal chariot drive. Upper register. Akhenaten and Nefertiti in a chariot leave the main Aten temple (the ‘House of the Aten’, represented as a pylon entrance with flagpoles). They head towards a fortified building set between what look like fences, probably the North Riverside Palace (Figure 8.5, p. 332), flanked by a running bodyguard headed by the ‘Chief of Police of Akhetaten, Mahu.’ Lower register. The royal couple drive along a road marked by what looks like the same fence interrupted by small buildings; a row of doorways apparently reached by paths appears above. Mahu and his bodyguard are prominent. From the tomb of Mahu (no. 9), after Davies, Rock Tombs IV, Pls XX–XXII. The landscape of the scene has been the subject of different interpretations. Are the small buildings that the royal family pass located in the city or in the eastern desert, where they have been interpreted as the rock tombs or even the Boundary Stelae? See the discussion in Stevens, Akhenaten’s Workers I, 416–21.



It must have been self-evident that a large population would also move to Amarna, estimated (on inevitably insecure grounds) to have been in the low tens of thousands (20,000 is a convenient figure to keep in mind; see below, p. 361). Mostly they lived in two large housing areas (the North Suburb and Main City, both of which are modern terms), lying north and south respectively of the main concentration of royal buildings, the Central City. A third area of housing (the North City) lay separately at the northern end of Royal Road. The Middle Kingdom had seen the growth of a tradition in Egypt of simple grid planning, applied to the streets and houses of settlements up to the scale of full-size towns. But in the New Kingdom the idea of total planning lost its attraction. In Amarna, outside the corridor of royal buildings, planningpetered out altogether. Instead of a grand unitary design we find a few broad but far from straight streets running more or less parallel to the Nile to join the suburbs to the centre, while narrower ‘streets’ (sometimes no more than irregular access spaces) cross at right angles.
