                                      CHAPTER 2


                   A Walk in the Woods


atin
lie
bs
ae—
  ?


ee
ee
ye
ee
SS




       Several years ago, I found myself wondering whether it was possi-
       ble to reconstruct the history of human evolution using genetic data
       from living populations. At that time, our knowledge about the sub-
     ject came mainly from paleoanthropology. But fossil material was
     scant, and even today we must content ourselves with a very small
   _ number of incomplete skulls and bones. Those few fragments are
     the only random pieces left of a giant jigsaw puzzle—how can we
       hope to reconstruct the whole from such limited clues? Often a
       new fossil, or the revision of a single date, forces a major reassess-
       ment of our understanding of human evolution—the discovery of a
       million-year-old mandible may take up entire pages in the scientific
       and popular presses.
          Our obsession with fossils has distracted us from a much richer
       source of evolutionary information: genetic data, although largely
       restricted to living populations, can tell us a great deal about human
       history. Genes and gene frequencies, unlike skeletal characteristics,
       change over time according to precise and well-understood rules.


                                         33
                                                                       wt   a

                                                                            *
Of course skeletal morphology, or the evolution ofbones, is also ; me
genetically determined, but in a much more complicated and less
clearly understood manner. It is influenced by many factors, most
notably the environment.
   Genetics, too, has its shortcomings. It is difficult, for example, to
study ancient populations. But we now know that DNA is occasion-
ally preserved in fossils that are not too old. A new science of paleo-
genetics is emerging, as any reader of Jurassic Park would know.                1

Claims have been made that DNA can sometimes be recovered                       ,
                                                                                 ‘
                                                                                J

from insects preserved in amber for several million years. Of course
                                                                                 :}
elephants or humans won't show up in amber deposits. Moreover, it               :9

seems that research on DNA found in amber was overly optimistic,
and that there is little, if any, hope of finding DNA in good condi-
tion from organisms that lived millions of years ago.
    The problem is that old DNA undergoes extensive fragmentation
and chemical alteration, and it is only by comparing many fragments
of the same DNA segment that one can confidently reconstruct the
complete structure of even a single short segment. Such a procedure —
was successfully attempted in the Munich laboratory directed by
Svante Paabo, a student of Allan Wilson, a pioneer on studies of mito-
chondrial DNA. The first samples studied successfully came from
a skeleton nicknamed Oetzi, a Bronze Age man whose body was
uncovered by melting ice in the Alps between Italy and Austria.
Oetzi’s clothes and tools have given us precious information about
Bronze Age fashion and technology. The DNA studied in Oetzi’s
remains comes from very small bacteria-like bodies called mitochon-
dria found in the cells of every higher organism from yeasts to mam-
mals. Most of our cells usually contain hundreds or thousands of
mitochondria. Each cell has at least one copy of a little chromosome
made of DNA. Thus, a considerable amount of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) is present in almost every cell. There is a good reason:
mitochondria are needed to generate energy for cell growth and
maintenance, using chemical nutrients. By contrast, DNA forming
chromosomal genes is present in each cell in only two copies per
gene: one from the father, the other from the mother. Thus it is more
likely that a sufficient amount of mtDNA will be preserved.

                                  34
        4       =
            :       a.   Se



      Oetzi’s mtDNA was strikingly similar to that found in people liv-
   _ ing in the same general region today. The population of the area
      must have been reasonably stable, with little migration of outsiders
      occurring during the 5,000 years since Oetzi’s death.
4         The tour de force paid off when a much more ambitious task
‘s
      was attempted in the same laboratory—the extraction of DNA from
A
:
4
    _ a Neandertal specimen.
                In 1856, excavation work in northern Germany uncovered a
      skull that clearly differed from those of modern humans. The idea
      of evolution was still vague—Darwin’s The Origin of Species would
      not be published for another three years. However, a local school-
      master who heard about the discovery understood the significance
      of the find and took the skull to the professor of anatomy at Bonn
      University. The skull was named after the place of discovery, Nean-
      der Thal (the valley of the Neander River).
          Many other similar fossils have been found in the one hundred
      fifty years since then but the relation between this man and modern
    _ humans still vexes physical anthropologists. The differences are clear
      but there is also a remarkable sense of familiarity. Some thought
      Neandertals (also spelled with an “h”) were the direct ancestors of
      modern humans. Others thought they were an extinct branch of an
      older human type. This question could be resolved by analyzing the
      DNA of the extinct Neandertals, if any could be found. A bone sample
      from an ancient humerus was examined in the same Munich labora-
      tory with an approach similar to that used to study Oetzi’s remains.
      The result was unequivocal. There is a considerable difference
    ~ between the mtDNA of this Neandertal and that of practically any
      modem human. From a quantitative evaluation of this difference it
     was estimated that the last common ancestor of Neandertal and mod-
      ern humans lived about half a million years ago. It is not quite clear
     where common ancestors lived, but modern humans and Neandertal
     must have separated early and developed separately, modern
     humans in Africa and Neandertals in Europe. The results of mito-
     chondrial DNA show clearly that Neandertal was not our direct
     ancestor, unlike earlier hypotheses made by some paleoanthropolo-
     gists. Around 60,000 years ago Neandertals expanded from Europe

                                         35
to Central Asia and the Middle East, but there are no later finds of
them in these regions. Modern humans arrivedin Europe 42,000—
43,000 years ago; they may have had contacts with Neandertals, but
no evidence of hybrids was found. Shortly after 40,000 years ago
Neandertals become more and more rare in Europe, and the last
specimens found so far are about 30,000 years old.
    These painstaking studies will hopefully be extended to many
other Neandertals and other old skulls, and in the future they may
help clarify recent hominid evolution. Unfortunately the method
is not easily effective with older samples, and studies on nuclear
genes, which would be more informative, have been successful only
on fossils of Oetzi’s age or younger.
     My own interest in human evolution started at Cambridge Uni-
versity in the Genetics Department chaired by-R. A. Fisher. The
first ten years of my research were in bacterial genetics, but in 1951,
when I began teaching general genetics at the University of Parma
in Italy, I shifted my attention to humans—a more charismatic
organism. By 1961 I felt there were sufficient data to tackle the
problem with which this chapter is concerned.




                    Growing an Evolutionary Tree

Ever since Darwin, we have thought of evolution in terms of trees
that trace the relationships among species and their ancestors. By
definition, a species is a group of individuals capable of mating and
producing fertile offspring. Humans comprise a single species, and
all populations are interfertile. This implies that all human groups
share a recent common ancestry, and/or that genes may continu-
ously be exchanged between populations. On the other hand, if
populations split relatively cleanly, with little or no subsequent
genetic exchange between the two new sub-populations, a tree is an
accurate   representation of the process. When a new continent is
occupied, a discrete fission usually results. Migration from one
continent to another necessarily involves the development of some

                                   36
¥PFirceeiiie Even if the migration takes much time and there
zremains geographic contiguity between mother and daughter pop-
     ulations, some   degree of genetic differentiation is the ultimate
     result.


    As I’ve said in chapter 1, it is easy to determine the genetic related-
    ness of several populations by calculating genetic distances between
    pairs of them. Let us take the modern indigenous populations of the
     five continents—a simpler proposition than the fifteen populations
     (three per continent) that Anthony Edwards and I first studied in
    1961. The genetic distances between continents, expressed as per-
    centages, are as follows:

                      Genetic Distances between Continents

                      Africa      Oceania        America       Europe
         Oceania ~     24.7
         America       22.6         14.6
         Europe        16.6         13.5            9.5          ;
         Asia          20.6         10.0            8.9          9.7


         Starting from these genetic distances, how can we construct a
    tree that illustrates the successive fissions that have produced these
    differences?
        The methods Edwards and I developed originally for this task
    were rather complicated, but for the sake of illustration we will
    choose a simple technique called average linkage. We later learned
    ‘that average linkage actually produces almost the same results as
    more reliable, but much more difficult, methods.
        Easy analysis of the five continents by a tree is assured when the
    groups are already arranged in a rational order, as in the table
    “Genetic Distances between Continents.” We first look for the
    smallest distance—the one between Native Americans and Asians.
    It is reasonable to expect that the longer the time of separation
    between two populations, the greater the genetic distance between
    them; the separation between Asia and America should therefore

                                       37
be the most recent fission of the tree. In fact, we know from arche-    _
ological information that the Americas were probably settled
between 10,000 and 25,000 years ago, when a land bridge con-
nected Siberia and Alaska during the last ice age, making it possible
to walk from Asia to the Americas. There are still uncertainties
about the settlement dates, as we will discuss later in more detail,
but it is probable that America was the last continent occupied by
modern humans.                  2    apis       .
    The proportionality between genetic distance and time of sepa-
ration is a reasonable principle but is not always necessarily true.
The distance between America and Asia is the smallest, but it is
smaller than those between Europe and America and between
Europe and Asia by a very small margin. All measurements are
affected by statistical error, and therefore the “true value” of the
quantity measured is never really known. We can never reach per-
fection in measurements, but we can estimate the statistical error,
and decrease it at will by increasing the number of observations.
The distances we are using are based on about one hundred genes,
and yet they are affected by a statistical error around 20 percent.
This quantity gives us a way to calculate an interval within which
the true value may lie, with a given probability. And we can always
reduce the error if we can increase the number of genes. It may be
enough to say for now that we have other, more complicated data
that reinforce our statement. Let us therefore accept that the small-
est distance is that between Native Americans and Asians and
therefore the most recent split is between Asia and America. We
begin our tree thus:




                      Asia             America


    Now we can combine the two continents by calculating the
mean between the distances of each of the other continents with
Asia and America (for example, the genetic distance between

                                  38
Europe and Asia is 9.7 while that between Europe and America is
 9.5; their mean is 9.6). The preceding table loses one line and one
 column and becomes:

                       Africa            Oceania           Asia-America
     Oceania            24.7                                 :
    Asia-America        21.6               12.3
    Europe              16.6               13.5                 9.6


     We again select the shortest distance. This time it is between
 Asia-America and Europe. We add a new branch to the tree by join-
_ ing Asia~-America to Europe:




                    Asia                 America     Europe


     Repeating the procedure, we add Oceania, and at the final step,
 Africa. The final tree is:                                    é




          Africa     Asia        America          Europe      Oceania

    A model of human migration from Africa—arriving first in Aus-
 tralia, then in East Asia, and finally in Europe and America—is
 eventually borne out by these distances and with the archeological

                                    39
daia, This tree, therefore, has a reasonable probability of accurately
representing the evolution of modern humans.
                                           We will see later
how it fits the settlement dates.
   In this tree, I have simplified our task by eliminating the most
obviously admixed populations of North Africa, western Asia, and the
Pacific islands smaller than Australia (but combining New Guinea
with Oceania because New Guineans resemble Aboriginal Aus-
tralians—also included in Oceania). Nearly a fourth of the world’s
populations have been ignored in our example. But even ifI hadn’t
made these cuts, similar results would be obtained, since the tree-
building method has proven more reliable than we initially thought.
   Nevertheless, tree building methods can fail too. One reason is
that human populations constitute a genetic continuum. When we
divide a continuum, only very arbitrary results can be obtained. Dar-
win recognized this and denounced attempts at classifying races. The
potential for statistical error while calculating genetic distance is
enormous and the only way to conquer this powerful impediment is
to increase the number of genes analyzed, which of course requires
much more work. When we first started gathering published data of
gene frequencies in human populations in 1961, only twenty genetic
polymorphisms were known for the fifteen populations, three per
continent, which we wanted to employ, but by 1988 we had nearly a
hundred, which has reduced the statistical error by a factor of more
than two. Today, several hundred genes are known and statistical
error has been reduced further. Results remain similar, but there are
other methodological sources of uncertainty beyond statistical error.
Fortunately we do not have to wait for another thirty years to pass to
respond to them, since recently developed approaches can help us
understand the new problems that have arisen.




                         An Enormous Forest

Different tree building methods can give slightly different results
for the same group of observed values. A practical limitation to the

                                    40
: earch for an accurate tree isGas extremely large number of poten-
  tial trees for a given set of populations (also called, more generally,
  taxa, the plural of taxon). With three taxa, A, B, and C, we must
  choose between three trees to locate the root; R:
ee
ee




         A                           ?
     A    mes                 A          iC “B        B         CoA

     With four populations, there are 15 different rooted trees. But
  ignoring the root, there remain only three possible trees:




     <a pl apa rg 5           Bo   GB       D         ‘sleet’
                                                         8Maga 2a ©,

_The number of possible trees grows very rapidly when one
  increases the number of studied populations. With five populations,
  there are 105 rooted trees and 15 unrooted trees. With ten popula-
 tions there are 34,459,425 rooted trees and 2,027,025 unrooted
 trees; with twenty populations the number of possible trees is
  approximately 8 X 10” and 37 times fewer without the root. In the-
  ory it would be necessary to analyze all the possible trees to be sure
  of finding the best one.
     The situation is worse if one wants to use a more appropriate
  method offered by modern statistics—maximum likelihood. With
 this method, the calculations take an even longer time, but the
 advantage is that it permits a truly rigorous approach to the analysis
 of data. Using this procedure, one must first create a precisely
 defined evolutionary hypothesis (or “model”) and use the observed
 data to test it. It is possible to obtain a measure of the “goodness of
 fit” with which the chosen model represents the data. If we want to
 test multiple hypotheses, the method allows us to choose the most
 satisfactory one, and evaluate its advantage over the next best tree.
 Unfortunately, today’s computers cannot exhaustively examine all

                                    41
the possible trees for greater than a dozen or so populations with _        >

the more advanced methods.
    The simplest maximum-likelihood model assumes identical
evolutionary rates in each population, producing a rooted tree with
all branch lengths equal. This technique is approximated by the
‘method of average linkage, which also assumes equal evolutionary
rates. But are evolutionary rates always the same? To find out, we
must examine the factors that affect the pace of genetic change.




                Evolutionary Mechanisms and Rates:
            Survival of the Fittest and of the Luckiest

From the beginning of modern genetics, four evolutionary forces
have been recognized: mutation, which produces new genetic
types; natural selection, the mechanism which automatically selects
the mutated types best adapted to a particular environment;
genetic drift, the random fluctuation of gene frequencies in popula-
tions; and migration, sometimes called gene flow.
    Genetic drift is the most abstract of these forces, but it is really
nothing more than the chance fluctuation of gene frequencies over
several generations. American Indians have an O blood type fre-
quency nearing 100 percent, and yet they probably descend from
an Asian population with a group O frequency around 50 percent.
If, as some have supposed, the number of immigrants from Asia to
America was on the order of a dozen or less, they could all have
been type O. The probability of ten Asian immigrants having this
same blood type is around one in a thousand—small but not
entirely negligible. If they were five, the probability would be one
in thirty-two. If the first colonists were all group O, all their descen-
dants would have been group O as well, unless new mutation or
later migrations introduced other blood groups. This extreme
example illustrates a statistical property of population size: the
smaller a population, the greater the fluctuation in the relative gene
frequency over the generations. This extreme form of drift (also

                                   42
 called, for greater precision, “random genetic drift” to differentiate
 it from other meanings of the word “drift”) is also called “founders’
 effect,” but it does not have to occur specifically, or only at the
 founding event. It occurs at every generation, being more marked
 the smaller the population size. Founders’ effect is likely to be of
 major importance because founders are usually few, and if a new
 settlement is successful, the population tends to increase =e
 after the beginning.
     A remarkable property of drift is its tendency to homogenize
 populations. If genetic drift operates without introduction of genes
 by migration or mutation, a population will eventually eliminate all
 but one genetic type. If two populations with identical gene fre-
 quencies separate, both will eventually become fixed for a single
 genetic type, but possibly different in the two populations. Drift acts
 blindly—the increase or decrease of gene frequencies of a given
 type in a drifting population is due entirely to chance. Asa result, the
 behavior of drift can only be predicted in terms of probabilities. For
_example, the most common gene at the beginning of the process is
 the one most likely to reach final fixation in the population. This
_ probabilistic nature of drift prompted Japanese population geneti-
  cist Motoo Kimura to modify the Darwinian stereotype of evolution, .
 “survival of the fittest,” to incorporate also the role of chance in evo-
 lutionary change—what he called “survival of the luckiest.”
     Is the lack of the A and B blood groups in the Americas due to
 drift? We cannot be sure, but we should also consider an alternative
 hypothesis—natural selection. Infectious diseases have been a
 major cause of human mortality. Some genes, including the ABO
 blood group genes, can convey resistance to particular infections,
 and there is some evidence that the O blood group imparts resis-
 tance to syphilis. According to one popular hypothesis, syphilis was
 common in the Americas and was brought back to Spain in 1493,
 believed to be its first appearance in Europe, by the first Spanish
 sailors of Columbus's expedition. Hastened by war, it spread to
 France and Italy and soon to the rest of Europe. Research on pre-
 Columbian mummies suggested that the A and B blood groups
 existed in the Americas several thousand years ago, but this has not

                                    43
been substantiated by modem analytical methods. If the result —
could be confirmed, however, it would implicate natural selection _
in the disappearance of the A and B genes from the Americas. If the
O blood group confers some resistance to syphilis, and there are
some cues that it may, its frequency would increase relative to the
susceptible A and B blood groups during an epidemic.       .
    The choice between these two hypotheses—drift and natural
selection—is often difficult to make. One must understand that nat-
ural selection is simply a demographic phenomenon: certain genetic
types within a population may have greater or smaller probability of
yielding children than has the rest of the population. This may hap-
pen because they have a greater, or smaller, probability of resis-
tance to some adverse condition, for instance, an infectious disease.
Or they may have greater or lower fertility.    Natural selection affects
evolution of the traits responsible for the difference of mortality or
fertility only if the traits are transmitted to progeny, as is typical of
genes. Thus natural selection usually affects a particular gene,
favoring certain forms (alleles) of the gene, which will find them-
selves at an advantage over others (but usually only in specific envi-
ronments). Thus the three ABO alleles confer different resistance
to diseases like E. coli infections, tuberculosis, perhaps syphilis and
smallpox. O individuals are more susceptible to gastroduodenal
ulcer, which we have recently learned is determined by the bac-
terium Helicobacter pylori.
    While natural selection affects each gene in a very specific way,
genetic drift affects all genes according to the same, clearcut proba-
bility laws. Under drift, the average magnitude of change of fre-
quencies is the same for all genes and is determined by the size of
the population from generation to generation. However, whereas
the direction of change is random for each gene under genetic drift,
natural selection acts only on some genes and determines change in
a particular direction. In very large populations, natural selection is
relatively unimpeded by drift. In the special cases of small isolated
populations, such as those living in the mountains or on islands,
drift is more likely to be a dominant force, though natural selection
is the real creative force of nature.

                                   44
 cat,                                                  eedkranen
 __ and complex organs ever developed, but natural selection is the
4 force that can create improbability, because it picks out automati-
___ cally very rare novelties produced by mutation, anytime they carry
          an advantage for the organism in its specific environment. Of
 ‘course,         organs as complicated as the eye or the ear are not created
: in one generation or by one mutation, but by the accumulation of
very           many changes that have operated in the same directions.
             Natural selection can target any gene. Because mutations are
random             changes in genes that have been adapted for specific, intri-
cate              functions over many millions of years, they are frequently
            deleterious,  causing  sickness or death. Natural selection will auto-
            matically eliminate mutations that lower the survival or reproduc-
            tive output of those who carry them. Nevertheless,         many genetic
            changes are neither beneficial nor disadvantageous; they are “selec-
           _tively neutral” and have the greatest chance of experiencing random
            drift. In the absence of historical data, it is difficult to distinguish
            between diffusion of a selectively neutral gene into a population
            because of drift and the spread of an advantageous mutation by nat-
            ural selection. In some few cases selection can work quickly, but the
            selective advantages or disadvantages of specific alleles are usually
            modest, and it may take thousands or even tens of thousands of gen-
            erations to substitute an improved gene. In humans, one thousand
            generations   would   span about 25,000 years. If a gene presentsa
         _ strong selective advantage, it can be spread by natural selection
          in only a few hundreds, or few thousands, of years. This almost
          certainly was the case in northern Europe and parts of Africa as
          adults grew capable of digesting lactose, the sugar found in milk.
          Children everywhere can digest milk until the age of three or
          four, but they generally lose this ability when they cease drinking
         their mother’s milk. In those populations that herd sheep, goats,
          cattle, and other animals, adults have frequently started drinking
          milk. There is a strong selective advantage to digesting lactose into
          adulthood. Animals were domesticated only within the last 10,000

                                             45
                                                               “4   im   pc



years and yet, within that time, the capacity to digest lactose has
reached almost 100 percent in herding populations in which adults a
drink milk.                                           .
    So evolution by natural selection can, in fact, be particularly
rapid for genes that impart a significant selective advantage to their
bearers. Selection for an advantageous form of a gene will usually
result in the fixation of genes that began at a very low frequency in
the population. Every evolutionary process begins withamutation
appearing in a single individual. Even when a mutation is strongly
advantageous and increases in number in successive generations, it
is represented by only a few individuals (usually one) at first. It is
therefore subject to drift, which may even eliminate a potentially
successful mutation. As inheritors become more numerous, ran-
dom extinction becomes unlikely.
   In summary, natural selection is determined by the difference
between the mortality and/or fecundity of different genetic types
(also called “genotypes”). Those genes that reduce mortality or
increase fertility will increase in frequency in subsequent genera-
tions. The genotypes that increase mortality, especially among the
young, or that reduce reproductive output tend to disappear from
the population. The biological adaptation of an individual to the
environment in which he lives is measured solely by his capacity to
survive and to reproduce. The process is completely automatic, and
the “survival of the fittest,” or more accurately, the greater repre-
sentation in future generations of those who have better chances of
surviving and reproducing (i.e., are genetically fitter), is the corner-
stone of natural selection.




                       Heterozygote Advantage

During   the nineteenth       century,   the concept   of racial purity
received much attention. The perfection of races or breeds is still
an important goal for animal breeders. Dog and cat shows establish,
often arbitrarily, an ideal of esthetic perfection, which trainers wish

                                    46
               oe


é toattain with their animals. This is frequently a counterproductive
effort. Breeders know that by seeking genetic purity through
  repeated crossings between closely related animals—inbreeding—
  they dangerously reduce the animals’ resistance to disease. The
  reverse—outcrossing—is more desirable since racial mixing in all
  species generally increases disease resistance and overall viability.
  This phenomenon is known as “hybrid vigor.” When considering
  the hybridization of a single gene, one speaks of heterozygote
  advantage. A heterozygote is an individual who receives different
 forms of a gene from father and mother.
     The classic example of heterozygous advantage is sickle cell ane-
 mia, which affects mostly, but not exclusively, Africans. Consider a
 parallel example, common in people of southern European origin: a
 gene responsible for a genetic disease called thalassemia, a severe
 anemia that usually kills before reproductive age is reached. The
 gene shows up in two slightly different forms, or alleles: normal N,
 and abnormal T (causing thalassemia). There are three possible
> genetic types:


    NN: individuals who receive the normal gene N from both parents are
        “normal” homozygotes.
    NT: those who get a normal allele N from one parent and a thal-
        assemia gene T from the other are heterozygotes. Like normal
          homozygotes, they do not have the disease (but can be identified
          through simple laboratory blood tests).
    TT: persons who receive a thalassemia allele from both parents are
        homozygotes for T, the abnormal gene, and have the disease.

    In some European populations, for instance in the Italian
province of Ferrara, located between Venice and Bologna, one of
approximately one hundred children is born with thalassemia.
Nearly all those afflicted die young. Heterozygotes are 18 percent of
the population and the rest, 81 percent, are normal homozygotes.
    The important question is: why do so many people have the dis-
ease, since they inevitably die before they reach adulthood? They
are obviously at a selective disadvantage, and the disease should
disappear through natural selection. The reality is, however, more

                                      4]
complicated; the province of Ferrara has also been affected for many a
centuries by a highly lethal infectious disease, malaria. Itso happens     _
that heterozygotes for thalassemia are resistant to it, although normal
homozygotes frequently succumb to the infections. The incidence of
malaria in the Ferrara region was so high until World War II, that
about one out of ten normal homozygotes died from it, while het-
erozygotes almost always survived it. Given these numbers and a few
calculations we might see that an equal proportion of N genes and of
T genes disappears at every generation, the first because of malaria
and the second because of thalassemia. Therefore, until there is
malaria of sufficient strength, thalassemia remains at a stable fre-
quency in the population. The thalassemia allele gives the population
some protection from malaria: in fact, it saves 8.1 percent of the N
homozygotes who would otherwise die because of malaria, at the cost
of a smaller number of deaths (1 percent) because of thalassemia.
   If malaria disappears, thalassemia will also disappear, because
normal homozygotes and heterozygotes will survive at the same
rate, while homozygous TT will continue to die young. As malaria
becomes more or less intense, the frequency of the thalassemia
gene will increase or decrease.
    We have said this type of natural selection is called heterozygous
advantage. Whenever the two homozygotes survive or reproduce
less than the heterozygote, the two alleles will remain in the popu-
lation and adjust their frequencies automatically to values such that
equal proportions of the two genes survive every generation. At this
point, which may be reached after a relatively few generations have
passed, the relative frequencies of the two alleles, and therefore of
the three genotypes, do not change any further.
    Sickle cell anemia is a disease that shares many features with thal-
assemia, and is especially frequent in people of African, Arabic, and
Asian Indian origin. In the case of genes like those producing thal-
assemia, of which there are many different types, or sickle cell ane-.
mia, the mutant has no chance of reaching a high frequency, since its
incidence is governed by a delicate equilibrium between the selec-
tive advantage of the heterozygotes and the usually serious disadvan-
tage of diseased homozygotes. Malaria—especially if it is caused by

                                   48
~~    ae   et




     the most virulent parasite, Plasmodium falciparum—is a very severe
     illness producing an anemia that lowers the body’s resistance to other
     infectious diseases. For this reason it is especially lethal among chil-
     dren. Several different genes can increase malarial resistance; they
     are primarily found at high frequencies in those populations that
     have lived with some type of malaria for at least fifteen or twenty cen-
     turies. This is the amount of time it takes for natural selection to
     reach stable gene frequencies as high as those found in many popula-
     tions that have been subject to serious endemic conditions of malaria.
       _ We do not know how many genes experience heterozygous
     advantage, but it is one of the factors that make “racial purity” impos-
     sible: This type of natural selection will always maintain heterogene-
     ity for a gene in a population until heterozygotes are at an advantage.




                      Genetic Variation between Populations

     We have very few direct measures of evolutionary rates because we
     don’t know the gene frequencies of past generations. However, we
     do know how genes vary in space, and there is a close connection
     between variation in time and space. On this basis it is clear that the
     rate of evolution differs greatly among genes.
           If we knew the effective population size and the intensity of
     migration for the entire history of our species, and if we knew
     which genes were subject to natural selection, we could predict the
     distribution of genetic variation across the globe. The nature of
     drift would make this only a probabilistic prediction. In general, we
     would expect the same level of variation at any gene since the popu-
     lation size for every gene would be the same. Natural selection,
     when present, could reduce or increase the rate of evolutionary
     change. But different genes are subject to very different intensities
     of selection, and there are many genes that show no sign of it.
           Other factors could limit the effect of drift. Because of migration,
     genetic exchange among populations almost always occurs, most
     often between closely neighboring villages. This migration (also

                                          49
 called gene flow) tends to reduce genetic variation between villages.          .
 If it were extremely high, there would be no genetic differences
 between villages, nations, or even continents;
                                             but levels of migration        —
 that would wipe out genetic differences between populations clearly
 have not occurred. A high mutation rate could have an effect similar
 to migration, but the majority of genes that we have studied have a _
 rather low mutation rate. We can usually recognize genes with a high
 mutation rate, because they have a higher number of alleles.
     Among the genes that show the greatest geographic variation
 are the immunoglobulin genes (which produce antibodies, key ele-
 ments in the body’s defense against infectious disease). Because
 there is considerable geographic variation in the distribution of dis-
~ ease, it is no surprise that we find important geographic variation in
 the genes that defend us from these diseases. As a result, we might
 expect patterns very different from those produced by drift. But the
 great variety of infectious diseases, and the genes that protect us
 from them, also play the evolutionary game—bacteria, viruses, and
                                                                                    |
 parasites are constantly mutating to evade our defenses. The effect                :
 of this random arms race is very similar to drift in the sense that
 chance plays a major role in creating genetic variation of pathogenic
 organisms but is not affected by human population size to the same
  extent as are selectively neutral genes. It is therefore easy to under-
  stand why the results from an evolutionary analysis of immuno-
  globulins are similar to those obtained from the analysis of genes
  governed by effective population size (i.e., drift), except that their
  overall rate of change is greater.
      The same goes for the HLA genes, an important and even more
  variable class of genes that are involved in our immunological indi-'
  viduality, and also in our immune defenses against infectious dis-
  ease. The situation here is more complex. The HLA genes have
  many alleles; some of them are found everywhere, and others are
  restricted to particular regions. The most unusual pattern of varia-
  tion (above all for HLA, but also for other genes) is found in the
  indigenous populations of South America, which generally show
  the greatest geographic variation. Almost all other populations in
  the world have a great variety of HLA alleles, but there is a single

                                    50
; HLA variant, rare or unknown elsewhere, that can achieve high
_ frequencies in one or a few South American native populations.
  Neighboring populations frequently contain a completely different
  set of alleles. It is not easy to exclude the possibility that these ele-
  vated frequencies are due in some populations to natural selection,
  but it seems here that drift has also played a major role.
     _ The problems of predicting evolutionary rates are, therefore,
  complex. A detailed study of a population can help us determine
  whether genetic variation is essentially random as a result of genetic
  drift or due to natural selection varying randomly (as for antibody
  genes and HLA), because we know how population size affects
  variation due to drift, and we can now easily increase the number of
  genes and individuals studied to reduce observational errors.
       But some genes show very little variation from one population
  to another. In such a case, heterozygote advantage is probably stabi-
  lizing the gene frequencies, and therefore reducing their subse-
  quent evolution. Homogeneity may sometimes be apparent. In
  malarial areas, for example, thalassemia is frequent. But molecular
  analysis has shown that in some geographic areas there are a great
  number of different thalassemia alleles, and this heterogeneity can
  be observed only by study at the DNA level. Often thalassemia al-
  leles can provide information about ancient migrations.
      The majority of genes have an intermediate geographic hetero-
  geneity, between that of the highly variable genes involved in immu-
  nity and genes that do not vary at all. These are probably subject to a
  situation of heterozygous advantage common to all environments.
 The average level of variation of gene frequencies among populations
 is approximately in the range expected for selectively neutral genes
 and the particular population size we estimate for modern humans
 more than 10,000 years ago. Since then there have been significant
 innovations in food production. They generated a substantial popula-
 tion increase, causing a progressive freeze of drift. It seems therefore
 that genetic drift played a major role especially in early human evolu-
 tion, and more recently only in special situations. Highly elevated or
 reduced variation for certain genes, however, must be caused _by nat-
 ural selection, which accelerates or retards their evolution.

                                     51
               Constancy of Average Evolutionary Rates

 Our task in reconstructing evolutionary trees would be greatly sim-
 plified if we could be sure that the rate of evolution—calculated
 as the mean of many genes (excluding genes subject to strong
 selection)—is approximately the same in different branches of the
 evolutionary tree. We have given an idea of the factors that can
 influence the rate of evolution. Do we have the ability to ensure
 that realityis as simple as our hypotheses?
     We have seen in a table of genetic distances that Africa is genet-
 ically the most distant continent from all the others. In effect, the
 distance between Africa and the four other continents is 21.7 + 1.7,
 almost double the distance between Oceania and the three other
 continents, 12.7 + 1.4 each. This indicates that the difference
 between the means, 9.0, is well above the level of statistical error.
 The other distances are all much smaller. There is an excellent his-
~ torical explanation for this result, which we shall see later.
      In order to examine the problem of the constancy of evolu-
  tionary rates, we can look at the distances between Africa and
  the other continents: 24.7 with Oceania, 20.6 with Asia, 16.6 with
  Europe, and 22.6 with America. It is clear that the shortest distance
  is between Africa and Europe, followed by that between Africa and
  Asia. If the rate of evolution were truly constant, the four values
  would be identical (within the limits of statistical error due to small
  sample size).
     The distance from Europe is anomalously low. North Africa is
 populated with Caucasoid people like Europeans, but we have
 made sure to eliminate these populations and are restricting our-
 selves to sub-Saharan Africa. The simplest explanation is that sub-
 stantial exchange has taken place between nearby continents,
 probably via migrations in both directions.
     Other comparisons should convince us that the proximity of the
 two continents contributes to their genetic similarity. Asia, for exam-
 ple, Africa’s other neighbor, is genetically closer to Africa than is
 either America or Oceania. Comparing genetic distances between
  Oceania and the other continents, we have a similar situation: 10.0

                                    52
& with Asia, 13:5 with Europe, and 14.6 with America. The shortest
  distance is seen with the closest continent, Asia.
      If the evolutionary rates of each continent were constant, the
   greater similarity of neighboring continents should not exist. But
   the deviation is not important. It does not need to result from dif-
   ferent amounts of drift or selection in each continent. The underly-
   ing cause is rather the genetic exchange between neighboring
   populations, which changes genetic distances by reducing the dis-
   tance between populations that have exchanged migrants. I con-
   clude that even if evolution in the different branches of the tree is
   not completely independent, the deviations are not sufficient to
   destroy our conclusions. Migration is almost. always limited to
   rather short distances. Nonetheless, it merits a digression.




                         Migrations Big and Small

   Humans are constantly moving. Over most of our history, all of us
   have been hunters and gatherers, and most of us have been herders
   and farmers, though only in the last ten thousand years. Hunting
   territories were not very far from each other, and probably did not
   change hands too frequently. For the African Pygmies, these terri-
   tories belong to a group (a hunting band) and each husband has the
   right to add his wife’s territory to his own. For this reason, Pygmies
   seek to marry a woman from relatively far away, following a rule
  that, while extending his sphere of influence, has also decreased the
   likelihood of marrying a close relative.
      Pygmies avoid marrying close cousins, but they don’t keep track
   of more distant relationships. Hunters and gatherers require greater
   mobility than farmers, but according to current data the difference
  is not so great. As to herders, they often migrate over distances
  approaching 500 to 1,000 kilometers, although these seasonal
  movements are restricted over the years. It is almost never a ran-
  dom nomadism. These movements continue in parts of the world
  today, but they usually involve only a few shepherds and not whole

                                     53
groups. Certainly there have been other reasons to move around, 3
usually without resettlement, to attend markets, festivals, and so on.
Movement is also important for meeting potential spouses.
    Marriageisa major reason for migration, since at least one of
the spouses (more often the wife) must move to unite with the
other. We have witnessed great changes in transportation this cen-
tury, but movement was once limited, and was rarely greater than a
day’s walk before the widespread use of trains and other modern
mechanisms of travel.            ;
   From a genetic point of view, the migration that matters most is
one that causes a difference between the birth place of parent and
child. This would include resettlement of one or both of the
spouses at marriage, and any subsequent resettlement.
    Data on the distances between birth places of a husband and a
wife, which are the easiest migration data to collect, indicate:

   1. an average distance of 30 to 40 kilometers for hunter-gatherers
      in tropical areas (these are much smaller than those for Arctic Eski-
      mos, who have a very low population density);
   2. 10 to 20 kilometers, on average, for African farmers with a low
      population density;
   3. 5 to 10 kilometers for European farmers of the nineteenth century;
   4, that during the second half of the nineteenth century, the average
      distance started increasing as a result of railroad construction.


    These are modest levels of migration. By focusing on the dis-
tance between spouses, averages are small since most marriages
occur between residents of the same village or town, sometimes sep-
arated by only a few blocks. This should not surprise us since people
are more likely to meet their neighbors in the context of work,
school, or recreation. Even in the smallest villages, most marriages
of the rural Italian population occur between spouses from the same
or the closest villages, and only rarely from distant villages.
    These “minor” migrations of a family or an individual are behind
the relationship between genetic and geographic distances (the
“jsolation by distance” we discussed in the first chapter).


                                       54
:          Mass migrations are an entirely different phenomenon. Much
      rarer, they are very important in the history of our species. One type
      of major migration involves the deliberate settling of new territories.
      We call this colonization. There are several known historical exam-
      ples: among them, the Greeks and Phoenicians of the Mediter-
      ranean and the European colonization of the Americas, Australia,
      and South Africa. There must have been many prehistoric coloniza-
      tion events as well. We will discover some of them in chapter 4.
          In recorded history, colonizations have been well organized and
      were usually motivated by overpopulation. Previously, there must
      have been less organized migrations as well. Population growth can
      end in saturation, prompting migration. This may repeat in the new
      locale, the growth of which may lead to further cycles. We shall see
      in chapter 4 that these expansions leave a characteristic signature
      on the geographic map of genes.
          The geographic study of genetic variation is very different from
      an approach based on evolutionary trees. It simultaneously solves
      and creates different problems. In the study of trees, one usually
     selects a small number of populations, usually located far apart, and
      tries to determine their historical relationships. Since all humans
      share a common origin, we can expect that a single or few popula-
      tions have grown and begun to spread over the earth, reaching new
      continents and ultimately covering the entire earth. This type of
      migration, going from one geographic region to a remote, separate
       one, will create a discontinuity, the equivalent of a fission. If repeated,
       this process corresponds to the branching pattern of a tree. Thus,
     ~ migration followed by separation of the mother and the daughter
    ~ colony can cause differentiation; while migration between neigh-
      bors has an opposite effect, favoring homogenization.
          But the process of colonization can be less abrupt, even at the
      beginning. And in later growth and development, neighboring pop-
      ulations are likely to have frequent, more or less reciprocal genetic
      exchange. This mixing can render the model of a branching tree
      inadequate in representing human evolution. In general, tree recon-
      structions are less useful than geographic or other more. specific


                                           55
                                                   Te".


                                                               re.
                              sense of the sim i]saivheccok ae
methods, but they help give a
tions, and sometimes even help recognizing admixture.
   An important control on the validity of an evolutionary tree is
that all the genes or characteristics used point to the same result or
at least have an explicable difference. If enough genes have been
studied in widely separated populations and statistical tests are
used to verify the stability of results, we often find strong support
for a tree structure. Some individual branches may pose problems.
Very short branches may be found for populations generated by
admixtures, or affected by long lasting gene flow from neighbors. In
these cases, the position of the relevant branch may also be shifted
toward the center of the tree; for instance, capital cities which have
experienced much immigration from all or most other parts of a
country usually occupy a central place in a tree of the country. The
length of a branch can also be affected by drift. A population that
has had a very small number of founders, or later demographic bot-
tlenecks, may show an inordinately long branch.
     Even when independent samples of genes show substantial sim-
ilarity, there are also differences that may be very informative. The
genetic markers mostly used until now are proteins, the gene prod-
ucts rather than the genes themselves. The more recent markers
employed in the direct study of the DNA present many advantages
over protein markers, again, with only one drawback—they have
been studied in only a few populations, while many protein markers
have been examined in thousands of different populations.
   Many difficult problems remain before we can satisfactorily
resolve questions in human evolution through the analysis of living
organisms alone. We shall devote the next chapter to a critical study
of the problems that arise during comparisons of data from differ-
ent genetic systems and archeological results that can help us
reconstruct history by another means.




                                  56
                                CHAPTER 3


                    Of Adam and Eve




                      Who Are Modern Humans?

 Darwin was the first to point out that the great apes are our closest
 living cousins. Since the two most similar to us, chimpanzees and
 gorillas, live only in Africa, he concluded that we must have evolved
 there from ancestors common to us all. We now know that the last
 ancestor common to the chimp and humans lived about five million
years ago. We must go back in time still further to arrive at the
branch leading to the gorilla, a more distant cousin, and as far as
thirteen million years to reach the point when we shared a common
ancestor with the orangutan. Even so, and in spite of its long red
coat, the orangutan still bears a surprising resemblance         to our
species. It lives in Southeast Asia, while our closer relatives all live
in Africa. Fossil australopithecines, among our ancestors after the
separation from chimpanzees,       have so far been found only in
Africa.
    The first member of our genus, Homo, was Homo habilis, who
appeared about 2.5 million years ago. H. habilis made crude stone

                                   57
tools and was completely bipedal. His brain was larger than that ofa
his immediate ancestors and of the living apes, although it was still
smaller than ours. There is complete agreement that habilis
evolved in Africa, where Homo erectus succeeded him. The latter
species was the first in our lineage to leave Africa and explore the
rest of the Old World. Recent evidence suggests that erectus’s
migration may have begun as many as two million years ago, not
one million years ago as was previously believed.
   With the arrival of Homo sapiens, about 500,000 years ago, we
                                                                          :
                                                                          :
reach the cranial volume of modern humans. Many features of sapi-
ens were still somewhat simian early on, and skulls like those of
fully modern humans appear only within the last 100,000 years in
southern and eastern Africa.
   Some confusion was generated by the discovery of modern
human skulls in the Middle East that were about the same age as
the earliest African samples. Clearly, the Middle East is nearby and
connected to Africa by land, but the find still raises doubts about
the origin of modern humans: Africa or the Middle East? It turns
out that Africa is the likelier source, given that other skulls found
there proved to be earlier and transitional between older ancestors
and modern humans.
    The story gets more complicated. Neandertals, a branch of late
erectus or of early sapiens that had been found only in Europe and
western   Asia in the last 200,000 or 300,000 years, also began
appearing for the first time in the Middle East 60,000 years ago.
The archeologist Richard Klein suggested that the first migration of
modern humans from Africa to the Middle East did take place
around 100,000 years ago but failed. A possible explanation is a
local cooling of the climate. Since Neandertals had adapted to
colder conditions in Europe, they may have migrated into the Mid-
dle East about that time and found it empty of modern humans.
    Some paleoanthropologists long believed that modern Euro-
peans are directly descended from Neandertals. But we have seen
in chapter 2 that very recent analysis of fossil DNA (in particular, on
the first specimen that gave the Neandertal name to the whole
group) has shown that this can’t be true. From these studies it

                                  58
               Se gh nlaae   ca




    3 became clear that Neandertals separated from the ancestral jiue
      some 500,000 years ago. Around 40,000 years ago they began disap-
      pearing rapidly, and are most probably totally extinct today.
             Before the complete demise of the Neandertal, modern humans
         had begun expanding from Africa to the rest of the world. There are
         important reasons behind every major population expansion. In the
      ‘case of modern humans, the most important have probably been
     _ technological innovations that improve food production, but discov-
       eries facilitating transportation or climatic adaptations also con-
         tributed. One unique innovation, moreover, helped modern humans,
é        born in Africa, to colonize the world.
             The human brain grew continuously until the appearance of
         Homo sapiens about 500,000 years ago. Based on cranial measure-
         ments, growth of the human brain stopped at that point or shortly
         thereafter. In computer terminology, the “hardware” had improved,
     \   at least superficially, but that was not enough; the “software” also
         needed to become more powerful.
             There is at least one major intellectual difference between us
         and our closest evolutionary relatives, the Primates. We can commu-
         nicate with a much richer and more refined language than any other
         species. Chimpanzees and gorillas can learn to use only 300 to 400
         words, and even that requires special effort and nonvocal communi-
         cation, since they cannot articulate their tongues and pharynges to
         produce sounds comparable to ours. The vocabulary of an average
         human is at least ten or twenty times greater, and can be as large as
          100,000 words or more. The great apes cari use symbols to indicate
         ‘simple things, but can understand these symbols only when some-
         body speaks the artificial languages devised by researchers who have
         conducted these remarkable experiments. However, they have a
         great deal of difficulty forming true sentences, and may be unable to
         develop grammar and syntax.
             All contemporary modern humans use very complex languages.
         There are no “primitive” languages; the 5,000 or more spoken today
         are equally flexible and expressive, and their grammar and syntax
         are sometimes richer and more precise than that of the more wide-
         spread languages like English or Spanish, which have undergone

                                          59
                                                          ee et   i



some simplification over the centuries. All humans of normal intel-
ligence can learn any language, provided they start at a young age.
After the age of five or six, a child can almost never become per-
fectly fluent in a language, and the ability to learn it can completely
disappear soon after that. After puberty, it is almost impossible to
perfect the pronunciation of a second language. This is an excel-
lent reason to begin foreign language instruction in elementary
school, but few governments seem to have noticed this virtually
absolute rule.
   There is some indirect evidence that modern human language
reached its current state of development between          50,000 and
150,000 years ago. As the archeologist Glynn Isaac has noticed, the
Paleolithic cultures during this time show increased levels of local
differentiation. This is reflected in the great number of names
archeologists have given to the cultures of the period. Isaac postu-
lated that this heightened variation in lithic culture, and the local     ia
                                                                           it


differentiation of languages and dialects that most probably accom-
panied it, arose with an overall increase in language complexity.
The possibility of communicating in a more refined manner, thanks
to languages similar to modern ones, must have greatly aided our
ancestors’ ability to explore and colonize. Beginning perhaps 60,000
or 70,000 years ago, modern humans began to migrate from Africa,
eventually reaching the farthest habitable corners of the globe such
as Tierra del Fuego, Tasmania, the coast of the Arctic Ocean, and
finally Greenland.
    As I said earlier, other innovations over the last 100,000 years,
such as improvements in toolmaking techniques, have been domi-
nant factors in the most recent human expansion out of Africa. But
advancements    in navigation were possibly even more important.
We do not have the remains of any boats or rafts more than 8,000
years old, since wood cannot survive so long, but we know that no
fewer than seventy kilometers of water separated Australia from
Southeast Asia, in four or five places. If modern humans could
reach Australia, which was certainly occupied more than 40,000,
and probably between 50,000 and 60,000, years ago, it seems likely
that navigation techniques were available earlier. If so, modern
     frumiatisdid at least part of their colonization of Asia by sailing a
     Africa along the southern coasts of Asia, past Arabia, India, Burma,
     and Indonesia (not in one generation, of course, but over many
     hundreds of them). The seacoast and route is easier to traverse than
     an overland path, and it would not have required a change in diet
     from fish and shellfish, nor an adaptation to new climates.




              Stages of Global Colonization by Modern Humans
eetes
oe
“Ito
ee.   The most crucial dates in modern human evolution are unfortu-
     nately beyond the range of the radiocarbon method, which has a
     limit of about 40,000 years. New alternative techniques can extend
     this range beyond 60,000 years. They have the advantage of being
       independent of carbon-containing material, and thus make it possi-
       ble to assay the age of tools not made of bone or wood, but we have
       scarcely begun to use them and to appreciate their limitations. Tak-
    _ ing account only of the earliest traceable human bone remains,
      there is excellent evidence that modern humans lived in southeast-
     ern Australia more than 30,000 years ago.
         Archeology provides several dates for the first arrivals of mod-
     ern humans on the various continents, and those dates can be com-
     pared to the genetic distances. The older the date of entry to a
     continent, the greater the time for the accumulation of genetic dif-
     ferences between the newly settled continent and the continent of
     origin. Thus genetic distances can be quite useful in determining
     when humans first reached a continent.
         Modern humans seem to have reached Asia first. We saw above
     that they may have originally arrived in the Middle East as many as
     100,000 years ago. If this first settlement was a failure because of
     climate cooling, there must have been a second, later settlement,
     but the first settlers may also have withdrawn farther south and
     southeast into Asia. How was the easternmost part of Asia reached?
    Was it set upon from the first Middle East settlements, or from East
     Africans traveling along the Arabian coast, and beyond India to

                                       61
                                                                    te

Southeast Asia? From here, two routes could have been followed:
south to New Guinea and Australia, or north to China and Japan.
   We know very little about the arrival of modern humans in East
Asia—the only measured archeological date of human remains in
China is 67,000 years ago, but this may be unreliable because of the
method of measurement.
    Europe was likely entered from western Asia and from North
Africa, slightly before the disappearance of the Neandertals, about
43,000 years ago. The first entry to the Americas from northeastern
Asia has been the most difficult to date accurately. Archeologically
based dates range from 15,000 to 30,000 or even 50,000 years.
   Many methods of genetic dating have been developed. Under
the simplest hypothesis, the genetic distances between populations
are proportional to the dates of first occupation of the geographic
areas they occupy, and more precisely to the time elapsed since the
separation between the pairs of populations being compared. The
following table shows the dates of the first occupation of continents,
on the basis of the archeological information given above, and the
relevant genetic distances between pairs of continents. Genetic dis-
tances were calculated from blood groups and protein polymor-
phisms, and taken from the table already given in chapter 2. The
last column shows the ratio between each genetic distance and the
corresponding archeological date.

                      Genetic      First settlement
   Migration          distance     date (thsnds yrs)     Ratio


   Africa > Asia         20.6             100               0,206
   Asia — Australia      10.0              DO               0.182
   Asia   + Europe        9.7              43               0.226
   Asia + America         8.9           15-50          0.59-0.178


The first three ratios between genetic distances and dates are rea-
sonably similar one to the other, and the differences between the
ratios are well within the error of measurement, confirming that
genetic distance is approximately proportional to the time of sepa-
ration of two populations. This is the same as saying that, in these

                                  62
           lar. -




          data, the rate of evolutionary divergence sees continents is at
          least approximately constant.
            _ We do not have reliable dates for the initial settling of the Amer-
          icas. Extreme values are shown in the last row of the table. It
          appears from the two corresponding ratios calculated in the last col-
§
a

          umn that the latest date suggested by archeologists, 15,000 years,
’4        would be too recent, and perhaps the earliest one too long ago.
      :   Based on the average of the first three ratios, 0.205, we would esti-
a




.         mate that the Americas were occupied 43,000 years ago (8.9/0.205
;¥-        = 43). Notice that the distance between Asians and American Indi-
4-        ans given here is probably too high, since it is based on all of Asia,
4
;         although probably only the eastern portion of Asia participated in
F         the colonization of the Americas. A more refined estimate. would
4         use the distance between East Asians and Amerindians, rather than.
4
          that between the whole of Asia and Amerindians. From a table not
;       given in this book, this distance is 6.6, generating an expected date
        of first settlement of America of 32,000 years ago (6.6/0.205 = 32).
            Taking into account the difficulty of calculating a reliable arrival
er
a     - date to the Americas because of lack of agreement among archeolo-
eo
          gists, the dates of first occupation of the continents are in reasonable
          concordance with the genetic distances, but they require further
          refinement.




                                     Nongenetic Data
          ‘From the outset, I was convinced that only strictly inherited traits
          like blood groups and proteins could provide satisfactory answers
          to questions of evolutionary history. For this reason, it was clear
          to me that external characters like height and other anthropomet-
          ric measurements     are not reliable, because they are influenced
          both by genes and by the environmental conditions of individual
          development; they change rapidly in response to factors such as
          nutrition and external temperature. Moreover, over time, the envi-
          ronment modifies the genetic basis of these characters via natural
          selection.

                                             63 .
                                                                          si
   Characteristics subject to strong selection from the environ--
ment can tell us about the recent environmental conditions under
which a given population may have lived. But we do not know how
much time it takes to modify those characters. The best genes for
evolutionary studies are, therefore, those that do not experience
natural selection. Genes that have no function such as “pseudo-
genes” (duplicates of functional genes unable to produce a normal
protein), or other DNA sequences that do not encode proteins and
have no known function, are subject mainly to chance (genetic
drift). Again, such genes are called “selectively neutral” and we pre-
fer to use them in evolutionary studies whenever possible. Charles
Darwin intuited this—he thought that the most useful characteris-
tics for reconstructing history would be those that he called “triv-
ial,” being more easily subject to chance.
     As I have said before, exceptions to this rule are the remarkably
variable genes, like the HLA (a system of genes that control our
genetic identity and help in immunity) or genes that make
immunoglobulins (proteins that function as antibodies, protecting
us from infectious diseases), that are among the most important in
evolutionary studies. In principle they could also lead us astray
when they are highly correlated with climatic or other environmen-
tal factors, which also influence the prevalence of certain infectious
diseases. But chance always remains an important determining fac-
tor in their evolution, making them extremely useful.
    When we were constructing our first evolutionary trees, how-
ever, it seemed important to conduct a parallel study using classical
anthropometric characteristics. The idea was (and still is) that, in
the search for solutions to a difficult problem, it may help to collect
information from as many relevant sources as possible. If they pro-
vide different answers, the result must be explained. We collected
anthropometric data of populations matching as closely as possible
those for which we had genetic data. The resulting tree showed a
few important differences from the genetic one. For example,
Africans and Australians were very similar to each other and there-
fore grouped together in anthropometric trees, but in genetic stud-
ies these populations exhibited the greatest distance.

                                  64
       at    eal


       We were not happy, at first, about this, but it became clear that
  _ the cause of the anomalyissimply that anthropometric characteris-
___ tics experience strong climatic selection. We know that skin color
     is largely determined by the sun’s intensity. Sub-Saharan Africans,
     Australian Aborigines, and New Guineans have dark skin and have
    adapted similarly for other body traits, especially body measure-
    ‘ments. They all live nearer to the equator than most other people.
     We also know that many other traits, such as overall size of nostrils,
     correlate in a physiologically understandable manner with climate,
     and therefore with latitude. Longitude does not show comparable
     ecological differences.
        ‘Anthropometric characteristics, including skin color, demon-
  _ strate the selective effects of the different climates to which modern
    humans have been exposed in the course of their migrations over the
    Earth’s surface. They vary especially with latitude. By contrast, genes
    are considerably more useful as markers of human evolutionary his-
  - tory, especially migrations. They vary more with longitude.
        The data that we used in our anthropometric study were
  - derived from a large number of researchers, and as a result there
    was some heterogeneity in measurements between them. A beauti-
    ful, very detailed analysis was made by William Howells (1973) on a
    rich sample of crania. Based on multiple cranial measurements that
    Howells himself had made, he produced results very similar to the
    calculations we made from general anthropometric data. We were
    able to show that, after correcting for climate effects, and in partic-
   ular eliminating the effects of general size (which is very sensitive to
   climate),  we could improve the concordance between the cranio-
   metric and the genetic data.
       In a second study of the same craniometric data, Howells (1989)
    tried to eliminate the effect of size by considering more specifically
    the shape of the skull. Shape is measured mostly using the relation-
    ship between the face and the crown. But shape is also very sensi-
    tive to climate selection. In very cold regions, modern humans
    show a strong reduction of the face in relation to the crown, which
   results in a major change in the form of the head. The use of shape
   did not change the conclusions, and the results of Howells’s second
analysis recapitulated the results of his first study. Characteristics i
strongly sensitive to natural selection by climate cannot provide a
complete description of a species’ evolutionary history but illustrate
only a small part of it—that of environments occupied by different
populations. The amount of evolutionary divergence accumulated
is likely to be a measure of the time elapsed only when it reflects
random changes.




    Different Genetic Markers, Methods of Measuring Genetic
               Distances and Reconstructing Trees

After we began working on the reconstruction of human evolution
using genetic trees, a multitude of new methods were proposed for
calculating genetic distances. Similarly, many new methods for
building trees were proposed. These various methods usually gave
rise to trivial differences in results. In principle, it is easier to
believe the historical validity of evolutionary trees reconstructed
from genetic data if conclusions are not influenced in a significant
way by the particular method used for calculating genetic distances
or for reconstructing trees. Above all, conclusions should be inde-
pendent from the genetic markers we use. If we do find that these
variables have an effect, we must look for the reason, as we did
when we found a discrepancy between genetic and anthropometric
traits. Speaking of traits, however, we should remember that con-
clusions would inevitably depend on the number of traits we use: if
too few are used, conclusions will fluctuate depending on the traits
selected. This is a well-known limitation of all observations, which
can be duly kept under control by appropriate statistical analysis.
    As mentioned earlier, experience showed that the type of method
used to calculate genetic distance does not have a major effect. But
the method of tree reconstruction can. There are two major classes of
methods: one is the standard statistical approach of making a specific
evolutionary hypothesis and testing it against the data. But the most
satisfactory (and also more complicated) method is called “maximum
    ‘a Elelihood” The evolutionary hypothesis jested by this method is
    usually the simplest one: that evolution has a constant rate, the same
      in all branches, and that what happens in a branch is independent of
      what happens in the others. But one can change these hypotheses if it
       is reasonable to do so, as itsometimes is.
          Another group of methods assumes that the evolutionary rate is
a      the minimum possible. Some of the relevant methods are called
3      “minimum evolution,” and “maximum parsimony.” One of them,
       called “neighbor joining,” has some definite computer advantages
‘      over the others, which makes itvery popular. There is no reason why
F      evolution should be minimal, except that mutation rates are low
       and it has been proved that forcing evolutionary changes to be the
       minimum possible does not necessarily lead to the right conclusion.
          The results we have shown so far are taken from the very large
       numbers of gene frequencies observed for blood groups like ABO,
       RH, and many other genes, mostly encoding enzymes and other
       proteins. A data bank we have collected includes almost 100,000
      _gene frequencies data on about 2,000 populations, published in
       the scientific literature since World War I. The trees we have used,
       and the geographic maps shown in the next chapter, are derived
       from them. -
           When we analyze DNA, we often abandon the study of gene
       frequencies in populations and instead examine individuals directly.
       Genetic distance between two individuals is simply obtained by
       counting the number of mutations making an individual different
       from another.



       The markers that we introduce in figures 2A and B are from DNA
       studies. We know that DNA is the hereditary material. Remember
       it is made up of four types of nucleotides known by their initial as
       A, C, G, and T; and that the genetic information contained in DNA
       is entirely coded in its nucleotide sequence. There are more than
       three billion nucleotides in a single complete set of human chromo-
       somes as found in a gamete (sperm or egg cell). Many readers know
      that DNA takes the shape of a double helix in which nucleotides

                                         67
come in pairs. The only possible pairs are AT, TA, CG, orGC,
therefore it is necessary to know the sequence of nucleotides in one |
helix only: in front of A in one helix, there can be only T in the other; _
in front of T, only A; in front of C, only G; and in front of G, only C.
   If we take the DNA from one sperm (or egg) and compare it to
the DNA of another random one, we find that there is on average
one different nucleotide pair every thousand nucleotide pairs. There
are therefore at least three million differences between the DNA in
one sperm or egg and the DNA in another. All these differences
originated by mutation, a spontaneous error made while copying
DNA, which most frequently involves the replacement of one
nucleotide by another of the four. New DNA is always a copy of
the old, apart from mutations, which are rare. New mutations are
therefore transmitted from parents to children. They accumulate
in a population, and the mutation separating two different alleles
found in a population may easily be tens or hundreds of thousands of
years old.
    It is possible to detect and count DNA differences between two
individuals by sequencing all the nucleotides of a specific DNA seg-
ment, but the procedure is tedious and we now have many short-
cuts to identify the presence of mutations.
    The first method of studying changes in DNA became available
in 1981 and uses the so-called “restriction.” It requires a lot of DNA,
and for this reason it became common to increase the amount of
DNA that would be obtainable from a small amount of blood by
transforming certain white blood cells—the B lymphocytes, which
produce antibodies—so that they can reproduce continuously in lab-
oratory culture. The procedure calls for infecting the cells with the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which induces them to divide without
limit. This procedure has been nicknamed-“immortalization.” Natu-~
rally it is only a very specialized cell of an individual, not the whole
individual, who has been immortalized. One can thus generate large
amounts of DNA, which can then be used for a great number of tests.
The procedure requires freshly collected cells, although cells frozen
in liquid nitrogen can often be transformed much later. Even if, by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)—the enzymatic multiplication of
   _ DNA inatestBicbdl tuecan produce large amounts of DNA from a
  _ single molecule, EBV transformation of B lymphocytes remains very
     useful, because the multiplication of DNA in vitrois never as precise
       as that produced by living cells.
eli.
           With Ken and Judy Kidd of the Yale University Genetics
       Department, and anthropologist Barry Hewlett of Washington
       State University, in 1984 I started a program to produce these cell
       lines from a number of indigenous populations from throughout
       the world. The first collaborative effort was the generation of cell
       lines of African Pygmies of the Central African Republic and north-
eoeastern
oe
Laeee         Zaire. This was followed by other similar initiatives. In 1991
       many of us proposed extending this program to a large number of
       human populations representing the entire human species. This
       larger plan became known as the Human Genome Diversity Proj-
       ect (HGDP), for which the U.S. National Science Foundation has
       begun making funds available. A pilot program, called the Biologi-
       cal History of European Populations, began in 1992 in Europe
   under European Community financing, and similar projects are
       underway in India, China, Pakistan, Israel, and elsewhere.
                                                                At pres-
  ent, there is a growing collection of more than fifty populations,
       generated in seven laboratories. DNA produced from these cell
       lines will soon be distributed to research workers by CEPH, a
       French Center for the Study of Human Polymorphism, founded
   and presided over by Jean Dausset, Nobel Laureate and discoverer
   of HLA. CEPH has already given a fundamental contribution to
   human and medical genetics by promoting a global collaboration of
  world scientists that generated the human chromosomes genetic
   linkage maps, a major advance in the field. Some of these cell lines
   are also available to researchers through a cell culture facility main-
   tained by the U.S. National Institutes of Health.


   Figures 2A and B compare a tree obtained by the method of chap-
   ter 2 with one obtained by a minimum evolution method on nine
   populations by restriction analysis of DNA. Most of the populations
   appearing in the figures come from our collection of transformed

                                           69
cell lines. Two African Pygmy populations are included: one from —
the southwest of the Central African Republic near the village ©
of Bagandou, which I visited again for this purpose in 1984, and
the other from a trip I made in 1985 to the Ituri Forest in Zaire.
The Mbuti Pygmies from Ituri are the shortest while those from the
Central African Republic are taller, probably because they mixed as
much as 75 percent with nearby Bantu and Sudanic villagers, but it
is also possible that another mutation is involved in decreasing their
size. The Mandenka are Senegalese samples collected by André
Langaney of Geneva and his colleagues. The European samples.
were obtained by Howard Cann from a Mennonite population in

                                                                                           ’
                                        Senegal Mandenkalu

                                        Central African Pygmies

                                        Zaire Pygmies

                                        Europeans

                                        Chinese

                                        Japanese

                                        Melanesians

                                        New Guineans

  (A)                                   Australians

Figures 2A and B. Trees generated for nine populations using 78 DNA restriction
markers, with two different methods: (2A) tree assumes a constant rate of evolution
(averrage linkage, maximum likelihood); and (2B), by a technique called “neighbor
joining,” assumes the minimum evolution necessary to generate the observed dis-
tances. Both hypotheses have serious limitations. The tree in B is drawn with dis-
tances proportional to those calculated, and tries, with partial success, to fit a world
map. The numbers represent the value calculated for each tree segment. It is clear
that the European segment is far too short. (Data and figure from Poloni et al.
1995)




                                           70
                                “.,
                                  .

                                  . omen
                                al +




                                ,e
eee
—!
eee
ae
"-A




                    O10'0
                       s




                       asoury

            190'0




      (B)




                      nN
California, originally from Germany and Great Britain. Chinese sub-
jects (mostly southern Chinese) and Japanese were all born in diverse
parts of Asia, but now also live in California. A single Oceanian popu- |
lation is represented by Melanesians from Bougainville Island, whose
blood samples were collected by Jonathan Friedlaender of Phila-
delphia. The Australian Aborigines and New Guineans come from
various parts of those regions. In independent studies, we tested

                                                                            .
indigenous Central and South American populations, which are
placed in the tree exactly where we would expect, based on work with |
other markers.
   There are today many types of DNA polymorphisms other than               .
those detected by restriction enzymes. They all contain potentially
more information than the classical markers we relied on in the pre-
vious chapter, but there has not been time yet to accumulate data on
a sufficiently large number of populations, as there exist from the
earlier work with blood groups and proteins. The different DNA
markers tested so far confirm the earlier results, and in some cases
they have already allowed scientists to push the analysis further.
   The agreement between different types of markers and the two
methods of testing is high, but not complete. All world trees place
the earliest split between    Africans   and non-Africans,    which is
expected given that all modern humans originated in Africa. But if
you assume a constant evolutionary rate, the next split tends to sep-
arate Oceanians   from the rest of non-Africans, while minimum
evolution locates it between Europeans and the rest. There is also
another, startling difference between the two trees. With minimum
evolution and related methods it is easier to observe length differ-
ences among the various branches than is possible with methods
assuming constant evolutionary rates. This is not surprising be-
cause, unlike the latter methods, minimum evolution places no con-
straint on the relative length of tree branches. A striking difference
between trees obtained with the two methods is that minimum evo-
lution places Europe—and to a lesser extent, East Asia—on a very
short branch departing near the center of the tree. The agreement
between markers, despite the disagreement between evolutionary
trees, compels us to seek an explanation for the short European

                                   712
_     branch observed in minimum        evolution trees, and for its unex-
     pected central placement. This is at odds with the archeological
     information on settlement times, according to which the European
     branch should depart from the tree as represented in the constant
      evolutionary rate tree.




                          Length of Branches in Trees

    When we see different branch lengths in a tree reconstructed by
      the minimum evolution method, the simplest hypothesis is that a
    - short branch is the result of a slow rate of evolution in that region
Eeand
ae)
ee
ae
ee
0ae       a long branch that of a locally rapid evolution.
         Two major evolutionary factors—drift and natural selection—can
      change in important ways from one place to another. Drift affects all
      genes. For a particular population, drift has about the same intensity
      for each gene, as a function of the population’s “effective size.” As
    " opposed to census size, effective size refers only to those people who
      reproduce, the generation intermediate between those too young or
      too old to do so—approximately one-third of the total population. Nat-
      ural selection, on the other hand, is free to change any gene, in any
     population, at any time. It is likely that only a few genes are under
     strong natural selection for any long period of time. The genes for
     which we see maximal differentiation and that appear to be under the
     effect of selection varying randomly in space and time (like the HLA
     or antibody genes) produce evolutionary trees similar to those
     obtained with genes subject to drift. It is, therefore, unlikely that a
     short or a long branch can be traced to differences in natural selection.
          So, is drift responsible for variation in branch lengths? Demo-
     graphic information can help to evaluate this possibility. In the case
     of a small island that has not had any recent immigration, drift
     might explain a long branch. Numerous examples exist. Easter
     Island is very far from both the South American coast and the other
     Polynesian islands. The demographic history is known in broad out-
     line, and it shows that a severe population bottleneck occurred in

                                        13
  the eighteenth century. As a result, Easter Islanders ax a longe
_ branch than other Polynesians. Sardinia is another example. Ite 4
  the most isolated of Mediterranean islands and its history reflects
  long cultural isolation. To a lesser extent, this is also true of Iceland.
 Although this island is relatively remote from other lands, it isless
 genetically different from the rest of Europe than Sardinia, but we
 know that it was settled relatively recently, in the ninth century, by a
 rather large number of colonists (about 20,000). The information
 on which these and many other similar statements are made can be |
 found in The History and Geography of Human Genes, listed in the
 bibliography.
     Small gene flow caused by geographic isolation and small popu-
 lation size are not the only reasons for long branches. Cultural fac-
 tors have limited the exogamy of groups such as Basques, Jews, and ~
 Eskimos, who tend to marry mostly within their own group. In the
-cases of high “endogamy,” due to geographic or cultural isolation,
 long branches are possible, especially if the group is small. A small
 population size and a reduction or total lack of marriages outside
 the group can lengthen branches in an evolutionary tree.
     Short branches have the opposite cause: large population sizes,
 which reduce drift, or elevated levels of genetic admixture. When
 marriage to another group is frequent, the original ethnic identity is
 gradually lost. Admixture is frequent when migration puts two
 groups in proximity. The migration of Africans brought to America
 as slaves has resulted in mixing between Blacks and Whites, and
 Blacks and Native Americans. In some areas mixing between all
 three groups has occurred to produce “triracial isolates.” Black peo-
 ple who have partial White ancestry are generally still classified as
 Black in North America. Black Americans have received a consid-
 erable input of genes from Whites. Studies with genetic markers
 indicate an average of 30 percent of White admixture in the Black
 population, the frequencies varying between approximately 50 per-
 cent on average in the northern United States and 10 percent in the
 South. Over the three centuries during which Blacks and Whites
 have lived together in America, 5 percent of White genes would



                                    714
 Pave to enter the Black SS  Spalaliis per"generation to reach an over-
  all level of 30 percent. —
   _ At least three major instances of gene flow occurred on the con-
  tinent of Africa itself (although there are probably many examples
  that have not been studied). In North and East Africa there must
  have been many opportunities of admixture between Blacks and
  Whites. In the north there is a preponderance of White genes while
_ Black genes are more predominant in the east (60 percent, on aver-
  age). Along the Nile, Blacks have lived in the south and Whites in
  the north for at least the last 5,000 years. Contact between Ethiopi-
  ans and Arabs occurred very early; at a later time, from about 1,000
  B.C. until fairly recently, a mixed Arab-Ethiopian empire ruled first
  from capitals in Arabia, then from Aksum in Ethiopia.
     A legitimate question, which is difficult to answer today, is
  where white skin arose. It is not impossible that it arose in Africa
  itself, maybe in the north, or both in the north and east. We do not
  know enough about the genetic determinism of skin color, except
  that there must be at least three or four different genes.
       Let us discuss, for a moment, the very short branch of Euro-
_ peans in the minimum evolution tree of figure 2B. From what we
  said before, it could have one of two explanations, or both: no drift at
  all (i.e., a very large population throughout), or an admixture. The
  first explanation is extremely unlikely. The shortness of the Euro-
  pean branch and its central location would mean that Europeans did
  not evolve but remained almost unchanged from the humans who
  lived 100,000 years ago. But our recent knowledge of the effects of
  the last glaciation suggests that the population of northern Europe
  was reduced considerably between 25,000 and 13,000 years ago, and
  after the end of the glaciation around 13,000 years ago the continent
  was resettled starting from its southern shores. This would have
  lengthened, not shortened, the European branch.
       The second explanation is that Europeans are the result of
  genetic admixture, most probably resulting from migrations from
  the two neighboring continents, Africa and Asia. A calculation of
  its genetic consequences fits exactly the data, as shown by Bowcock


                                     15
                                                                    ~   33



 et al. (1991). If we sought to determine the exact composition of—
 this mix, it appears that Europeans are about two-thirds Asian and
 one-third African. When would this mixture have occurred? The
 data suggest a rather early date, on the order of 30,000 years. How
 can we further test such an explanation? It is a challenge that the
 forthcoming data on new DNA markers may well answer.
     Arthur Gobineau, the nineteenth-century French diplomat and
 intellectual who wrote the very popular “Essay on the Inequality of
 Human Races,” which contributed to the rise of German racism,
  would die of rage and shame at this suggestion since he believed
- that Europeans (especially those from central Europe, who are              oe
                                                                              =
                                                                              —
                                                                              —

 at the genetic center of Europe) were the most genetically pure
 race, the most intellectually gifted, and the least weakened by racial
 mixing. His persuasion that race mixture is the cause of degen-
 eration became very popular, but is at odds with everything we
 know today.
    We must consider a third, artifactual reason for the central loca-
 tion and shortness of the European branch in minimum evolution
 trees. Almost all of the classical and DNA polymorphisms that we
 have studied ‘so far were first identified in blood samples from
  Europeans or their descendants in North America. Most markers
 were designed for use in the study of linkage—a technique that
  allows the chromosomal location of disease genes to be deter-
  mined. The polymorphisms that best suit this purpose have an
  equal frequency for all the alleles, and were therefore selected
  preferentially. Europeans were the source of almost all the genetic
  polymorphisms that we have studied so far, irrespective of whether
  DNA or proteins were used. Could this have artificially placed
  Europeans in the center of our trees? The answer seems to be yes,
  although a deeper analysis reveals that this explanation can be
  responsible for only one part of the phenomenon.
     It is true that the study of migrations, of which we shall speak
  more in the next chapter, has shown that an important portion of
  European genes derives from the Middle East. It is also true that the
  Huns, an East Asian population, arrived in France and Italy around
  A.D. 450. And it is true that the Turks made it to the Austrian border

                                    76
~ at the end of the eighteenth century. But the geographic distribution
 _ of genes in Eurasia assures us that these incursions had few genetic
  consequences. It is more likely that the intermediate position of
  Europe between Asia and Africa is the result of more ancient admix-
  ture than the last two.




           Mitochondrial
                      DNA and the Story of “African Eve”

  The study of mitochondrial DNA           (mtDNA) has generated much
  enthusiasm, in part because of how easy it is to work with. Mitochon-
  dria are small organelles found in the cells of all eukaryotic cells (cells
  of higher organisms, which, unlike bacteria, have a regular nucleus).
  In a single cell there are often several thousand, even tens of thou-
  sands of these organelles. Their job is to generate the cell’s energy
  supply by using oxygen to liberate the energy contained in organic
  molecules (primarily sugars). The transmission of mtDNA appears
 - purely maternal. It is possible that one or a few mitochondria from
  the sperm enter the egg at conception. This has been observed in
  mice and could in exceptional cases occur in humans but only very
  rarely, and in any case, the paternal mitochondria would be greatly
  outnumbered by the mother’. It appears that mitochondria are the
  vestiges of bacteria that entered a eukaryotic cell and became symbi-
  otic with it more than one billion years ago. Today the symbiosis
  is obligatory for both the host cell and the mitochondrion. The mito-
  chondrial genome is very short—a bit longer than 16,500 base pairs,
  which is vastly shorter than the three billion nucleotides of the
  nuclear genes. It contains genes that code for a few proteins and cer-
  tain specialized RNA molecules. The most important genes gener-
 ally vary little from one individual to another or even from one
 species to another. In most cases their variation would be incompati-
 ble with life itself. Mutations in mitochondrial DNA are, on average,
 at least twenty times more frequent than in the nuclear genes. The
  mutation rate is even higher in a short segment called the D-loop,
 which has been the object of most evolutionary studies. This elevated

                                      11
variability, although restricted to a small part of the molecule, helps _
certain evolutionary studies. In particular, claiming the likely extine-
tion of Neandertal was made possible by analysis of the D-loop. In
fossil bones, DNA is usually highly fragmented and very difficult to
study, but the presence of many copies of mtDNA per cell and the
fact that the original Neandertal remains were subject to a somewhat
lower temperature were of considerable helpin reaching this impor-
tant conclusion.
    Several laboratories, including ours, have shown that mtDNA-
gives similar, and sometimes identical, results to the autosomal
markers we have used. The most complete study of mtDNA was
done by the late Allan Wilson and his colleagues at UC Berkeley.
They were the first to sequence the D-loop of a number of individ-
uals from all over the world. Several years ago, I was surprised by a
call from Vogue magazine requesting an interview about the birth
date of “African Eve,” which scientists had just dated to 190,000
years ago. Journalists knew earlier than I about the work being
done in Wilson’s Berkeley laboratory, fifty miles from mine.
   Wilson was working on an application of the “molecular clock.” If
one can count the number of mutations that differentiate two living
individuals, and identify when their last common ancestor lived, one
can construct a “calibration curve.” Either proteins or DNA should
provide the same result. A well-known protein molecule, hemoglo-
bin, was the first used for this approach by Emil Zuckerkandl and
Linus Pauling, in the sixties. Our information about possible dates for
the last common ancestors of pairs of individuals living today is better
now than it was then. The most useful dates are linked to catastro-
phes like the fall of a meteorite near the Mexican coast around 63
million years ago. This event opened the crater of a volcano, causing a
major eruption that obscured the sun and altered the climate so dras-
tically that several groups of animals, like the dinosaurs, died, and
others, like several orders of mammals, began to prosper. Counting
the number of mutations separating, say, cattle and humans, whose
last common ancestor lived probably a bit further back than that dis-
aster, supplies one point from which to build the calibration curve
linking that geological date and the number of mutations separating a

                                   78
     Son
     +

         cow and a human. Ideally one would like to have many different
          dates and corresponding mutation counts, each pair generating a
         point by which to build the calibration curve. (Actually, one point is
          sufficient because the theoretical shape of the curve is known from
          mathematical theory, but such a procedure is obviously less reliable.)
          Knowing the number of mutations separating chimps and humans,
          and comparing that number with the number separating cows (or
          other mammals) and humans, it became possible to establish that the
          separation of chimps and humans is about five million years old. This
          date could then be used, counting the number of mutations separat-
          ing Africans from non-Africans and comparing it with the number
          separating chimps from humans, to establish the birth date of the so-
          called “African Eve.” According to that first estimate, the woman
         from whom all modern human mitochondria descend lived about
;        190,000 years ago (with a probability interval of 150,000 to 300,000
         years). As we shall see, this first attempt was not so bad.
,
.            While calling this woman Eve attracted a good deal of publicity,
7;       it was wrong and gave rise to much misinterpretation. Many scien-
     ~ tists believed—and perhaps some continue to believe—that genetic
;;        data suggest there was only a single woman at that time, whom it
         was natural to name Eve. Because these mitochondrial data, like all
         other genetic data, indicated an African origin for modern humans,
         it was possible to call her African Eve. But it is clear that many
         women lived throughout that period. Their mitochondria, however,
         did not survive. “African Eve” is simply the woman whose mito-
         chondria were the last common ancestors of all surviving mitochon-
         dria today.
             Another frequent mistake is believing that the birth date of this
         woman was simultaneous with the first migration of modern
         humans out of Africa. In fact, it must have preceded it. The origin
         of a mutant gene that is the last common ancestor of a gene or of a
         DNA segment and the separation of populations are different
         events. The second event, the actual division of populations (e.g.,
         the leaving of Africa by parties of modern humans settling in Asia)
         is later, possibly even much later. The same confusion has arisen for
         various other genes unrelated to mitochondria.

                                           79
    African Eve has caused great controversy in the scientific world.
Many scientists have criticized both the date and the interpretation
of its significance. I will not go into detail about criticisms of Allan
Wilson’s work and conclusions, since recent work from Japan con-
firms his results and provides a better estimate of the birth date of
mitochondrial “Eve.” Wilson’s studies were limited to a small frac-
tion of the mitochondrial DNA. Satoshi Horai and his colleagues
have studied the complete mtDNA sequence of three humans (an
African, a European, and a Japanese) and have compared these to —
four primate sequences (Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Orangutan, and Gib-
bon). They established “Eve's” age to be 143,000 years with a rather
narrow confidence interval. The separation between Japanese and
Europeans occurred much later, although again the branches refer
to mutations in mtDNA, not separations between populations.




                                 Adam

Should there be an Adam, to complement Eve? Yes, but we cannot
expect him to have been born at a similar time and place. The
processes of paternal and maternal transmission took place inde-
pendently, and the only thing we can expect to be common to Adam
and Eve was that they both lived in Africa, though not necessarily in
the same region.
    The key to finding Adam was the Y chromosome. Humans have
23 chromosome pairs, and as in most other living organisms they
receive one member of each pair from the father, and one from the
mother. One looks at chromosomes in a cell that is dividing, because
then all chromosomes, normally very long and thin threads, are
compacted into short rods. Each chromosome has a specific size and
shape, and members of the same pair are identical to each other,
with one exception: the sex chromosomes. These are two, called X
and Y, the X being of average size relative to the other 22 pairs, and
the Y being one of the shortest. Females have two X chromosomes,
        ad Cass anXanda Y, Itisrede le possible to distinguish the sex
        of an individual by simply looking at its chromosomes.
             Itis the Y chromosome that makes a male a male. A son receives
         an X chromosome from his mother and a Y from his father. Y chro-
         mosomes pass from male to male without end, and a mutation in
         one male will be found in all its male descendants.
             The first single-nucleotide mutation of the Y chromosome was
       ~ found in an African male. It took a laborious search. Until then, sev-
         eral laboratories had failed finding any such variation. No shortcuts
        proved useful, only brute force: we sequenced, in their entirety, seven
         DNA segments on many individuals from all over the world, before
        we found the first variant. The colleagues in my laboratory were
         not happy about having to endure this tiring procedure. I was away
         for some months, and when I returned I was in for a surprise: two
         of them, Peter Underhill and Peter Oefner, had developed a new
         method that helped them locate mutants more easily than ever
        before. In less than three years they accumulated some 150 new poly-
a
=        morphisms, with which they made a beautiful tree of Y chromosome
a
he -
       _ variation, starting with orangutans, gorillas, and chimpanzees, and
=
         showing with greater clarity than ever before that the continents were
:
_       settled by Africans in the expected order. Modern humans appear first
zc      in Africa, then in Asia, and from this big continent they settled its
        three appendices: Oceania, Europe, and America. By now, this story
        keeps repeating itself with any genetic system. As to the birth date of
        Adam, it is very similar to that of Eve: 144,000 years ago. But the sim-
te
        ilarity is superficial: both dates are affected by a statistical error of
        more than plus or minus 10,000 years. Even more important than
        proving that the origin of modern humans out of Africa holds true for
        males as well, the Y chromosome research has helped develop a new
        method of detecting mutants that can be applied to any chromosome.
        It is also proving very useful in one special branch of genetic variation
        research: that of genetic disease, that is, medical genetics.
            There-was one other coda to this Y chromosome study, much of
        the merit for which goes to Mark Seielstad, who helped translate
        this book into English while still a Ph.D. student. Y chromosome


                                            81
mutants have been found to be very highly clustered geographi-          _
cally, more than those of other chromosomes, or even of mitochon-
dria. In other words, men move very little genetically. The old
statement from Verdi’s Rigoletto, “La donna é mobile,” turns out to
be true, though not at all in that old, frivolous sense: rather in an
entirely new, genetic one. Most people find this hard to believe, as
we are used to the idea men are the ones always on the move. That
may still be true, but it’s another story. Even when the anthropolo-
gist Barry Hewlett and I measured the geographic mobility of male
and female African Pygmies, we found that the “exploration range”
of males was on average about twice that of females. But for genetic
mobility, what counts most is where people settle for marriage, and
on average it is women, more often than men, who change resi-
dence to join their spouses. In times past, and still among some
South American tribes now, when women were scarce it was usual
to kidnap them from near tribes or villages, which made women
even more mobile genetically in a more brutal way. The difference
in genetic flow of males and females can help clarify ancient migra-
tions. It introduces the possibility of duplicating observations,
though with a different meter.




                   The Importance of Stuttering

Modern molecular genetics has already produced many discover-
ies. One of the most surprising is that the human genome (and
those of almost all other species) contains large number of “repeti-
tive” DNA, that is, sequences of nucleotides that are repeated, usu-
ally in tandem. Some, called “microsatellites,” comprise very short
repetitive sequences of two to five nucleotides. The most prevalent
motif contains only two nucleotides, cytosine and adenine (C and
A), and the DNA segment is therefore CACACACACACA ...a
sort of stuttering. Errors often occur here when DNA is copied so
that the number of repetitions either increases or decreases in the


                                 82
 —— ecsiaone repeated unit is eases tic
4 When themutation rate is high, we find many different numbers of
repeats (e.g., 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25 repeats). A heterozygote will
__ have two different forms, for example 22 and 25, coming to him
   from father and mother. These repetitive sequences (microsatel-
Be lites) are numerous in the genome, and each one of them can serve
as agenetic marker.
        Many laboratories have been engaged in finding and mapping
    these repeats. The work of the French laboratory Généthon has
    been among the most productive; 5,264 isolated microsatellites
    were made available to all laboratories and have played an impor-
  _ tant role in generating the current map of human chromosomes. |
    Microsatellites seem to be randomly scattered throughout the
    genome, and on average there is one roughly every 50,000
    nucleotides. They have been most useful in locating hereditary dis-
    ease genes, functioning as presumably harmless markers. A few of
    them, however, have quite unexpectedly turned out to be the cul-
 _ prits in important genetic diseases.
        An interesting evolutionary application of microsatellites is a
    method of “absolute genetic dating.” This method allows us to date
   population separations, impossible through other genetic methods.
       We have seen that standard genetic methods estimate the last
   common ancestor's birth date, approximating only upper limits of
   population separations. Archeological dates hint at the first arrival
   of new settlers. These are often underestimates, because it is very
   unlikely to find evidence of the original settlers in the archeological
   record. The real date lies between the genetic and the archeological
   one, but the latter is likely to be closer.
      Then there is the molecular clock method: it requires reliance
   on at least one other past event whose date is precisely known. Very
   few such events exist, and the nearest and most useful for our pur-
   poses, the separation of chimpanzees and humans, can be only
   approximately dated, with a 20 percent margin of error.
       Microsatellites may provide an alternative. If we can ascertain the
   mutation rate, we can count the number of mutations separating two


                                        83
at a time. Fortunately, Généthon has made an excellent analysis of
the mutation rate and pattern on its 5.264 microsatellites. In an ear- _
lier analysis, in which the pattern of mutation was considered to be _
simply that of addition and subtraction of repeats one at a time, we
obtained a value very close to that of mitochondrial Eve. But consid-
eration of the observed mutation pattern, in particular the frequency
with which more than one repeat is added or lost, decreased  the esti-
mate of the first migration out of Africa considerably, and brought it
down to $0,000 years, very close to the archeological estimate. We
are currently accumulating further data on more microsatellites and
hope to publish a fairly accurate evaluation of this important date,
which is central in the evolution of modern humans.
    We have called this method absolute genetic dating, because it
does not rely on  paleontological    dates, which are scarce and rarely
reliable. Neither, then, does it consider the very approximate calibra-
tion curve on which the so-called molecular clock is based; even its
theoretical shape, based on a shaky hypothesis, might be challenged.
    All genetic dating methods that rely on mutation rates are inde-
pendent of paleontological dates, and in this sense they are
“absolute.” They are of course as good as the available mutation rate
estimates. Those provided for microsatellites by the Généthon
group are very good, but they have been calculated for only a very
special group of microsatellites (CACA . . .). This value is now fre-
quently used for other microsatellites, but really there is no good
evidence that this extrapolation is permissible. Application of muta-
tion rates of other genes, in particular single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (“snips”), is not satisfactory. They are extremely low, on the
order of 1 in 100 million per nucleotide per generation, or less, and


                                  84
    ~ have never been directly estimated by direct counting. The ae
      estimates are average values for poorly known genes. The only sure
    _ thing is considerable variation from nucleotide to nucleotide, and
      probably also from DNA region to DNA region. There should be
*
     some improvement of this situation once the sequencing of the
    _ whole genome (the Human Genome Project) is finished, and energy
     and machines currently tied up in the project become available.
         Accurate knowledge of mutation rates is necessary for a serious
     application of absolute dating methods to evolutionary rates. The
     ‘standard example of the power and weaknesses of the absolute dat-
    ing methods is the use of radiocarbon (!4C) by archeologists for dat-
    ing carbon-containing materials. The calculations use the rate of
ee
ee  disintegration of radiocarbon, which is very well ascertained and
   stable. The method is absolute   in the sense that it does not, in the-
      ory, require calibration from other sources of-information. But
      there is at least one other important hypothesis that must be correct
      for radiocarbon dating to be acceptable: that the amount of radio-
      carbon available to plants in the atmosphere has been constant
     through time. This basic hypothesis was checked by comparing
     radiocarbon dates with other measurements of time. Tree rings that
     provided dates for the last 10,000 years against which to compare
     clearly showed that corrections to standard radiocarbon dates were
     necessary.
         The genetic method of dating is based on the hypothesis that
      mutation rates are constant, and this may require further testing.
     ‘One kind of test could be to measure mutation rates in people living
     in very different environments.
         Science proceeds by successive approximations. The first time
     that the speed of light was measured, in 1675, there was an error of
     about 30 percent (200,000 km/sec). In 1732, a second measure gave
     313,000 km/sec. Today we know it with an error of less than a
     meter. Almost all genetic results agree that modern humans arose
     in Africa and spread to the rest of the world in the last 100,000
     years. Exact dating and routes will require further work, but new
     tools are becoming available.


                                       85
                         A Tree-free Parenthesis

  I started thinking about reconstructing phylogenetic trees as a
  means to understanding human evolution in 1951, and I have since
  grown aware of the oversimplification that they make. Mathemati- .
  cal representation is inevitably simplistic, and occasionally one has      —



  to be brutal in forcing it to suit a reality that can only be very com-
  plex. And yet, there is a beauty about trees because of the simplicity
  with which they allow you to describe a series of events, like the dif-
  ferentiation of human populations. But one must ask whether one
_ is justified in simplifying reality to the extent necessary to represent
  it as a tree. When Anthony Edwards and I started trying to fit trees
  to real data, I was aware of an alternative method, principal compo-
  nents analysis, that allows for a more faithful description of the
  data, and is always worth trying jointly with trees. It does not recon-
  struct a simple history like a tree does, and in fact it does not give 4
  history at all, but it represents the whole set of data in a very simple
  graphical way, and reveals latent patterns, if they exist, in the mass
  of apparent nonsense that the original data seem to be at the begin-
  ning. It was therefore convenient to use both methods side by side.
      Principal components analysis had been invented in the thirties,
  but had been applied only a few times, because of the staggering
  amount of arithmetical work it requires. Before the invention of
  computers, very few scientists were sufficiently determined to carry
  out such an enormous number of computations. To use a concise
  description very unfair to the non-mathematical reader, it simplifies
  the “data matrix,” formed by the frequencies of the various alleles
  of many genes, observed in many populations, by calculating the
  eigenvectors of a few of its leading eigenvalues. It is difficult to
  explain it to non-mathematicians,       other than by saying that it
  reduces the number of dimensions with which one can represent
  the data, with a minimum loss of information.
      A classical application of principal components analysis shows
  how one can use distances between all possible pairs of cities of, say,
  Europe by car, train, or plane, in kilometers or in duration of tran-
  sit, or all of them together, to draw a map in two dimensions that
         automatically reconstructs the geography of European cities with
       very good approximation. Remembering that there is a strong cor-
         relation between genetic distances and geographic distances it is
         therefore not at all surprising that by applying principal compo-
          nents to the genetic distances between all possible pairs of world
          populations, one can reconstruct a map of the world. There is
          inevitably some distortion, because genetic distances cannot be
          perfectly proportional to geographic distances by sea and land.
4         Crossing oceans has been more difficult than crossing even vast
,         tracts of land, at least until transoceanic navigation became easy,
4
          and the data we use reflect movements of indigenous peoples
:         before that time.
F             When Anthony Edwards and I were calculating the first tree, we
          also produced the first principal component map of the same data.
{         At the time, 1962, there were no packaged computer programs for
S
he’
          doing the work. Anthony actually reinvented principal components
          analysis and I felt sorry to have to tell him I knew that it had already
          been invented. The two methods, trees and components analysis,

Lien
          are complementary. The first is more informative on history, and
          the second on geography. Using both at the same time on the same
Tv
          data can provide a synthesis of the two approaches.
             In the next chapter we will use principal components again for a
          different, very specific geographic application. It may be useful to
          show here how one can represent data from 42 populations from all
          over the world for over 100 genes, using just two or three dimensions.
          Paolo Menozzi, Alberto Piazza, and I collected data from a survey of
          at most 100,000 gene frequencies of protein polymorphisms in about
          2,000 world populations, the basis for an analysis that appeared in
          The History and Geography of Human Genes. The 2,000 populations
          were clustered in 42 groups, using criteria of geographic, ethnic, and
          linguistic similarity for pooling them. These 42 populations will be
          used for generating a tree comparable to that of languages on
          page 144. Here we show in figure 3 the analysis by a method very
         similar to principal components, called multidimensional scaling,
         which improves somewhat the efficiency of information recovery. We
          reduce the more than 100 genes to just two dimensions or axes,

                                             87
which still recover more than 50 percent of the total information—
supplied by the 100 genes. The vertical axis is the first and more
important of the two. Like the tree, it separates Africans from the
rest of the world. This is in accordance with the first split of practi-   _
cally all trees, which draws the same separation. The graph shows
that the six African populations are scattered more widely than are
all other thirty-six populations from the rest of the world, indicating
they have been isolated more than all other populations. But they
still form a cluster, from Mbuti Pygmies at the top to the East
Africans who are closest to the rest of the world populations. This
may mean that some of the Africans who went first to Asia were East
Africans, but it may also mean that there has been considerable gene
flow in later times between East Africans and Arabs. The geographic
vicinity of these two regions agrees with both explanations, and it
is difficult to weight them on the basis of these data alone. One-
seventh of the African population, Berbers from North Africa, falls
into the Eurasian cluster. Again there is the problem of distinguish-
ing between the hypothesis that Berbers originate from an admix-
ture of North Africans with Europeans (and also with people from
the Middle East), and a second one that Berbers are direct descen-
dants of the North Africans, a fraction of whom settled Europe. The
two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive and might both be true.
Hopefully DNA markers will give some clue for choosing between
these hypotheses, and other possible ones, or indicating their rela-
tive roles if they all share some part of the truth. Incidentally, the
fact that Berbers fall in the Eurasian cluster should not be taken as
sufficient evidence for classifying them as having originated in Eur-
asia. More data might give a better picture, and lead us to a different
conclusion. It seems almost certain that every population is made of
genotypes that originated in more than one continent. We will even-
tually be able to reconstruct the origins of our genes in terms of a
long and complex history.
     The more disparate scatter of African populations is expected,
as most of the history of modern humans took place in Africa.
There was, thus, more time for differentiation into more diverse
groups. We can visualize our evolution as having taken place in very
                                                                    @ Mbuti




                                                                               & West African



          gw Africa   |
      4 Europe
                                     San (Bushmen) P|
       X Asia, excl. S.E.
       * S.E. Asia
      -@ Oceania
          @ America
                                                              @ East African




                            Basque ~
                                          Greek ¢ Mongol Tungus                                           -
                                                                                                              M
                                   Danish ~             Berber
                                              British ,
                                                             Near Eastern                               Indonesian
:                            relicx                iranian                          Mon Khmer
North Ameri                       RAIL Se
  :      Sear                North Turkic® poh Ps
                                                es
                               :                           n
                  X Chukchi            Italian a      X Tike Fe                     * South Chinese
                                                         ibetan 4 Sardinian
                                                         >                          @ Polynesian
      a                                                                                Filipino’      —_@ Micronesian
Sou        eee            ei dice                        X |Japanese           ‘.     Thai +            @ Melanesian
    @NaDene               Central American                                     New Guinean
                                                                     @ Australian




Figure 3. A synthetic view of 42 world populations, based on the genetic distances
among them (see HGHG). The two-dimensional graph was built by multidimen-
sional scaling, a variant of principal components analysis, and represents, with min-
imal loss of information, distances between pairs of objects (42 human populations
in this case), calculated on the basis of many characters (110 genes). Populations
are indicated by different symbols in order to distinguish the continents and sub-
continents of origin. The only continents that are not differentiated by this analysis
are Europe and Asia; an additional third dimension perpendicular to the first
two would show that Europe is in a different plane compared to the rest of the
world and differs less (on average) from Asia than the other two continents (Oce-
ania and America), which were settled by migrants from Asia. (Computations by
Dr. Eric Minch, while he was at Stanford University, using gene frequencies given
in Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994)
many successive steps, every step bringing a small group of people, ©
say from East Africa to North Africa, and others to southwestern
Asia. Both groups grew in numbers and continued expanding. Those
in southwestern Asia may have sent propagules north and east, and        e


perhaps back toward East Africa. Further steps brought descen-
dants from these groups to other parts of Asia, eventually reaching
all the inhabitable world.
    Figure 3 shows clearly that Asia was settled from Africa, while
Oceania, Europe, and America were settled from Asia. For includ-
ing Europe we need a little help from a third axis, which is not
shown here. Illustrated in the lower left quadrant of the graph is the
expansion from Asia to America, which took place from northeast-
ern Asia via the Bering Strait (then not a sea tract but a land strip,
Beringia). In the lower right quadrant, Southeast Asia appears as a
propagule from mainland Asia; and, from it, Oceania was settled.
We know that the settlement of Oceania happened by many succes-
sive expansions, the last of which is Polynesian, and is reasonably
dated to the last 6,000 years.
    Europe was also settled largely from Asia, as well as from Africa,
as we have already mentioned, but the first two axes do not distin-
guish Europe and Asia. This is not too surprising, as there is no
clear boundary between the two continents; the Urals do not con-
stitute a formidable barrier. Eurasia can be viewed as a single conti-
nent. Nevertheless, the two continents are genetically distinct, as
can be shown by adding a third axis to the graph. The third axis,
perpendicular to the first two (not represented in our figure), shows
Europe above Asia, on a plane higher than all other continents. But
because of the geographic continuity with Asia, its genetic distance
from Asia may be a little smaller than that from Oceania or Amer-
ica. The numerical information given in chapter 2 is not sufficient
for making this statement, but the original data are much more
informative, though inevitably more complicated.
   In conclusion, history, given by trees, and geography, by principal
components or multidimensional scaling, substantially agree. The
simplest way to summarize both is to describe human evolution as
having begun in Africa, where many groups became differentiated

                                  90
           <\ ale    ale
       from one another over a fairly long time. African groups located
  ' closely to other continents expanded to them. The first and major
 expansion by African groups was from East Africa to Asia, probably
 Z _ via Suez and the Red Sea, perhaps continuing along the southern
     coast of southern Asia, but probably extending south also through the
___ interior of Asia. Northeastern Asia was probably reached from the
   coast of Southeast Asia and from Central Asia. From Southeast Asia
   expansion to nearby New Guinea and Australia was natural and ear-
     lier than that to America. Expansion to Europe probably came from
       the east, west, and center, and was also relatively late. These state-
  _     ments are, for the time being, approximate and uncertain, because
        the genetic data collected so far are very limited. But it seems very
        likely that they can be made more precise in a fairly short time,
        because analysis of DNA, with methods already available or new ones
        in sight, provides many of these answers.




oe
ee
ea
Rie
oo
Se
Oe
,




ee
Beoo




                                          91
