                             Preface




This book surveys the research on human evolution from the many
different fields of study that contribute to our knowledge. It is a his-
tory of the last hundred thousand years, relying on archeology,
genetics, and linguistics. Happily, these three disciplines are now gen-
erating many new data and insights. All of them can be expected to
converge toward a common story, and behind them must lie a single
history. Singly, each approach has many lacunae, but hopefully their
synthesis can help to fill the gaps. Other sciences—cultural anthro-
pology, demography, economy, ecology, sociology—are joining in
the effort, and are justly becoming pillars of interpretation.
    It would be impossible to communicate the conclusions about
human history and the causes of human evolution if one had to rely
on the jargons of such diverse disciplines. Scientific terminology
insures precision and increases the speed of communication among
specialists, but it creates a barrier between them and the general
public. I have tried to restrict my use of jargon to a minimum, and I
have also attempted to explain terms and methods unknown to the


                                  Vil
                                                                :   a    -
general public. The response to foreign editions of this                (in.

French, Italian, Spanish, and German) indicates that most readers
have no difficulty in following the science presented here, and can 4
appreciate multidisciplinarity.
    To some, history (including evolution) is not a science, because
its results cannot be replicated and thus cannot be tested by the
experimental method. But studying the same phenomenon from
many different angles, from many disciplines, each of which sup-               .
plies independent facts, has the value of largely independent repe-
tition. This makes the multidisciplinary approach indispensable.               |
     An important conclusion that emerges from this work is that               |
                                                                               |
human genetic evolution has been heavily affected by technological
innovations and by cultural change, in general. Culture, meaning
the accumulation of knowledge over generations, is the main differ-
ence between humans and other animals (the difference is one of
degree, because animals, too, learn during their lives and transmit
knowledge to future generations). Cultural transmission is thus an
important object of study, one that has been dramatically neglected.
Chapter 6 is devoted to it.
    The subject of this book has significant implications for important
social problems. It explains, among other things, why racism is falla-
cious. Genetics is instrumental in shaping us, but so, too, are the cul-
tural, social, and physical environments in which we live. The main
genetic differences are between individuals and not between popula-
tions, or so-called “races.” Differences of genetic origin among the
latter are not only small (rapidly becoming even smaller with the
recent acceleration of transportation, and both migratory and cul-
tural exchange) but also superficial, attributable mostly to responses
to the different climates in which we live. Moreover, there are serious
difficulties in distinguishing between genetic and cultural differ-
ences, between nature and nurture.
    My greatest hope is that the reader experiences the same intel-
lectual pleasure I have with each expected and unexpected finding,
uncovering so many points of agreement among disciplines that
have been kept carefully separate for so long.


                                  Vill
                  Acknowledgments




This book owes much to many people. It was conceived when I was
 invited in 1981 and 1989 to give a series of lectures at the Collége
 de France. The “Collége” is a wonderful institution created by
 Francis I to counteract the arrogance and backwardness of the Sor-
 bonne, and to exemplify a center of excellence. Jacques Ruffié’s
 arrangements motivated me to write my lectures, and gave me the
 wonderful chance to twice spend a month in Paris in the spring,
 delivering them. In 1994, Odile Jacob expressed interest in publish-
 ing the lectures in a new series of books based on courses at the
 Collége, and so I rewrote my lectures from scratch for the third
 time. The Italian edition was a fourth opportunity. My former stu-
 dent Mark Seielstad was not deterred by significant differences
 between the French and the Italian editions, but used them both in
 order to improve the English translation, which he completed while
 in the throes of preparing his Ph.D. dissertation at Harvard. The
 need to revise the English edition was also a new and irresistible
 temptation for me to update and modify the book again. This fifth
version has been edited with great skill and attention to clarity,
rigor, and accur             acy
                      by Ethan  Nosowsky. Lam alsograteful toPhyllis oe
eka for her help in preparing the manuscript and to Brian
Blanchfield for ushering it to press.
     Collaboration with experts from other fields is essential when
taking a multidisciplinary approach. I am indebted to many friends
and colleagues who, over the last fifty years, have helped lay the
foundation for the scientific work described in this book. As an
expression of gratitude, I'd like to summarize the major collabora-
tions of these many decades.
     I began as a geneticist researching bacteria in the forties. In the
fifties, when I was teaching part-time in the University of Parma,
Italy, I gradually shifted focus to human population genetics. My
main research at Parma was the study of the role of chance in evolu-
tion, a subject that was neglected at the time. The opportunity to
give a clear, quantitative answer to the problem was offered by the .
demographic records of the last three centuries or more in a region
where the population density varied enormously, very high in the
fertile plains, very low in the mountains. Sizes of villages and migra-
tion among them could be estimated from the available parish
books. When there are few parents to pass genes from one genera-
tion to the next, chance will cause important fluctuations in the fre-
quencies of types of genes found in different villages. The effect of
chance in evolution is called “drift,” a somewhat misleading name,
because the word practically has the opposite meaning in other sci-
ences. This research made it possible to predict the variation
between villages due to drift on the basis of their demography, and
compare it with local genetic variation. This work and a parallel
study of consanguinity data from bishopric archives would not have
been possible without the advice, information, and help of Antonio
Moroni, a Catholic priest, then my student and now professor of
ecology at Parma, and Franco Conterio, then postdoctoral fellow
and now professor of Anthropology at Parma.
    In the sixties Imoved to the University of Pavia, Italy, and started
generating methods for reconstructing evolutionary trees of human
genetic data, in collaboration with Anthony Edwards, now at Gonville

                                   X
       aGod Caiusraliege of Ceapias Afterward I researched African
        _ Pygmies in many expeditions between 1976 and 1985. This work
    g
      y   profited greatly from my collaboration with Marcello Siniscalco, then
        professor at Leyden, as well aswith anthropologists Colin Turnbull,
        now, unfortunately, deceased, and Barry Hewlett, now a professor
        in Vancouver, Washington. Our work was the subject of a book I
      ~ edited, published in 1986, called African Pygmies.
            It soon became clear that human population genetics research,
        touching as it does on many disciplines, could prosper only with the
        help of scientists from other disciplines. I moved to Stanford in
       1971 and collaborated with archeologist Albert Ammerman, now at
     ~ Colgate University, on the problem of whether, in the expansion of
        Neolithic agriculture from the Middle East to Europe, the farming
      _ technique or the farmers themselves diffused northwest from the
        place of origin. The study of genetic geography was begun in 1977
        with the collaboration of Paolo Menozzi and Alberto Piazza, now
        professors of ecology at Parma and of human genetics at Turin
        respectively, with the purpose of offering a solution to that prob-
        lem, and we provided a key to the answer. Eventually this approach
        was extended to the rest of the world and led to the publication of
        our History and Geography of Human Genes in 1994 with Prince-
        ton University Press. It is the source for the majority of claims made
        in the first five chapters of this book, and is referred to by the
;
>      _acronym HGHG.
           In the seventies and early bai I dedicated much time to
        the study of cultural evolution, mostly as a response to the personal
4       and profound interest I developed after observing African Pygmies.
r
       Researching cultural transmission and evolution, I gainfully collab-
       orated with Marcus Feldman, professor of biology at Stanford.
       Applications to linguistic evolution were made possible thanks to
       exchanges with linguists from the Bay Area: Bill Wang, from Berke-
       ley, Joseph Greenberg and Merritt Ruhlen at Stanford.
           At the end of the seventies and beginning of the eighties, with
       the seminal work of Y. W. Kan, David Botstein, Ronald Davis, Mark
       Skolnick, and Ray White, the promise of chemical analysis of
       DNA—the material of heredity—started to become reality. Until

|                                         XI
Rein oon te ee                                                  ; =
possible, andeventually mucheasier,tostudy variation on DNA
   Mitochondrial DNA, a small organ that ispresent inevery cell. 3
and transmitted to the progeny by the mother, was one of the first _ "
objects of study. We began this work with Doug Wallace and his stu-
dents. In the hands of the late Allan Wilson of Berkeley, it gave the
first important evidence that modern humans appeared in Africa
and from there spread to the rest of the world. Now the purposes of
our research are also served by studying Y chromosomes, found only
in males and transmitted from father to son. I was blessed by a -
stroke of good luck when Peter Underhill of my laboratory    and Peter
Oefner of Ron Davis’ laboratory together developed a superior
technique of detecting DNA variation. The new genealogy of Y
chromosome variants they developed will enormously aid our
understanding of the history of the evolution of modem humans.
This research is now progressing rapidly.
    The results already at hand promise to generate a clear picture of
                                                                         ie
                                                                         7*
                                                                          B
                                                                          A




the expansions and migrations out of Africa that made modem
humans look the way they do today. It would seem that these events
were much more recent than has been thought. It is impossible to
generate much diversity in such a short period of time, which con-
vinces us once and for all that the superficial racial differences we
perceive between people from different continents are just that.




                                 Xll
Genes, Peoples and Languages
                                    CHAPTER 1


                      Genes and History




                           The Pride of an Emperor

__ Dante Alighieri’s reputation as the grand master of Italian literature
   has eclipsed all the Italian poets and writers who followed him.
 Nevertheless, Dante was not the only great Italian poet. There
     were others, such as Petrarch, Ariosto, and Leopardi. The latter is
     perhaps the least well-known outside Italy, although he was not
     only a talented poet but also a remarkable philosopher.
        I recently reread his play Copernicus, which I still find relevant
     and insightful. The characters include the Sun, the First and Last
     Hours of the Day, and Copernicus. In the opening scene, the Sun con-
     fides to the First Hour that he is tired of revolving around the Earth
     each day, and demands that the Earth shoulder some of the burden.
     The First Hour, alarmed by this prospect, points out that the Sun’s
     retirement would create havoc. But the Sun is adamant and insists on
     informing Earth’s philosophers of the impending change since he
     believes they can convince humans of anything—good or. bad. By
     the second scene, the Sun has delivered on his threat. Copemicus,

                                       3

eT
- surprised by the Sun’s failure to rise, sets about investigating the cause.
  His search quickly ends when he and the Last Hour are summoned —
  to hear the Sun’s proposal: the Earth must renounce her position at
 the center of the Universe and instead revolve around the Sun. Coper-
 nicus notes that even philosophers would have difficulty convincing
 the Earth of that. Moreover, the Earth and her inhabitants have
 grown accustomed to their position at the center of the Universe and
 have developed the “pride of an emperor.” A change of such magni-
 tude would have not only physical but also social and philosophical
 consequences. The most basic assumptions about human life would
 be overturned. But the Sun is insistent that life will go on, that all the
 barons, dukes, and emperors will continue to believe in their impor- .
 tance, and that their power won't be weakened in the least. Copemi-
 cus offers further objections: a galactic revolution could begin—the
 other planets may assert that they want the same rights to centrality as
 the Earth had. Even the stars would protest. In the end, the Sun might
 lose all importance and be forced to find another orbit. But the Sun
 desires only rest and counters Copernicus’s final fear—that he will be
 burned as a heretic—by telling him he can avoid such a fate by dedi-
 cating his book to the Pope.
     In writing about Copernicus, Leopardi had the benefit of living
 several centuries after him. He knew what had happened to Coper-
 nicus, Giordano Bruno, and Galileo. But we do not have Leopardi’s
 advantage when considering the scientific issues of our day. Any
 current theories may be modified or even destroyed at any moment.
 In fact, science progresses because every hypothesis can be con-
 firmed or rejected by others. The great number of conditionals we
 use in our scientific prose underscore this truth. While correcting
 the translation of one of my books, I was terrified to see that all my
 conditionals had been changed to indicatives—my safeguards had
 been eliminated. When we write papers for scientific journals, we
 know that many statements cannot be supported in their entirety.
 This seems strange to the public: isn’t science infallible? In the end,
 only religion claims to deliver certainty. In other words, faith alone
 is immune from doubt, although few believers seem troubled by
 the fact that each religion offers different answers. Mathematics

                                      4
    may be the only exception in the sciences that leaves no room for
    __ skepticism. But, if mathematical results are exact as no empirical law
      could ever be, philosophers have discovered they are not absolutely
      novel—instead, they are tautological.



  Copernicus also reminded me of our attitudes about race and
  racism. Each population believes that it is the best in the world.
_ With few exceptions, people love the microcosm into which they
     _are born and don’t want to leave it. For Whites, the greatest civiliza-
_     tion is European; the best race is White (French in France and En-
      glish in England). But what do the Chinese think? And the
      Japanese? Wouldn’t most of today’s recent immigrants return to
     their country if they could find a decent way of life there?
           It is also true, as Leopardi observed, that the more things change,
      the more they stay the same. Noble or economically powerful fami-
      lies come and go—there is an increasingly rapid turnover of power—
      but power structures change very little. The Roman Empire lasted
      longer than many others in Europe, but it spanned only five cen-
      turies. It was similar in size to the Inca Empire, which lasted a little
      more than a century. Before the Roman Empire, several maritime
     ‘powers—the Greeks, Phoenicians, and Carthaginians—colonized the
      Mediterranean coast. At the same time, the European interior saw
      Celtic princes establish control over most of Europe. During the sec-
      ond half of the first millennium B.c., the Celtic and maritime fief-
      doms were each united by commercial, linguistic, and cultural ties,
      but were politically fragmented.
          Ultimately, they would all fall to the Romans. The Romans built
      the first politically united culture in Europe, but it eventually fell
      to “barbarian” invaders from the East. The barbarians flourished,
      and only the eastern part of the Roman Empire—the Byzantine
      Empire—was to survive into the Middle Ages. In the west, Charle-
    ~ magne founded the Holy Roman Empire in A.D. 800, the culmina-
      tion of Frankish political development. France, Germany, and parts
      of Italy and Spain were briefly reunited. After A.D. 1000, Frankish
      power passed to Germany and, in part, to the Pope, although the

                                         5
 Papacy and the Empire were often in conflict. The Holy Roman
 Empire ceased to have any political importance by the fourteenth
 century, although Austrian emperors continued to take the title of
 Holy Roman Emperor until 1806. Several European states were
 formed or consolidated between 1000 and 1500. Although wars
 among them were frequent, none was able to conquer much of
 Europe before Napoleon. With the development of seaworthy
 ships, the armies and navies of Europeans attempted to extend
 their hegemony to the rest of the world, competing for national
 riches on other continents. The Portuguese, Spanish, English,
 Dutch, French, and Russians established overseas empires which
 would endure into the twentieth century, but in all of European his-
 tory, not a single empire has lasted for more than five centuries.
 Napoleon rapidly conquered continental Europe, but his rule
 lasted for fewer than ten years.
     The Chinese Empire began in the third century B.c. and
 endured many vicissitudes under myriad dynasties, none of which
 lasted for more than four centuries. After several difficult periods,
 China fell to the Mongols in the thirteenth century. One hundred
 years later, the Ming restored Chinese dominance for three cen-
 turies. Then another foreign dynasty, the Qing, ruled for several
 centuries into the twentieth. The same pattern is found on every
 continent or subcontinent.
     National pride is always more fervent in successful times. When a
 people feels strong, it is easier to say, “We are the best.” However,
é power can have rather unusual origins. The wise decisions and
  shrewd political acts of a few leaders or small groups often produce
 enduring states. Even cruel regimes can sometimes succeed in intro-
 ducing prosperous periods. The rise to political power frequently
 requires violence, which is not always physical. Favorable external
 circumstances can also help maintain stability, if only temporarily.
 Politicians who wield their power responsibly are difficult to replace
 with equally capable successors. During happy and prosperous years,
 people can convince themselves that their success is due to their
 excellent qualities, the intrinsic characteristics of their “race” that
 make them great. The illusion of immortality ignores all the lessons
      “ofhistory. The self-critic is rare and tends to be absent or has no lis-
       teners when things are going well.
           Perhaps Claude Lévi-Strauss most succinctly defined racism as
       the belief that one race (usually, though not always, one’s own) is
      biologically superior—that superior genes, chromosomes, DNA
       put it at an advantage over all others. This is America’s situation
       now. It is no coincidence that you must first dial the number one
%
       when calling the United States from abroad.
           At any particular moment, a single people may be dominant
bn
>
       despite the many countries that have been before, or will be soon. Of
       course, it is not necessary to be superior to be convinced that one
       is. Even a limited success can demonstrate power to others. Many
       believe such dominance is determined by biology.




                             Other Sources of Racism

     ' Almost any society can find a good reason to consider itself predom-
      inant, at least in a particular activity. A simple claim to competence
      in any sphere—be it painting, football, chess, or cooking—is often
      sufficient to imbue a people with exaggerated importance.
          One’s daily routine, which is subject to both individual and cul-
      tural influences, is filled with superficial comparison of one’s own
      habits with foreign, often significantly different, habits. Even if we
      do not know the sources of these differences, the simple fact that
      they exist can be enough to inspire fear or hatred. Human nature
       does not welcome change, even when we're dissatisfied with things
       as they are. Perhaps this devotion to habit and fear of melioration
      encourage a conservatism that could lead to racism.
           There are unquestionable differences among peoples and na-
      tions. Language, skin color, tastes (especially in food), and greet-
      ing all differ among cultures and lead us to believe that others
      are essentially not like us. We typically conclude that our ways are
      the best, and too bad for the others. To the Greeks, all those who
      did not speak Greek were barbarians. Of course, when a person is

                                          7
unsatisfied with life in his home country and migrates, he might _
more easily tolerate uncertainties and strange living conditions in
another region or continent. He might even accept the necessity of
learning new things. But in general, he prefers the cocoon in which
he was born, terrified of discarding what is familiar.
    Many other factors nourish racist sentiments. One of the most
important is the desire to project one’s unhappiness onto another.
Everyone knows that self-alienation in moder society is often a very
serious cause of irritation and angst. These feelings can arise from the
fear of unemployment, being forced to perform inhumane work, the
reality and experience of poverty and injustice, and the feeling of
powerlessness which often results from the jealous observation that
vast wealth is possible only for the very few. Everyone, even those who
feel victimized by their superiors, can assume authority over those
lower on the social ladder. The poor can always find somebody poorer.
   Because of all these factors, racism is widespread. It is less
apparent during times of peace and civil order. But hostilities about
mass immigration from poor countries exacerbate it.




              Is There a Scientific Basis for Racism?

Racism should be condemned because its effects are pernicious. It is _
criticized by virtually every modern religion and ethical system.
However, can we exclude the possibility that a superior race exists, or
that socially important, inherited differences between the races can
be found? There are certain obvious differences between human
groups for traits that depend to some extent on genes: skin color, eye
shape, hair type, facial form, and body shape. Will these and other
traits provide a scientific justification for racism? Do other differ-
ences exist that might?
     We must first define the nature of the variation to be studied.
Doing so helps us to understand what we mean by race, to decide
which groups we should examine and what racial differences may
tell us.
                         Biological and Cultural Variation

      We must note that most people do not distinguish between biologi-
      cal and cultural heredity. It is often difficult to recognize which
      is which. Sometimes the cause of racial difference is biological
      (in which case we call it genetic, meaning that it comes with your
__     DNA); sometimes it is behavioral, leamed from someone else
       (these are cultural causes); and sometimes both factors are involved.
       Genetically determined traits are very stable over time, unlike
     socially determined or learned behavior, which can change very
     rapidly. As I said above, there are clear biological differences
 __  between populations in the visual characteristics that we use to clas-
____ sify the races. If these genetic differences were found to be gen-
     uinely important and could support the sense of superiority that one
      people can have over another, then racism is justified—at least
       formally. I find this genetic or biological definition of racism more
       satisfactory than others. Some would extend the domain of racist
       judgments to include any difference between groups, even the
     ~ most superficial cultural characteristics. The only advantage of this
       broader definition is that it sidesteps the difficulty of determining
       whether certain traits have a genetic component or not. But it does
      not seem appropriate to speak of racism when one person resents
      another's loud voice, noisy eating habits, taste in dress, or difficulties
      with correct pronunciation. This type of  intolerance, which is rather
      common in certain countries or social classes, seems much easier to
      correct and control through education than is true racism.




                           Visible and Hidden Variation

      The racial differences that impressed our ancestors and that con-
      tinue to bother many people today include skin color, eye shape,
      hair type, body and facial form—in short, the traits that often allow
      us to determine a person’s origin in a single glance. Ignoring admix-
      ture, it is fairly easy to recognize a European, an African, and an

                                          9
Asian, to mention those standard types with which we are most
familiar. Many of these characteristics—almost homogeneous on a
particular continent—give us the impression that “pure” races exist,
and that the differences between them are pronounced. These
traits are at least partly genetically determined. Skin color and body
size are less subject to genetic influence since they are also affected
by exposure to the sun and diet, but there is always a hereditary
component that can be quite important.
   These characteristics influence us a lot, because we recognize
them easily. What causes them? It is almost certain they evolved in
the most recent period of human evolution, when “modern” humans,
or early humans practically undistinguishable from ourselves, first
appeared in Africa, grew in numbers, and began to expand to the
other continents. Evidence and details will be discussed later. What
interests us here is that this diaspora of Africans to the rest of the
world exposed them to a great variety of environments: from hot
and humid or hot and dry environments (to which they were
already accustomed) to temperate and cold ones, including the
coldest ones of the world, as in Siberia. We can go ——         some of
the steps that this entailed.
    1. Exposure to a new environment inevitably causes an adapta-
tion to it. In the 50,000-100,000 years since the African diaspora,
there has been an opportunity for substantial adaptation, both cul-
tural and biological. We can see traces of the latter in skin color and
in size and shape of the nose, eyes, head, and body. One can say that
each ethnic group has been genetically engineered under the influ-
ence of the environments where it settled. Black skin color protects
those who live near the equator from burning under the sun’s ultra-
violet radiation, which can also lead to deadly skin cancers. The
dairy-poor diet of European farmers, based almost entirely on cere-
als that lack ready-made vitamin D, might have left them vulnerable
to rickets (our milk still has to be enriched with this vitamin). But
they were able to survive at the higher latitudes to which they
migrated from the Middle East because the essential vitamin can be
produced, with the aid of sunlight, from precursor molecules found
in cereals. For this Europeans have developed the whiteness of their
 Se                 ea                   e
 _ skin, which the sun’s ultraviolet radiation can penetrate to transform
_ these precursors into vitamin D. It is not without reason that Euro-
     peans have, on average, whiter skin the further north they are born.
        _ The size and shape of the body are adapted to temperature and
      humidity. In hot and humid climates, like tropical forests, it is
      advantageous to be short since there is greater surface area for the
      evaporation of sweat compared to the body's volume. A smaller
      body also uses less energy and produces less heat. Frizzy hair allows
      sweat to remain on the scalp longer and results in greater cooling.
      With these adaptations, the risk of overheating in tropical climates
ee
oS
ne
     _is diminished. Populations living in tropical forests generally are
      short, Pygmies being the extreme example. The face and bodyof
      the Mongols, on the other hand, result from adaptations to the bit-
      ter cold of Siberia. The body, and particularly the head, tends to be
      round, increasing body volume. The evaporative surface area of the
      skin is thus reduced relative to body volume, and less heat is lost.
      The nose is small and less likely to freeze, and the nostrils are nar-
  row, warming the air before it reaches the lungs. Eyes are protected
 ’ from the cold Siberian air by fatty folds of skin. These eyes are often
      considered beautiful, and Charles Darwin wondered if racial differ-
      ences might not result from the particular tastes of individuals. He
      called the idea that mates were chosen for their attractive quality
      “sexual selection.” It is very likely that some characteristics undergo
      sexual selection—eye color and shape, for example. But the shape
     of Asian eyes is not appreciated only in Asia. If it is admired else-
     where, why is it not found in other parts of the world? Of course it is
     also characteristic of the Bushmen of southern Africa, and other
     Africans have slanted eyes. It probably diffused by sexual selection
     from northeastern Asia to Southeast Asia, where it is not at all cold.
     It is also possible that the trait may have originated more than once
     in the course of human evolution. If it first appears that climatic
     factors were most important in the creation of racial differences, we
     should not neglect sexual selection as a possible side explanation.
      Unfortunately, the genetic bases for these adaptations are not
     known; each of these traits is very complex. Considerable local vari-
     ation in tastes further complicates the matter.

                                        11
   2. There is little climatic variation in the area where a particular
population lives, but there are significant variations between the cli-
mates of the Earth. Therefore, adaptive reactions to climate must
generate groups that are genetically homogeneous in an area that is
climatically homogeneous, and groups that are very different in
areas with different climates.                     i
    We could ask if sufficient time has passed since the settling of
the continents to produce these biological adaptations. The selec-_
tion intensity has been very strong, so the answer is probably yes.
We could note in this regard that the Ashkenazi Jews who have
lived in central and eastern Europe for at least 2,000 years have
much lighter skin than the Sephardi Jews who have lived on the
Mediterranean perimeter for at least the same length of time. This
could be an example of natural selection, but it might also result
from genetic exchange with neighboring populations. Some avail-
able genetic information favors the second interpretation, but bet-
ter genetic data are desirable before we can exclude the influence
of natural selection.
   3. Adaptations to climate primarily affect surface characteris-
tics. The interface between the interior and exterior plays the
biggest part in the exchange of heat from the interior to the exterior
and vice versa. A simple metaphor can help explain this statement:
if you want to decrease the cost of heating your house in the winter,
or cooling it in the summer, you must increase the house’s insula-
tion so that the thermal flow between the inside and outside is
minimal. Thus, body surface has been largely modified to adapt dif-
ferent people to different environments.
    4. We can see only the body’s surface, as affected by climate,
which distinguishes one relatively homogeneous population from
another. We are therefore misled into thinking that races are “pure”
(meaning homogeneous) and very different, one from the other. It
is difficult to find another reason to explain the enthusiasm of nine-
teenth-century philosophers and political scientists like Gobineau
and his followers for maintaining “racial purity.” These men were
convinced that the success of whites was due to their racial
supremacy. Because only visible traits could be studied then,itwas

                                  12
  not absurd to imagine that pure races existed. But today we know
  that they do not, and that they are practically impossible to create.
  To achieve even partial “purity” (that is, a genetic homogeneity that
  is never achieved spontaneously in populations of higher animals)
 would require at least twenty generations of “inbreeding” (e.g., by
   brother-sister or parent-children matings repeated many times).
   Such inbreeding would have severe consequences for the health
   and fertility of the children, and we can be sure that such an
   extreme inbreeding process has never been attempted in our his-
   tory, with a few minor and partial exceptions.
    ' In more recent times, the careful genetic study of hidden varia-
   tion, unrelated to climate, has confirmed that homogeneous races
   do not exist. It is not only true that racial purity does not exist in
  ‘nature: it is entirely unachievable, and would not be desirable. It is
   true, however, that “cloning,” which is now a reality in animals not
   very remote from us, can generate “pure” races. Identical twins are
   examples of living human clones. But creating human races artifi-
 _cially by cloning would have potentially very ee                conse-
   quences, both biologically and socially.
       We shall also see that the variation between races, abana by
   their continent of origin or other criteria, is statistically small
   despite the characteristics that influence our perception that races
   are different and pure. That perception is truly superficial—being
   limited to the body surface, which is determined by climate. Most
  likely only a small bunch of genes are responsible, and little signifi-
   cance is attached to them, especially since we are progressively
. developing a totally artificial climate.




               Hidden Variation: Genetic Polymorphisms

 The ABO blood group was the first example of an invisible and com-
 pletely hereditary trait. Discovered at the beginning of the century,
 it has been the subject of numerous studies, because the matching
 of blood types is essential for successful blood transfusions. There

                                    Be
are three major forms of the gene (also called “alleles”): A, B, and O, :
and they are strictly hereditary. An individual can have one of four
possible blood types: O, A, B, and AB.
    Although it is not truly essential for the understanding of what
follows, it is difficult to resist the opportunity of mentioning at this
point a basic rule of inheritance: each of us receives one allele from
                                                                              :
each parent—one from the father and one from the mother. There-              ;
                                                                            a
fore AB blood type arises when an individual receives gene A from             :

one parent and gene B from the other. O blood type arises when an
individual receives O from both parents. A type, however, can be of
two different genetic constitutions, AO and AA: the first receive A
from one parent and O from the other, the second receive A from
both parents. A similar situation applies to blood group B.
    The existence of genetic polymorphism (a situation in which a
gene exists in at least two different forms—or alleles) is demon-
strated by the reaction of different blood types to specific reagents.
To determine a blood type, two reagents are needed (anti-A and
anti-B), which react with red blood cells (small oxygen-bearing
blood cells invisible to the eye). The reaction is performed by adding
two small drops of a patient's blood to a glass slide. A positive reac-
tion occurs if, after adding a reagent, the blood cells clump together.
Because blood’s color is due to the red blood cells, when they clump
together, the remainder of the blood becomes clear. If the reaction
is negative, the blood drop remains a consistent red color. Blood
group A individuals react positively only to the anti-A, while blood
group B reacts only with-anti-B. Those with blood group O fail to
react with either serum, while AB individuals react with both.
    To simplify the statistics, we do not count the number of differ-
ent individuals or genotypes, but only the number of alleles—two
per person. However, we have no way to distinguish between indi-
viduals of polymorphic blood group A, who could be either AA or
AO. So, too, with B type blood. Luckily, simple mathematical tech-
niques allow us to estimate how many individuals are AA and how
many are AO (or BB and BO).
    During World War I, Ludwik and Hanka Hirschfeld, two Polish
immunologists, examined several different ethnic groups among

                                   14
     a the soldiers in the English and French colonial armies and the
     ~ World War I prisoners, including Vietnamese, Senegalese, and
       Indians. They discovered that the proportions of individuals
       belonging to the different blood groups were different in every
       population. This phenomenon is now known to be universal. We
:
i      know the number of polymorphisms is extremely high, and each
4
4
a
       human population is different for most of the other polymorphisms,
7
J
       as well. This early work with ABO gave birth to anthropological
;
7      genetics.
4.




                      Genetic Variation between Populations

       The following table shows the frequency (in percent) of the ABO
       alleles by continent.

          Region                        A             B            O


          Europe                        27             8          65
                      English          25              8          67
                      Italian          20              a          73
                      Basques          23              2          75
          East Asia                    20             19          6]
          Africa                       18             13          69
          American Natives               ier           0.3        98
          Australian Natives           Ped             2          76


           We immediately notice wide variation among populations in
       different parts of the earth; each has a distinct gene frequency.
       The O gene always appears the majority type, varying from 61 to
       98 percent. The A gene varies from 1.7 to 27 percent, while the
       B gene varies from 0.3 to 19 percent. If we consider smaller sam-
       ples of Native Americans, the A and B genes might be completely
       absent.
           This table suggests two questions: Is this an exceptional situa-
       tion or does something similar hold true for other genes as well?

                                        15
Can we explain why there is such great variation? For now, let’s
explore other genes and save the second question for later.
   After World War I, new blood group systems were developed
using the same methods that led to the discovery of the ABO system.
The most complex group is the RH system, which was found among
Europeans during World War II. Its study was quickly extended to
several non-European populations. But aside from the ABO and RH ©
systems, very few blood group genes have clinical importance.
Anthropological curiosity—the passion to know one’s ancestors, rela-
tives, and ultimate origins—has motivated many researchers to con-
tinue the search for new genetic polymorphisms, which, performed
by new genetic research techniques, is increasingly successful.
   Genetics, the study of heritable differences, offers us a window
through which to view that past. We know that, with few exceptions,
many characteristics such as height and skin, hair, and eye color are
genetically determined, but we do not understand precisely how.
Moreover, some of them are also influenced by non-genetic factors,
for instance, nutrition, in the case of height, and exposure to the sun,
in the case of skin tone. Our poor understanding of the hereditary
mechanism of these familiar characteristics is due to their interac-
tion with non-genetic, environmental factors, and the general com-
plexity of the mechanisms determining all traits that involve shape.
By contrast, we understand clearly the inheritance of blood groups,
and of chemical polymorphisms among enzymes and other proteins,
because the account of traits determined by relatively simple sub-
stances like proteins is chemically simpler and easier to understand
and measure. But these traits are not directly visible, and rather sen-
sitive laboratory methods are required to detect them.
     Very early on, the American scientist William Boyd showed that
by using the first genetic systems discovered—ABO, RH, and
MN—one could already differentiate populations from the five
continents. Arthur Mourant, a British hematologist, produced the
first comprehensive summary of data on human polymorphisms in
1954. The second edition of Mourant’s book, appearing in 1976,
contained more than one thousand pages, more than doubling the
amount of data previously available.

                                   16
        ig cr




     oe major pechnigtiss are used to study polymorphisms, or
 * genetic “markers” as they are called because they act as tags on
   genetic material, on proteins. One, employed for almost all blood
   group typings, uses biological reagents, often made by humans
   reacting to foreign substances from bacteria, or from other sources.
    These reagents are special proteins called immunoglobulins or
    antibodies. They are madein the course of building immunity, that
    is, resistance to some external agent, and usually react specifi-
    cally with substances called antigens, usually other proteins. The
    other analytical method of genetic analysis, developed in 1948, is a
    direct study of physical properties of specific protein molecules,
    usually by measuring their mobility in an electric field. It is called
    electrophoresis.
      Both methods revealed directly or indirectly the variation in
   structure of specific proteins from individual to individual. The
   behavior of these variants could be tested in families to confirm the
   genetic nature of such variation. But the number of polymorphic
   proteins detected in this way was small and at the beginning of the
  1980s only about 250 were known. All proteins are produced by
   DNA, and therefore behind protein variation there must be a paral-
   lel variation of DNA, the chemical substance responsible for bio-
   logical inheritance. The analytical methods necessary to chemically
- . study DNA were developed later.
          In the early eighties the analysis of variation in DNA had its
     start. DNA is a very long filament made of a chain combining four
     different nucleotides, A, C, G, and T. Changes in the sequence of
   ~ nucleotides of a specific DNA happen rarely, and more or less ran-
     domly, when one nucleotide is replaced by another during replica-
     tion. Thus, if a DNA segment is GCAATGGCCC, it may happen
   that a copy of it passed by a parent to a child is changed in the fifth
   nucleotide, T being replaced by-C. The DNA generating the child’s
   protein will thus be GCAACGGCCC.          This is the smallest change
   that can happen to DNA, and is called a mutation; as DNA is inher-
   ited, descendants of the child will receive the mutated DNA. A
   change in DNA may cause a change in a protein, and this may cause
   a change visible to us.
     Restriction enzymes provided a simple way to detect differ-
 ences in the DNA of two individuals. Restriction enzymes are pro- _
 duced by bacteria and break DNA into certain sequences of 4, 6, or —
 8 nucleotides, for instance GCCG.
     A method of multiplying DNA in a test tube with theenzyme
 DNA polymerase, which nature uses to duplicate DNA when cells _ |
 divide, was discovered and developed in the second halfofthe eight-
 ies, and is called PCR, or polymerase chain reaction. This new tech-
 nique has improved the power of genetic analysis in the nineties. We
 now know that there must exist millions of polymorphisms in DNA,
- and we can study them all, but the techniques for doing this at a sat-
 isfactory pace are only now beginning to be available.
     The future of the analysis of genetic variation is clearly in the
 study of DNA, but results accumulated with the old techniques
 based on proteins have not lost their value. There are some specific
 problems, which can be resolved only by DNA techniques. On the
 other hand, the very rich information generated by protein data on
 human populations includes almost 100,000 frequencies of poly-
 morphisms. They were studied for over 100 genes in thousands of
 different populations all over the earth, and many of the conclusions
 thus made possible and discussed in this book have arisen from stud-
 ies of proteins. Results with DNA have complemented but never
 contradicted the protein data. We start having knowledge on thou-
 sands of DNA polymorphisms, but they are almost all limited to very
 few populations. We will summarize the most important ones.




   Studying Many Genes Allows Use of the “Law of Large Numbers”

 Is it possible to reconstruct human evolution by studying the types
 of living populations only? We can simplify the process of doing so
 by concentrating most of our studies to indigenous people, when it
 is possible to recognize them and differentiate them from recent
 immigrants to a region. But we learn much about human origins
 and evolution from a single gene like ABO.

                                    18
  We will introduce here the word “gene.” Everybody has heard it,
_ but few know its precise meaning. The old definition, “unit of inher-
  itance,” is still difficult to understand—in fact, it was used when we
_ did not know what a gene was in chemical terms. Today we can give
  a much more concrete definition: a gene is a segment of DNA that
has a specified, recognizable biological function (in practice, most
_ frequently that of generating a particular protein). It is, therefore,
 part of a chromosome, a rod found in the nucleus of a cell that con-
  tains an extremely long DNA thread, coiled and organized in a com-
  plicated way. A cell usually has many chromosomes, and their
  distribution to daughter cells is made in such a way that a daughter
  cell receives a complete copy of the chromosomes of the mother
 cell. When studying evolution, however, we may, and often must,
  ignore what a gene is doing, because we don’t know. But a gene
 -remains useful for evolutionary studies (and others) if it is present in
  more than one form, and the more forms of a gene (allele) that exist,
  the better the gene suits our purposes. With only three alleles, ABO
~ can hardly be very informative. In Africa, the place of origin, one
  finds all alleles. But this is also true of Asia and Europe. -In Asia,
  however, the B allele is more frequent than in the other continents;
  group A is somewhat more common in Europe; and Native Ameri-
  cans are almost entirely blood group O. What conclusions can we
  draw? That A and B genes were probably lost in the majority of
  Native Americans, but why? Many have speculated about the rea-
  son, but it is impossible to provide an entirely satisfactory answer.
      The first hypothesis connecting the historical origin of a people
 _and a gene that was subsequently confirmed by independent evi-
  dence was made on the basis of the RH gene in the early forties.
  The simplest genetic analysis recognizes two forms: RH+ and RH—.
  Globally, RH+ is predominant, but RH— reaches appreciable fre-
  quencies in Europe with the Basques having the highest frequency.
  This suggests that the RH— form arose by mutation from the RH+
  allele in western Europe and then spread, for unspecified reasons,
  toward Asia and Africa, never greatly diminishing the frequency of
  the RH+ gene. The highest frequencies of the negative type are
  generally found in the west and northeast of Europe. Frequencies

                                    19
 RH-— (orat least predominantly
                       so) before a group of RH+ pe
 entered
     via the Balkans and diffused to the west and north,            mi   ag
 with indigenous Europeans. This hypothesis would have remained _
 uncertain if it had not been substantiated by the simultaneous study
of many other genes. Archeology also lent support to the argument, _
 as we shall see later.
     Reconstructing the history of Lot ea has proved a daunting
 task. The accumulation of data on many genes in thousands of peo-
 ple from different populations has produced a dizzying amount of
 information that describes the frequency of the different forms of
 more than 100 genes—a body of knowledge that is very useful for
 testing evolutionary hypotheses. Experience has shown that we can
 never rely on a single gene for reconstructing    human evolution. It
 might appear that a single system of genes like HLA, which today.
-has hundreds of alleles, would be sufficient. The HLA genes play an
 important role in fighting infections and recently have become
 important in matching donors and recipients for tissue and organ
 transplants. They possess a great diversity of forms, as is necessary
 for a potential defense against the spread of tumors among unre-
 lated individuals, but they are also subject to extreme natural selec-
 tion related to their role in fighting infection. If the conclusions we
 reach about evolution through observations made using HLA are
 different from those obtained using other genes, we need to explain
 the reasons, because they may lead to different historical interpre-
 tations. It is very useful, and I think essential, to examine all existing
 information. The broadest synthesis has the greatest chance of
 answering the questions we ask, and the least chance of being con-
 tradicted by later findings.
     Therefore, it is also worth gathering information from any dis-
 cipline that can provide even a partial answer to our problems.
 Within genetics itself, we want to collect as much information about -
 as many genes as possible, which would allow us to use the “law of
 large numbers” in the calculation of probabilities: random events are
 important in evolution, but despite their capriciousness, their behav-
 ior can be accounted for through a large number of observations.

                                    20
 Jacques Bernoulli, in his Ars conjectandi of 1713, wrote, “Even the
 _ stupidest of men, by some instinct of nature, is convinced on his own
  that with more observations his risk of failure is diminished.”
      Many studies have been invalidated because of an inadequate
 _ number of observations. When we study polymorphisms directly on
   DNA, there is no dearth of evidence: we can study millions. We
   may not need to study them all, because at a certain point addi-
   tional data fail to provide new results or lead to different conclu-
   sions. Nevertheless, simply studying a large sample is not always
   enough. If we observe heterogeneity in our data, so that it can be
   divided into several categories, each implying a different history, we
_ must further search for the source of these discrepancies. We have
_ seen an important example in the comparison of genes transmitted
   by the paternal and the maternal line, as we will discuss in another
   chapter.




                            Genetic Distances
   It is clear that, in order to contrast populations, we must synthesize
   a vast amount of genetic information. At first, to measure the
   “genetic distance” between populations, we simply compared pairs
  of populations. Only much later, when we had a very large number
  of genes and some new analytical techniques, were we able to study
  the differences among many populations, or even within individual
  populations. For most genes, the frequency differences between
  populations are nil to very slight and their contribution to the global
  genetic distance between populations is close to zero.
      The RH gene provides interesting genetic distances in Europe,
  but is less useful elsewhere. For example, the frequency of RH neg-
  ative individuals is 41.1 percent in England, 41.2 percent in France,
  40 percent in the former Yugoslavia, and 37 percent in Bulgaria.
  These differences are slight, but among the Basques the frequency
  is 50.4 percent and among the Lapps (more appropriately called
  the Saami) the frequency is 18.7 percent. For this gene the genetic

                                     21
distance between France and England, calculated simply 5 eae bs
the difference between the percentages above, is 0.1 percent. The —
distance between French and Bulgarians (4.2 percent) or between
Bulgarians and persons from the former Yugoslavia (3 percent) is
greater. But the distance between Basques and English is consider- —
able (9.3 percent) and the difference between Basques and Lapps
is dramatic (31.7 percent).
    I like to explain the concept of genetic dissarien in the simple
way that I have done above, as a difference between percentage
frequencies of the form of a gene. In reality, there are now many
methods for calculating genetic distances and all are fairly compli-
cated. When I started this calculation, I asked the advice of my
teacher, R. A. Fisher, one of the great geneticists and statisticians,
because I could not think of a better consultant. It is pointless to
give his formula here, because it is too complex. But it is still essen-
tial to average the distance between two populations over many
genes if one wants reproducible conclusions.
    Among other formulas subsequently proposed, one developed
by Masatoshi Nei, a famous Japanese-American mathematical
geneticist, has become more popular than the Fisher formula I first
used. But more than twenty years after he introduced it, Professor
Nei is now convinced that Fisher's approach is. better than his own
for the study of human populations.
    In any case, most of the formulas currently used to calculate
genetic distances provide very similar results overall. In fact, if I
find substantial disagreement among results using the various dis-
tance measures, I tend to suspect there are other problems with the
data—usually that the sample of genes is insufficient.
   Once a genetic distance is calculated between populations for
each of several genes, we can average all the distance values thus
obtained. We thus synthesize the information from all the genes
studied. The more genes we have, the more likely it is that conclu- _-
sions will be correct. When we have enough genes, we can subdi-
vide them into two or more classes and use each class to test our
conclusions, which should, if everything is fine, be independent of
the genes employed.

                                   22
                    Isolation by Geographic Distance

BcBciotisting theories developed by three mathematicians—Sewall
_ Wright in the United States, Gustave Malécot in France, and Motoo
  Kimura    in Japan—led, with minor differences, to the conclu-
  sion that the genetic distance between two populations generally
  increases in direct correlation with geographic distance separating
  them. This expectation derives from the observation that while most
  spouses are selected from within their own village or town, or part of
  a city, a small proportion are chosen from neighboring ones. This
  proportion reflects the migration that goes on all the time every-
  where because of marriage. In the simplest model, equal numbers
  of migrants are exchanged between neighboring villages. The first
  measurements of migration arising from marriage were performed
  by Jean Sutter and Tran Ngoc Toan, and independently by myself in
  collaboration with Antonio Moroni and Gianna Zei, using church
  wedding records, which noted the spouses’ birthplaces. They con-
  firmed the tendency of people to find spouses from a short distance
  away, as expected. The first verification of the theory that genetic
  distance increases with geographic distance between populations
  was provided by Newton Morton, who studied small, homogeneous
  regions. Menozzi, Piazza, and I extended them to the entire world in
  our book The History and Geography of Human Genes, from which
  figure 1 was taken.
      The increase of genetic distance with geographic distance may be
  linear at first, but over a greater geographic distance, the increase in
 genetic distance slows sharply. The two characteristics of the curve—
 the rate (i.e., the slope) of the initial increase, and the maximal value
  reached by the genetic distance over a great geographic distance—
  are different for the various continents. They are greatest for indige-
  nous Americans and Australians, and slightest in Europe, which is
  the most homogeneous continent. The maximal genetic distance (in
  Europe) is three times smaller than on the least homogeneous conti-
  nents. Despite political fragmentation, migration within Europe has
  been sufficient to create a greater genetic homogeneity than else-
  where. The curve has not reached a maximum value (and therefore

                                     23
          1000 2000 3000 4000 5000


                   Europe




          1000 2000 3000 4000 5000


                   Australia




          1000   2000    3000   4000   5000             1000   2000   3000   4000   5000


 Figure 1. Relationship of geographic distance (in miles, on the horizontal axis) to
_ genetic distance (on a scale between 0 and 1, vertical axis) in the various continents.
 Genetic distances among pairs of populations were averaged for all available data
 on 110 genes tested by methods of protein analysis (blood groups, electrophoresis,
 etc.). Robust averages of genetic distances were calculated for all possible pairs of
 tribes, towns, or other human communities that share a geographic distance class.
 (Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994)



 the point of genetic equilibrium) in Asia (and clearly even less in the
 whole world) in spite of the extensive migrations of the past millen-
 nia. Mongols, for example, began important expansions east, south,
 and west around 300 B.c. The Turkish advance, halted near Vienna in
 the eighteenth century, was their last exploit.
     Figure 1 shows the remarkable precision with which the data
 support the theory. Naturally, individual pairs of populations would


                                              24
    vary substantially from the theoretical curve, but the points in figure
_     lare the averages of many population pairs, calculated from over a
     hundred genes. We observed that it matters little which genes are
      chosen. Only one genetic system shows a major deviation from the
      others—the immunoglobulin genes. These genes code for our anti-
      bodies, and the greater variation found in them is probably a
     response to the great geographic variation in the array of infectious
      diseases we encounter.




                             What Is a Race, Then?

      A race is a group of individuals that we can recognize as biologically
      different from others. To be scientifically “recognized,” the differ-
      ences between a population that we would like to call a race and
      neighboring populations must be statistically significant according
      to some defined criteria. The threshold of statistical significance is
     _arbitrary. The probability of reaching significance for a given dis-
      tance increases steadily with the number of individuals and genes
      tested.
          Our experiments have shown that even neighboring populations
      (villages or towns) can often be quite different from each other.
      There is a limit to the number of individuals in a given village popu-
      lation who can be tested. But the maximum number of testable
      genes is so high that we could in principle detect, and prove to be
    _ statistically significant, a difference between any two populations
     however close geographically or genetically. If we look at enough
     genes, the genetic distance between Ithaca and Albany in New York
     or Pisa and Florence in Italy is most likely to be significant, and
     therefore scientifically proven. The inhabitants of Ithaca and Albany
     might be disappointed to discover that they belong to separate races.
     People in Pisa and Florence might be pleased that science had vali-
      dated their ancient mutual distrust by demonstrating their genetic
      differences. In his Divine Comedy, Dante, a Florentine, expressed


                                        25
 his ciistike of people Sait Pisa by wishing that God =e move        two   —
  islands situated at the mouth of the river Arno, thereby flooding Pisa :
_ and drowning all its people.
      Classifying the world’s population into several hundreds of ;
 thousands or a million different races would, of course, be com- —
 pletely impractical. But what level of genetic divergence would _
 be necessary to determine boundaries for a definition of racial dif-
 ference? Because genetic divergence increases in a continuous
 manner, it is obvious that any definition or threshold would be com-
 pletely arbitrary.
     It has been suggested that one might define race by the analysis
 of discontinuities in the surface of gene frequencies generated on a
 geographic map. Introduced by Guido Barbujani and Robert Sokal
 (1990), the method looks for local increases in the rate of change


                                                                               :
 of gene frequencies, per unit of geographic distance. Obstacles to
 migration or marriage could create these local increases. If proved
 for many genes, such barriers could help distinguish races. But a
 true discontinuity is difficult if not impossible to establish for gene
 frequencies, so they would rather look for regions where gene fre-
 quencies change rapidly. The particular rapidity of genetic change
 that could suffice as a “genetic barrier” would naturally be chosen
 in an arbitrary manner.
     This procedure illustrates the theoretical difficulties classifica- _
 tion by race poses. Gene frequencies are not geographic features
 like altitude or compass direction, which can be measured precisely
 at any point on the earth’s surface; rather, they are properties of a
 population that occupies an area of finite extent. One possible solu-
 tion would be to use villages and small cities as “points” in geo-
 graphic space. Large cities could be subdivided into several points
 to take account of residential segregation. But the available data on
 gene frequency in villages or small cities are insufficient and they
 would provide an extremely detailed clustering.
     In any case, this method is still useful for identifying the geo-
 graphic location of genetic “boundaries,” however arbitrary these
 are. In Europe, for example, Barbujani and Sokal found 33 genetic
 boundaries that corresponded in 22 cases to geographic features

                                   26
 (mountains, rivers, eda) and almost always (in 31 cases) to linguistic
 _or dialectic boundaries. In a country with a homogeneous language,
  like Italy, family names provided better results than genes. Because
  they're inherited, surnames can give almost the same information
  as genes, but are more informative because surnames are readily
  available in large numbers.
      A more significant difficulty resulting from racial aishcanond is
  that the barriers found by the method described above have rarely
  defined a closed space inhabited by a population enclave, even
  when aided by geographical.features such as the Alps. Islands may
  be the only exceptions. The population of each island could be clas-
  sified as a race, because it would be different from other islands and
  the nearest mainland, if there were sufficient genetic information.
 ‘But would that be useful for practical purposes, like for instance
  taking a census in the United States? The answer is certainly no. A
  third problem is that a huge number of genes must be studied to
  distinguish closely related populations.
 _ Scientific attempts to classify races continued through the end
  of the nineteenth century. The results often contradicted each other,
 a good indication of the difficulty of such efforts. Darwin under-
 stood that geographic continuity would frustrate any attempt at
 classifying human races. He noted a phenomenon that repeated
 itself many times in the course of history: different anthropologists
come to completely different tallies of races, from’ 3 to over 100.
  But why does this compulsion to classify human races exist? The
  question is extremely important. Maybe it would be more useful to
  answer a more general question: why classify?




                           Why Classify Things?

  When we are presented with a great number of things, we feel com-
  pelled to impose some order on potential chaos. Such is the goal of
  classification. It allows us to describe a complex array of objects with
  simple words or concepts, even at the cost of oversimplification.

                                     27
    Zoologists and botanists have classified chia or even 1
lions of species, and their work is not close to being finished. Ifvari-
ation were not important and complex, it would not be necessary to -
categorize at all. One could simply recognize the level of difference
relevant to one’s needs.
    Humans are not alone in their tendency to classify. Chim-
panzees, for example, and probably most other animals, can sepa- _
rate several hundred leaves and fruits into edible and non-edible
categories. Depending on their appetite, other categories may be
used, although edibility is fundamental since many plants are
potentially toxic. Chimpanzees have even been observed teaching
their offspring which foods can be eaten and which cannot.
    Unlike animals, humans use language to differentiate between
objects. We assign a name to each object we wish to distinguish.
African Pygmies recognize hundreds of tree species (Western
botanists identify a similar number) and several hundred animals;
but such diversity is still too little to require a terribly high order of
classification.
    Classification and some accompanying oversimplification become
necessary when variation is very high. Naturalists such as Georges
Louis Leclerc Buffon and Carolus Linnaeus established valid sys-
tems of classification for the extraordinary diversity of plant and
animal species. Similar systems can be found in some so-called
“primitive” populations who have an undeveloped (or non-monetary)
economy.
   Why can classifying human races be useful? Demographers and               |
sociologists undoubtedly have some opinion on the subject. Most
practical classifications are extremely simplistic. The U.S. census
recognizes Whites, Blacks (African Americans), Native Americans,
Asians, and Hispanics. This last category has almost no biological
meaning. In practice it refers to Mexicans, but more generally, a
large number of Spanish-speaking people are assigned to it.
    Proposing an improved classification can only end in failure.
Observing the variation between ethnic groups should convince
us of that. Visible differences lead us to believe in the existence


                                    28
     “pure” races, but we have seen that these are very narrow, essen-
   tiallyincorrect criteria. And when measured and plotted carefully,
  visible traits are actually far less discontinuous than is usually —
   believed. Classification based on continental origin could furnish a
 ~ first approximation of racial division, until we realize that Asia and
_ even Africa and the Americas are very heterogeneous. Even in
 _ Europe, where the population is much more homogeneous, several
   subdivisions have been proposed. But it is immediately clear that all
   systems lack clear and satisfactory criteria for classifying. The more
we pay attention to questions of statistical adequacy, the more hope-
__ less the effort becomes. It is true that strictly inherited characteris-
_ tics are more satisfactory than anthropometric measurements or
__ observations of colors and morphology. But above all it is true that
   one encounters near total genetic continuity between all regions
__ while attempting to select even the most homogeneous races.
      The observation has been made that almost any human group—
   from a village in the Pyrenees or the Alps, to a Pygmy camp in
   Africa—displays almost the same average distance between individu-
   als, although gene frequencies typically differ from village to village
   by some small amount. Any small village typically contains about the
   same amount of genetic variation as another village located on any
   other continent. Each population is a microcosm that recapitulates
   the entire human macrocosm even if the precise genetic composi-
_ tions vary slightly. Naturally, a small village in the Alps, or a Pygmy
   camp of 30 people, is somewhat less heterogeneous genetically than
  _a large country, for example, China, but perhaps only by a factor of
   two. On average, these populations have a heterogeneity among indi-
   viduals only slightly less than that in evidence in the whole world.
   Regardless of the type of genetic markers used (selected from a very
  wide range), the variation between two random individuals within
   any one population is 85 percent as large as that between two individ-
   uals randomly selected from the world’s population.
      It seems wise to me, therefore, to abandon any attempt at racial
  classification along the traditional lines. There is, however, one prac-
  tical reason for keeping an interest in genetic differences.


                                      29
   Can the Study of Genetic Differences Be Useful in Practice? — Rs
The intellectual interest of a rational classification of races clashes —
with the absurdity of imposing an artificial discontinuity on a phe-
nomenon that is very nearly continuous. But is there a practical
reason that justifies it? It clearly must be sought where a real dis-
continuity exists, if any. Here, it happens, we are closer to practical
reasons that justify some sort of classification on the basis of genetic
differences.
    Humans live in social communities. The social group is evolving
rapidly, its size increases and its internal structure becomes more
complicated. The majority of the world is still, however, formed by
groups that are at the lower end of the complexity scale. The indus-
trialized countries are at the opposite end. Most people like to iden-
tify with their social group, and therefore give it a name.     For
obvious reasons, this tends to be the same as the name of the lan-
guage, and of the tribe, although in many cases the tribe has grown         :
enough that it is no more a simple social group. Within the larger
groups there tend to be further subdivisions. This helps to give a
lower bound of the number of social human groups existing on
Earth. The number of languages existing today is 5,000—6,000, and
the number of social groups that may exist today in the world must
be greater than 10,000, or even 100,000.
    If we want to fix an upper bound we must be more precise about
the meaning of social group. From a genetic point of view, the most
meaningful social group is the one in which one is likely to find a
spouse. The minimum size of such a group to avoid deleterious
effects of inbreeding is five hundred. This is also a “magic number”
that many anthropologists, not without some factual support, indi-
cate as the average size of a tribe, especially for the more economi-
cally primitive ones. This would mean that there exist on Earth at
most ten million social groups. On the basis of some other consider-
ations, perhaps one million may be a reasonable upper bound of the
number of social groups that are worth being considered as distinct
from a genetic point of view. The average group would consist of
5,000-500,000 individuals, These numbers may have to be some-

                                   30
          ie   wy



    what modified and I reserve the right to do it. But the principle
    remains valid.
        Clearly no anthropologist would accept a classification into a
     million races, and probably not even into 10,000 ones. But this is a
     “genetic” classification that might be useful, and will probably exist,
     with some further complication, a day not too far ahead. Individuals
     belonging to a group of this kind would have genetic similarity
     greater than two random individuals, because they would share sig-
_    nificantly more ancestry. In fact, the group will have been defined
     on the basis of endogamous behavior (a tendency to marry within
     the group). Endogamy tends to generate, gradually, both genetic
     and cultural differentiation between groups. We have seen that the
     genetic differentiation of populations, even if real, is small, but sta-
     ble in time. In contrast to this, cultural differentiation can be sur-
_    prisingly high, and fast to reach, but also more easily reversible, and
     hence less stable. But there is no question that genetic differences
     can be important from a very practical point of view: namely the
    _ chances of having specific diseases, and responding similarly to the
     same drugs.         .
        To skeptical readers, an example of the application of this prin-
     ciple can already be seen in Iceland, where medical research of all
    Icelanders has begun with Parliamentary approval by a foreign
     pharmaceutical firm. Here the population is of 250,000 individuals,
     and therefore within the upper and lower bounds defined before.
     But current research may show that the Icelandic population is not
     as homogeneous as might be expected.




                Weakness and Strength of Historical Research

    We have begun a survey of human diversity, and it is inevitable to
    ask oneself a number of questions: How are such diversities pro-
    duced? What are the forces at work? What has been the course of
    these events? In short, what has been the history of human evolu-
    tion, and which factors have caused and directed it?

                                        31
    Any attempt at reconstructing human evolution presents the —
same problems we encounter in historical research. Experimental
science allows us to test any hypothesis, no matter how unlikely, but _
history cannot be repeated at will—even if it sometimes gives the
appearance of repeating itself. Nevertheless, historical and anthro- _
pological analogies are often useful. When these offer independent —
confirmation or supplementary evidence, they allow us to eliminate
or support a hypothesis. Multidisciplinary research provides, in a
way, a sort of replication of an event, which is generally possible
only in experimental science.
    Exploring related disciplines can lead to rich discoveries. It was
with this intent that I have searched for, and often found, support
from fields such as linguistics, archeology, and demography. Just as
this approach yields positive results, it is also a source of great intel-
lectual satisfaction. The researcher sees the fundamental unity of
the sciences and their procedures.




                                    32
