                                    CHAPTER 5


                    Genes and Languages




     - More than 5,000 languages are spoken today. A few are used by
       hundreds of millions of people, but the great majority have a very
       restricted distribution. Languages with only a hundred speakers or
  et
  ee   fewer are in danger of imminent extinction; many have disappeared
       already.
ee) It doesn’t take a linguist to know that some languages are
aeee
      more closely related than others. Spanish and Italian, my mother
      tongue, are obvious examples. I can get by in Spanish- or Portuguese-
      speaking countries without much difficulty. However, words that are
      identical or similar but have different meanings cause trouble. For
      example, burro means “butter” in Italian but “donkey” in Spanish;
     equipaggio means “crew” in Italian and equipaje means “luggage” in
     Spanish; salire means “to go up” in Italian, and salir, “to go out” in
     Spanish. We call these words “false friends,” and fortunately there
     are not many of them. Italian, French, Spanish, Romanian, and so
     on, derive from a common source—Latin. Likewise, Germanic
     languages include Swedish, German, Dutch, Flemish, and English.
     The Slavic languages of eastern Europe are also quite similar. The

                                       133
resemblance between Sanskrit, a classical language in India, and
some ancient European languages was well-known as early as the
eighteenth century.
    The study of Sanskrit provided the first linguistic clues to the rela-
tionships among what would become known as the Indo-European
family of languages. Since then, many other linguistic families have
been recognized (some linguists prefer to call these families phyla).
Like plant and animal taxonomists, linguists have reconstructed
trees illustrating linguistic relationships that they call “genetic”—
equivalent to the word's use in biology. But linguists have had
trouble reconstructing relationships above the family level—we
have yet to agree on a single tree linking all the existing families. In
fact, many linguists believe that the question of the unity or diver-
sity of modern languages can never be answered. The difficulty
rests with the rapidity of linguistic evolution.
     Figure 11 shows the geographic distribution of language fami-
lies recently proposed by Merritt Ruhlen. The least well-known
languages, those of the Australian Aborigines and New Guineans,
are more difficult to classify. But opinions about other families also
differ, and bitter feuding has characterized much of historical lin-
guistics over the past century. One of the most contentious issues
among American linguists has been the classification of Native
American languages.
    At the beginning of the century, having noted the resemblance
of many Amerindian languages, the linguist Edward Sapir and the
anthropologist Karl Kroeber claimed that only a few Native Ameri-
can language families existed. Their hypothesis met considerable
resistance from the majority of American linguists who strongly
opposed such a unification. A new cycle of contention began after
Joseph Greenberg of Stanford University published a book in 1987
called Language in the Americas, showing that the languages spo-
ken by pre-Columbian Americans could be grouped into just three
families: Eskimo-Aleut, Na-Dene (comprising languages that are
spoken mostly in the Pacific Northwest, but also including Navajo
and Apache), and Amerindian, which comprises most languages of
North and South America. Greenberg's proposal agreed with the

                                   134
                                      MASNSS




                                                                                                                                                                     ur sdeul Woy UMeIP) SozeIOST ONSINSUT [BIOAes Jo UONROOT pu ‘saTTUIey ONSMBuT] UsayUAas ayy Jo UOYNGUySIp orydesS005 “T][ eNSIq
                                                                              |
                                                                                    }
                ULTURJOPIOY-~1esIN,
                                                                                     (Ouysny)



          UBIEYES-OTIN
                                                                         uBpeyoUEy-yoNY


                                                    uriseones




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘(T JOA ‘L861 veryny
                                                                   JTyseyNX-oyeIQ)
                                                                uvedoinq-opuy
                                                                              opy-Oun|sy                                                            mnafy-ounjs”
                                                                                          oRIseoNsnYy
                                                                                   uejoqiy-ours

ueslory                                                                                                            anbseg
                                                                                  UeIpIAeq              ueleysny



                                      oNRISy-O1Ty
                                                                     oreaty
                                                                                         (OLysnYy)
                                                                                         ovx-oRIW(Ousny)
                                                                                                 oreq
                                                                                                    oyloeg-opuypuuleury pysegstung
                                                                                                                            PI       yeyeN

                                                                                                                              PALO
                                                                                     |                      auaq-en
                                                                                                             fF                                     [Ay

                                                                                                                                               Ree
                                                                                                                                               ueadomg-opuy
                                                                                                                                                    Kel ae
                                                                                                                                                         (oLysny)
                                                                                                                                                          uvIssuoQnsNYy
                                                                                                                                                      (OLAsny)
                                                                                                                                                      oPIseosny
                                                                                                                                             SANV'ISI




                                                                                                      135
- classifications of American biologists Christie G. Turner and -
 Stephen Zegura, who used measurements of modern and fossilized -
 teeth, and blood groups and proteins, respectively. What's more,
 these three linguistic families seem to correspond with three major
 migrations suggested by archeological data. Amerindians appear to
 have come first, followed by Na-Dene speakers and finally Eski-
 mos. The first group occupied all of America, while the second and
 third groups have remained near the Arctic, where they originated.
 We also found that Native Americans can be divided genetically
 into the three distinct groups Greenberg recognized on linguistic
 grounds. It must be said, however, that Amerindians are genetically
 extremely variable and that linguistic sub-groupings within the
 Amerindian family level do not correspond terribly well with the
 genetic results. Souther Na-Dene (Apaches and Navajos) are
 genetically similar to Northern Na-Dene, but the southern popula-
 tions have absorbed genes from their Amerindian neighbors.
     The Amerindians appear to have reached the Americas in a
 migration much older and more complex than those of later Na-
 Dene and Eskimo-Aleut speakers, and there may even have been
 more than one Amerindian migration. Genetic data indicate that
  Amerindians arrived at least 30,000 years ago, but this date may only
 _represent an average of the most important migrations. In addition,
  it may be biased upwards if it is true that the first Amerindian migra-
  tions involved very few individuals, as some new data on Y chromo-
 somes suggest. A strong founders’ effect tends to increase the length
 of branches in neighbor-joining trees, discussed later, and thus also
 to exaggerate the time of first settlement calculated genetically.
     The publication of Language in the Americas unleashed a new
 war between American linguists and anthropologists supporting
  Greenberg's thesis. A large group of linguists held a meeting and
  declared it impossible to recognize fewer than sixty or so taxonomic
  groups of Native American languages. Taxonomists can be divided
  into “lumpers” and “splitters”: these synthetic and analytic tenden-
  cies probably reflect a fundamental dichotomy in the human spirit.
  However, in the case of Amerindian classification, methodological
  differences can explain much of the dispute, as Greenberg discusses

                                    136
        4 indetail. Iam not a linguist, but I findGreenberg's arguments most          ~
          convincing. Furthermore, Greenberg has been through this before.
   _~     Many years ago, he proposed a now widely accepted classification of
          African languages into only four families: Afroasiatic, including all
          Semitic languages and most languages in Ethiopia and North Africa;
          Nilo-Saharan, comprising languages spoken along the upper Nile
          and the southern Sahara; Niger-Kordofanian, which includes most
          central, southern, and West African languages, especially the Bantu
           ones; and Khoisan languages, spoken by Khoi-Khoi and San popula-
        _ tions in southern Africa. Greenberg's classification endured a bar-
         _ rage of criticism when it was first proposed, and it is now widely
           accepted. A similar change of attitude toward the Amerindian classi-
          fication will probably come with time.
              An examination of some of the objections thatGreenberg's col-
          leagues have raised against his classifications can help us understand
          both the objective difficulties that afflict studies of linguistic evolu-
          tion, and also the subjective ones, which are typified by Greenberg's
        _ attackers. Languages change very rapidly and it is terribly hard to
          establish clear connections between distant languages. Significant
          phonological and semantic changes to all languages occur over time.
         The magnitude of these changes complicates the reconstruction
   and evaluation of linguistic commonalities. Grammar also evolves,
   although usually sufficiently slowly to aid the recognition of more
ee
ee
ee ancient linguistic connections. Under the pressure of phonetic and
         semantic change, a language rapidly becomes incomprehensible.
         Modern languages derived from Latin would not be understandable
         to a Roman of two thousand years ago—a thousand-year separation
         is often enough to render a language incomprehensible to its first
         speakers. After a separation of five to ten thousand years, the rate of
         recognizably similar words can drop to ten percent or less. Fortu-
         nately, certain words and certain parts of speech exhibit a slower rate
         of change and give us a better chance of discerning more distant lin-
         guistic relationships.
             As for the problems caused by misguided methods, some anti-
         Greenberg linguists believe it is impossible to posit a quantitative
         relationship between any two languages. By disallowing reliable

                                             137
                                 © oft ee   >   °* ae
                                                    as       a!
                                                         +




~ measurements, and by limiting the relationship between two lan-—
  guages only to “related or not related,” the American linguists—
  opposing Greenberg have ruled out the possibility of hierarchical ~
 classifications, an essential prerequisite to taxonomy.
     Interestingly, this position completely contradicts the view of |
 linguists who use sophisticated methods to measure linguistic simi-
 larity, based on the fraction of words from a standard list that have a
 detectable common origin. This approach was developed by an
 American linguist, Morris Swadesh. He suggested that the proba-
 bility that a word will lose its original meaning stays constant over
 time. When the fraction of related words retained after a known
 period of time has been calculated (by observing the change from
  Latin to the modern Romance languages, for example), we can con-
 struct a “calibration” curve, allowing us to read the time elapsed
 since two living languages shared a common ancestor. This method,
 which has been called “glottochronology,” uses a “linguistic clock”
 very similar to the “molecular clock” we discussed previously for
 genetics. In biology, we have the advantage of using many proteins
 ‘or DNA sequences to obtain many independent estimates of the
  date of separation between two species. Unfortunately, there is no
  such variety and wealth of data in linguistics to strengthen our con-
  clusions. Glottochronology is a less rigorous method than those
  used in biology, and is especially difficult to apply to distant com-
  parisons when the fraction of cognate words more than ten thou-
  sand years ago is very small. The word lists cannot grow, because
  only a limited number of words change slowly; moreover, every
  word has its own rate of change, a fact neglected by glottochronol-
  ogy, which assumes a constant rate of change.
      Other linguists insist that the resemblance between similar
  words in different languages be examined in light of “classical
  sound correspondences,” which are very strict rules of phonological
  change. If these rules are not followed exactly, they say, two words
  cannot be considered “cognates,” that is, one cannot determine if
  they share a common origin. Greenberg has answered them with
  an impressive list of exceptions to these rules within the Indo-
  European language family and others. He concluded that it would

                                     138
              eae            eee    A

    . be impossible to establish the Indo-European language family if
  _ these rules were applied too rigorously. Fortunately, the Indo-
 i European family was proposed and accepted before the theory of
sound correspondences adopted its most rigid format.
        Finally, some linguists believe that the parent language that
    - gave rise to a family or, in general, a cluster of languages must be
_       reconstructed in order to demonstrate a phylogenetic relationship
a
“<
   among families. Here too, biology provides an analogy—when the
    _ “consensus” DNA sequence is calculated from the sequence of two
     _ modern species. The consensus sequence is the best guess of the
        ancestral sequence that would require the fewest changes to gener-
        ate the diversity observed in a particular sample. But the search for
|.aia
 —      consensus is less rigorous in linguistics because linguistic variation
eee
ee
a,
        is much wider than biological variation, since only four nucleotides
        make up DNA. In biology, some proteins are so important to an
vo organism that littleor no change could be tolerated. Thus, many
__ sequences of proteins change extremely slowly, and it is possible to
   prove their relationship without reconstructing ancestral sequences
        of millions or even billions of years ago. Knowledge of a proto-
        language may be helpful in comparative analyses, but imposing this
        exercise on all linguistic classifications is a serious limitation when
"so few proto-languages have been generated. Furthermore, recon-
        structions have a low probability of being entirely reliable. Green-
        berg’s method avoids this impasse. It may be more subjective than
        is desirable, but it can go much further than other methods.
            The classification of families by Merritt Ruhlen (a student of
        Greenberg's) appears to me to be satisfactory for comparing genetic
        and linguistic evolutions, as we will do in the next section. Defining
        a family does not appear to be an entirely objective task, but the
        distinctions between families, subfamilies, and superfamilies are
        mostly a matter of convenience and are unnecessary for certain
        purposes. What matters is the possibility of establishing a simple,
        logical, and hierarchical relationship. Unfortunately, most modern
        classifications stop at the level of families, of which there are as
        many as seventeen in Ruhlen’s unifying system. There ate some
        superfamilies, but, as already noted, modern linguistic methods

                                          139
have not yet generated a complete tree growing from a single —
source.
    It is of interest to consider some of the proposed superfamilies,
even if they are rather controversial. According to Ruhlen, Austric is a
superfamily consolidating four families: Miao-Yao (spoken in pockets
of southern China, and northern Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand); Aus-
troasiatic, comprising Munda languages spoken in northern India and
Mon-Khmer (spoken mostly throughout Southeast Asia); Daic (spo-
ken widely in southern China and much of Southeast Asia), and Aus-
tronesian. There are some 1,000 Austronesian languages, spoken by
about one hundred eighty million people, including Taiwanese abo-
rigines and Malayo-Polynesians. The latter group ranges from Taiwan
to Polynesia, parts of Melanesia, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia,
and as far west as Madagascar. The oldest Austronesian languages are
spoken by Taiwanese aborigines. Whether or not this superfamily is
accepted, it ties together a very wide geographic region, including
Southeast Asia, both insular and non-insular areas, and a large num-
ber of islands in the two oceans separated by Southeast Asia.
   Superfamilies extending over Europe and Asia are of particular
interest. Two linguistic groupings in this region are current today and
are closely related: Nostratic and Eurasiatic. Rejected at first by most
linguists, they are slowly being recognized. The Nostratic superfam-
ily, as originally described by various Russian scientists, includes the
Indo-European, Uralic (spoken across the Uralic mountains), Altaic
(widely spoken in Central Asia), Afroasiatic, which comprises many
North African and also Semitic languages, Dravidian (currently spo-
ken almost only in southern India), and South Caucasian families.
One Russian linguist, Vitaly Shevoroshkin, showed that the Nostratic
superfamily has strong similarities to the Amerindian group, as
defined by Greenberg. The Eurasiatic superfamily proposed by
Greenberg is similar to Nostratic, but it is different in the extension
given to some families like Altaic and comprises smaller families like
Eskimo and Chukchi, in addition to Japanese. Thus, Eurasiatic
extends further east than Nostratic, but not as far southwest, as it
does not include Afroasiatic and Dravidian, which, according to
Greenberg, have an older origin.

                                  140
                                      td
                                       ek cont ated




        anch, aban to ee eeceiciAmerindian group on one side,
  and to anew, older superfamily on the other, Dene-Caucasian. Sapir
 “initiated this new grouping, but Sergei Starostin proposed it offi-
_ cially only a few years ago. The Dene-Caucasian superfamily includes
 _ essentially three families: North Caucasian, Na-Dene, and Sino-
 _ Tibetan. The last family of languages is spoken by almost a billion
  _ individuals (in China, India, Nepal, Burma, and also Southeast Asia,
 _ : plus some isolates in Europe and West Asia), and is therefore the
     most populous one.
         Thus, one could draw this approximate saeeam,


                   Eurasiatic   Afroasiatic     Dravidian




                                 Nostratic         Amerindian


                                                       Dene-Caucasian




                                                Eurasian

En
ee
oe       This hierarchy of superfamilies includes almost all of Europe,
     northern Africa, most of Asia, and all of America. It lacks only three
     African families, Khoisan, Niger-Kordofanian and Nilo-Saharan, as
     well as Australian (170 languages), and Indo-Pacific, a group of 700
     languages, spoken mostly in New Guinea but also in neighboring
     islands and in the Andaman Islands near Malaysia.
        There is, however, a small group of languages called isolates,
     which most linguists are unable to classify in any of the better-
     established families. The best known is Basque. Still spoken by
     approximately 12,000 French and perhaps a million and a half
     Spanish, this language is likely a relic of a pre-Neolithic period and
     is possibly related to the language spoken by Cro-Magnons;, the first
     modern humans in Europe. But it has certainly changed enough

                                          141
that modern Basques and Cro-Magnons would not be anidto
communicate if they had the chance to meet. In fact they probably—
wouldn't even recognize their languages as related. Several linguists_
suggest a relationship between Basque and modern languages of
the northern Caucasus.      It is thus possible that one or more
pre—Indo-European languages were spoken in Paleolithic Europe.
Other linguists see even more encompassing resemblances among
Basque, Caucasian, Sino-Tibetan, and Na-Dene languages. The last
are spoken in the northwestern region of North America. Another
claim is that Burushaski, an isolate spoken in a high valley in the
Himalayas, is related to Basque and Caucasian. And, according to           {



other linguists, Sumerian, Etruscan, and other linguistic “fossils”
 belong to the same ancient family, Dene-Caucasian. If the Nos-
tratic/Amerindian group were added to the Dene-Caucasian group
to form a hypothetical Eurasian superfamily, it may have extended
across all Europe and Asia (except the southeast), and spread to the
Americas. This giant superfamily later differentiated into several
branches, and local twigs of this tree flourished and extended to
regions far and wide.              -
   These are interesting and hopeful hypotheses that need to be
explored further. If we want to stay on absolutely firm ground, the
situation is worse than simply lacking a reliable tree to link all mod-
ern languages: it is not even certain that all languages.share a com-
mon origin. Most linguists consider both problems insoluble. It’s a
bit like trying to determine if all life on the planet had a single ori-
gin. (Many biologists believe in a single origin; since there is only
one form of the twenty aminoacids found in proteins.) Greenberg
noticed that there is at least one word all the linguistic families
share: the root tik. It means finger, or the number one (a semantic
shift, which requires no explanation). In other languages we find
other semantic changes of this root, which also appear acceptable,
“hand” and “arm,” for example, or “point, indicate.” In French,
doigt (pronounced “dwa”) and in Italian, dito (meaning “finger”)
come from the Latin root digit.
    Extending this example, American linguist John-D. Bengtson has
proposed, with Ruhlen, about thirty other roots that are nearly as

                                  142
       Vel Sd

  | el on hess newest results. As might be expected, there are
        few roots that are common to most languages. Most of them
 _ designate parts of the body, or are personal pronouns or small num-
bers    (one, two, and three). It is not surprising that words conserved.
 _ since the beginning of linguistic diversification are among the first
 _ words we learn: eyes, nose, mouth, and so on. But there are others
___ that were certainly very important in Paleolithic life and have been
__ preserved in many languages; “lice” is one example.




        Comparison of Linguistic Families with the Genetic Tree

   Even without a comprehensive linguistic tree, we can still compare
   our genetic tree to existing linguistic trees. There are some impres-
   sive similarities.
       In figure 12, the language families have been drawn next to the
   populations that speak the respective languages. We see that a fam-
   ily corresponds to one or more branches in the genetic tree. Some-
   times a language family is represented in the joint genetic-linguistic
   tree by only one branch, because the populations speaking these
   languages were grouped together in the genetic analysis. In effect
   they show great similarity, either genetic or ethnographic, and live
   near each other. An example is the Bantu subfamily, belonging to
   Niger-Kordofanian, which is genetically homogeneous and distinct
   from other African groups. Although the word Bantu designates a
   language group, it is also useful as a biological category. Other
   genetic groupings also have been corroborated by linguistic infor-
  mation; for example, southern Indians speak Dravidian languages
  and the Na-Dene speak Native American ones. Shared language
  families often point to a common genetic and ethnic background.
      The genetic tree shown in figure 12 is composed of 38 popula-
  tions, some of which are broadly grouped (e.g., Europeans, Melane-
  sians). There are only 16 language families (we had no genetic data
  on Caucasian populations when we drew this tree). Therefore some

                                    143
    Genetic Tree            Populations                 "Linguistic Families —

                     Mbuti Pygmy                 Original language unknown
                     bear             meee Niger-Kordofanian-
                     Bantu
                     Nilotic ————————__          Nilo-Saharan
                     San (Bushmen)               Khoisan
                     Ethiopian
                     Berber, N. African          Afro-Asiatic SR         oe       ee -
                     S. W. Asian                                                    tt
                     Tranian                                                        n

                     era                         Indo-European           [oe

                     Indian                                                         ~
                     S. E. Indian —————.         Dravidian ========      oe Staal 5
                     Lapp                          2
                     rae                     = Uralic-Yukaghir
                                                             ‘           8“ Bole
                                                                            a z
                     Mongol                                                   e     - =
                     Tibetan                     Sino-Tibetan                       :3
                     Korean                                                         : —F
                     Japanese                    Altaic                  —               5
                     Ainu                                                           1
                     N. Turkic                                                      .
                     Eskimo ———————              Eskimo-Aleut                       :
                     Chukchi ———————_            Chu kchi-Kamchatkan                i
                     S. Amerind
                     C. Amerind —+               (ALS             ee   eeSe         i
                     N. Amerind
                     N. W. Amerind               Na-Dene
                     S. Chinese ——————           Sino-Tibetan
                      Mon-Khmer —————            Austroasiatic
                     Thai ————————_              Daic
                      Indonesian                                          Austric
                      Malaysian
                     Philippine                  Austronesian
                      Polynesian
                      Micronesian
                      Melanesian                              :
                       sy      care         \. Indo-Pacific
                      New Guinean
                     Australian ——————           Australian


Figure 12. The comparison of genetic and linguistic trees (Cavalli-Sforza et all.
1988, pp. 6002-6).




                                           144
    Spal in the pibeto tree must and indeed usually do belong
 4 together to the same linguistic family. We can immediately note that
  _ populations that are adjacent in the genetic tree usually speak lan-
  _ guages of the same family. Because of this we can use the genetic
~ tree to help us date the approximate origin of a linguistic family.
Most language families appear to have developed during a brief
 _ period, between 6,000 and 25,000 years ago.
       There are, however, exceptions to the tendency of populations
3 speaking related languages to be close in the genetic tree. Ethiopians,
_ for example, are part of the African genetic branch, but they gener-
 ally speak languages from the Afroasiatic family, which are wide-
   spread in North Africa and the Middle East, where the people are
   generally Caucasoid. Ethiopians are in effect a bit more African.than
   Caucasoid genetically and more Caucasoid than most Africans lin-
   guistically. The Saami (Lapps) illustrate another exception to this
_ tule: they are genetically Caucasoid but speak a Uralic language
  whose other representatives live mostly in northeastern European
  Russia and northwestern Siberia near the Urals. The Uralic people of
  Asia are generally Mongoloid, and the Lapps are a mix of Caucasoid
   (probably from Scandinavia) and Mongoloid (of Siberian origin), —
  with a prevalence of the former. Even without looking at their genes,
  we can see this in the color of their skin and hair, and in the color and
  shape of their eyes, which vary in type from Mongoloid to Caucasoid.
      There is a simple explanation for these disagreements between
  genetic and linguistic classifications. As we have explained, these
  two populations are the products of relatively recent genetic admix-
  ture: of Europeans and Siberians for the Lapps, and of Africans and
  Arabs for the Ethiopians. In the genetic tree, the populations are
  placed with the groups that contributed the greater proportion of
  genes. Extended admixture may also put them in a more isolated
  and somewhat intermediate position in the tree. The genetic effects
  of population admixture are much simpler and more predictable
  than linguistic change. Genes of a mixed population occur in pro-
  portions corresponding to those of its ancestral parental popula-
  tions. But a genetically mixed population tends to preserve only one
  of the two original languages. Sometimes, the language of a mixed

                                    145
population will not change at all:more nee saan we finda— :
words or, sometimes, sounds borrowed from the other language.
Grammar is more resistant to change than vocabulary. As for the ori-
gin of the mixtures that generated Ethiopians and Lapps, we know
of intimate contacts between Arabs and Africans in Ethiopia during
the first millennium B.c. An Arab-Ethiopian kingdom established a         ~
capital first in Arabia (in the Saba region) and later in northern
Ethiopia (at Aksum). But earlier contacts may have occurred that
took place too early for history to record. We also know that the
Lapps have been in their present territory for at least 2,000 years. In
both these cases, the shortage of written records limits our ability to
know just how far back contact originated. In each case, the degree
of genetic mixing established can vary and depends on the amount
and mode of contact between two populations.
    It is easy to calculate that the genome of a people who received
a constant genetic flow of 5 percent per generation from its neigh-
bors would keep only 70 percent of its original genome after three
centuries. This is the average value of admixture for African Ameri-
cans, who have retained 70 percent of their original genome and
received 30 percent from mostly white settlers. If this flux contin-
ues with the same speed, African Americans will have little more
than 10 percent of their original genes after 1,000 years of habita-
tion in America. In the cases of Lapps and Ethiopians, their parent
populations may have been in reciprocal contact for a long time
(perhaps several thousand years), and degrees of admixture are
greater than those observed in African Americans, who were in
contact with whites for a much shorter period, and under condi-
tions of strong social inferiority.
    We can find still other interesting exceptions to exact corre-
spondence of the genetic and linguistic trees. Genetically, Tibetans
belong to the group of northern Mongols, but they speak a Sino-
Tibetan language like the Chinese. The Chinese represented in our
tree, however, originate from southern China and are genetically
more similar to southern Mongols. History comes to our rescue: in
this case as well. According to Chinese historians, Tibetans are re-
lated to the northern Chinese. Starting from the third century B.C,

                                  146
   in northern China, pastoral nomads headed south to Tibet. Some
  remained nomadic shepherds, but most maintained their original
  __ language after migrating. The unification of China began around
     the third century B.c. under the short-lived Qin (pronounced Chin)
     dynasty, and was completed under the Han Dynasty, which reigned
 4 for the next-four centuries. These two northern dynasties can be
  __ credited with the spread of their language beyond northem China
    into the entire country. During the following 2,000 years, this lan-
_ guage naturally differentiated into several others. Nevertheless, a
large number of ethnic minorities (55 are officially recognized,
 _ forming about 10 percent of the total Chinese population), espe-
  _ ciallyin southern China, have preserved their original language and
   ! genes, showing their different origins. The large majority of Chi-
     nese (close to 90 percent) call themselves Han, but the original
  _ genetic difference between north and south is still clearly vis-
; ible among them. Therefore, it is not surprising that Tibetans have
   - conserved their northern Chinese genes, although they live in
j the south, while southern Han look genetically more like Southeast
_ Asians. But they all speak Sino-Tibetan languages, of northern
origin.
;        The Nostratic and Eurasiatic superfamilies are represented at
     the extreme right of the group of language families in the tree in
    figure 12. With few exceptions, they correspond with the deeper
    genetic branches that we have called North Eurasian (not labeled)
    uniting the Caucasoids, northern Mongols, and Native Americans.
    This branch begins near the second fission, where non-Africans split
    into Southeast Asians (including Australians and New Guineans),
    and North Eurasians. The most important exceptions to this corre-
    spondence are the two Sino-Tibetan speaking populations, Tibetans
    and Chinese, whose genetic and linguistic associations noted in the
     figure disagree. They both speak Sino-Tibetan languages but
   _ Tibetans associate genetically with North Eurasians, and Chinese
    with South Asians.-As we have just explained, however, the dis-
    agreement is superficial, because the Chinese shown in our tree are
    from the south, and have only adopted their current language in the
    last 2,000 years, while they are genetically more closely related to

                                    147
 the speakers of Austric languages, that is, people living in Southeas
 Asia with whom they are grouped in the genetic tree.
     Figure 12 shows one other apparent discrepancy between the
 genetic and linguistic trees: Melanesians (from the Pacific islands
 closer to New Guinea) are genetically close to Southeast Asians and
are linguistically assigned to the Indo-Pacific family. This is not
 entirely accurate, because the languages spoken in Melanesia (as
 well as in coastal parts of New Guinea) are in part Austronesian,         e
 and part non-Austronesian. The latter are mostly Indo-Pacific, a
 very heterogeneous family. In practice, Melanesia’s situation is not
 a disagreement but an exceptionally complicated situation gener-
 ated by several superimposed migrations that can be considerably
 clarified by a more detailed analysis.
     The genetic tree in figure 12 still has some flaws, which are dis-
 cussed below, but, because of the complexity of the relationship and
 the frequency of mixed origins of populations, a much more detailed
 representation is needed. The tree we published in 1988 shows that
 after the first split (separating Africans from non-Africans), the sec-
 ond branch separates Eurasians and Americans from Oceanians
 (Australian Aborigines and New Guineans) and Southeast Asians.
 By 1994, new genetic information showed that the second branch-
 ing split Oceanians from all the rest; Southeast Asians actually split
 from Eurasians in the third branch. Admixture between Southeast
 Asia and the rest of Asia is probably the reason for this uncertainty,
 which has yet to be resolved because of the lack of adequate data
 from Southeast Asia.
     Other difficulties have also intervened, because a popular tree
 reconstruction method developed by Naruya Saitou and Masatoshi
 Nei (1987), called neighbor joining, produces a genetic tree some-
 what different from that of figure 12. In neighbor-joining trees,
 Europeans are attached to a short branch near the center of the
 tree between Africans and Asians. The most likely explanation is
 that Europeans received some of their genes from Asia and some (a
 smaller portion) from Africa. Using the neighbor-joining method,
 mixing between populations shortens the mixed branch and moves
 it toward the tree’s origin. I believe that the conflicts between these

                                   148
   ; ‘
     aifdee Halide methods are related mostly to delvitattin
    between populations.
        Mixing between North Asians and Africans contributed to the
    European makeup. Several European genetic traits are intermediate
    between the two parent populations. Africa probably contributed
    genes to Europe via a number of different routes, including the
     Middle East. This region is reachable directly from both Africa and
    Asia without crossing the sea, and may have been a starting point for
g _ the occupation of Europe by modern humans 40,000 years ago.
    Neolithic humans came from the Middle East 10,000 years ago. But
  _ we cannot exclude the possibility that modern humans also entered
     Europe from northwestern Asia. This may explain the relationship
     which several linguists claim exists between Basque. and the Dene-
    Caucasian languages spoken in extreme western Europe. Survival of
     the evidence of old relationships may be due to the refuge offered by
     geography, especially mountains, to relic languages and populations.
          A genetic tree built using a reasonably large number of micro-
     satellite markers showed that Basques were more similar to the Hunza
     (who speak the Burushaski language) than to four other Pakistani
     populations investigated. This observation, a result of the magnifi-
     cent research effort done in Pakistan by Dr. Qasim Mehdi and his
     colleagues, will need confirmation with a greater number of individu-
     als and markers. In the meantime, it provides the first genetic indica-
ae
ae   tion of a relationship between these two peoples, for which some
   _ remote linguistic resemblance was independently postulated.




                Why Is There a Similarity between Biological
                          and Linguistic Evolution?

     There are important similarities between the evolution of genes and
     languages. In either case, a change, which first appears in a single
     individual, can subsequently spread throughout the entire popula-
     tion. For genes, these changes are called mutations; they are passed
     from one generation to the next and can—over many generations—

                                       149
increase in frequency and even eventually completely replace the _
ancestral type. The genome is conserved and well protected from
outside influences.   Genetic mutations   are rare, and transmission
from one individual to another occurs only from parent to child,
while linguistic changes are much more frequent and can pass also
between unrelated individuals. As a result, languages change more
quickly than genes. In effect, if a word can resist change for 1,000
years, a gene can remain substantially unchanged for millions, and
even billions of years. Despite these differences, there are two rea-
sons for anticipating important similarities in the evolution of the
two systems.                   :
    Let me start by emphasizing that there is no reason to think that
genes influence the ability to speak one language over another. If
there are any such differences, they must be small indeed. Modern
humans possess thecapacity to learn any language, and the first lan-
guage learned is a function of the time and place of birth. All mod-
ern languages share a similar level of structural complexity—ethnic
groups that live at a primitive economic level do not speak a more
primitive language than wealthier groups. If there is any interaction
between genes and languages, it is often languages that influence
genes, since linguistic differences between populations lessen the
chance of genetic exchange between them.
   Linguistic evolution is a special type of cultural evolution, as we
shall discuss more generally in the following chapter. How is it possi-
ble for these two very different systems to follow parallel evolution-
ary trajectories, or to “coevolve”? The explanation is quite simple.
Two isolated populations differentiate both genetically and linguisti-
cally. Isolation, which could result from geographic, ecological, or
social barriers, reduces the likelihood of marriages between popula-
tions, and_as a result, reciprocally isolated populations will evolve
independently and gradually become different. Genetic differentia-
tion of reciprocally isolated populations occurs slowly but regularly
over time. We can expect the same thing to happen with languages:
isolation diminishes cultural exchange, and the two languages will
drift apart. Even if glottochronological estimates of the time of sepa-
ration are not always as exact as we would like, in general languages

                                  150
      "do diverge increasingly with time. In principle, therefore, the lin-
     _ Guistic tree and the genetic tree of human populations should agree,
     __ since they reflect the same history of populations splitting and evolv-
        ing independently.
            Nevertheless, there are several major sources of divergence
    _ between genetic and linguistic trees. One language can be replaced
    __ by another in a relatively short time. In Europe, for example, Hun-
       garian is spoken in the geographic center of many Indo-European
         branches: Slavic, Germanic, and Romance; but it belongs to the
      _. Finno-Ugric branch of Uralic. The other languages of the same
         family are spoken in the northeast of Europe and in the west of
    7    Siberia. At the end of the ninth century A.D., the nomadic Magyars
       left their land in Russia, crossed the Carpathians and invaded Hun-
       gary, which had already been occupied by the Avars. The conquest
       resulted in a Magyar monarchy, which imposed its language on the
       local Romance-speaking population. The number of conquerors
       was large but did not constitute the majority of the population—
      perhaps less than 30 percent of the total. The genetic effect of this
       conquest was therefore modest, and further diluted by subsequent
Oe
NEE
ee
       exchanges with neighboring countries. Today, barely 10 percent of
       the genes in Hungary can be attributed to Uralic conquerors.
4         Elsewhere, the Barbarian conquests following the collapse of
|      Rome faced greater difficulties in replacing or modifying the lan-
      _ guage of the conquered, who were always more numerous than their
       invaders. The earlier inhabitants also usually possessed a higher
       level of socioeconomic organization and were able to retain their
       cultural identity. The Lombards probably originated in Sweden or
       northern Germany, but they began to conquer Italy in the middle of
       the sixth century A.D. About 35,000 warriors, coming from Austria or
       Hungary, rapidly occupied most of Italy, except for the extreme
       south, and established a powerful state that lasted until the eighth
       century, but had no significant effect on the local language. The same
       is true of the Franks, a German population that played an important
       role in French political history without affecting their language. But
       in England after the fall of the Roman Empire, the Anglo-Saxons—
       Roman mercenaries of Germanic origin—did succeed in imposing

                                         151
century. The BritishIsles have witnessed dramatic linguistic change
in a very short time. The indigenous population spoke pre-Indo-
European languages unknown to us today. In the last millennium—
B.C., Celtic languages were spread throughout most of Europe, from _
a center probably located between Austria and Switzerland. At the
time of Rome’s conquest, Celtic languages were spoken throughout _
most of the British Isles. The Romans imposed Latin, which was fol-
lowed by the adoption of Anglo-Saxon. Norman invaders ultimately
brought many French words into English after 1066.
    Another important replacement occurred in Turkey at the end
of the eleventh century, when Turks began attacking the Byzantine
Empire. They finally conquered Constantinople (modern Istanbul)
in 1453. The replacement of Greek with Turkish was especially sig-
nificant because this language belongs to a different family—Altaic.
Again the genetic effects of invasion were modest in Turkey. Their
armies had few soldiers and even if they sometimes traveled with
their families, the invading populations would be small relative to
the subject populations that had a long civilization and history of
economic development. After many generations of protection by
the Roman Empire, however, the old settlers had become compla-
cent and lost their ability to resist the dangerous invaders.
    In general, the survival of a language like Basqueor Burushaski
is more likely to happen in refugia (isolated places—like mountain-
ous regions—resistant to invaders). A strong social identity also
helps to retain a population’s language.
    Examples of language replacement are not limited to Europe,
but because Europe’s written history is quite long, the most recent
replacements are documented to a unique extent. The Aryan inva-
sions of Iran, Pakistan, and India brought Indo-European languages
to Dravidian-speaking areas. The great geographic discoveries of the
Malayo-Polynesians, extraordinarily skillful navigators, led to the
diffusion of their Austronesian languages to parts of New Guinea,
Melanesia and Micronesia, and Polynesia. To the west, Austronesian
languages spread as far as Madagascar near the African coast. The
Polynesian migrations had lesser genetic consequences in Melanesia

                                152
             ete
            aees ae       §




 and New Giines: which were already occupied. The genetic-
  linguistic mosaic of Melanesia is very complex, reflecting a 5,000-
  year history of migration and admixture of different people. But
when the latest Austronesian migrants—passing Melanesia and cen-
4 tralPolynesia—reached eastern Polynesia, starting about 3,000
  years ago, they still appeared nearly Mongoloid, because they had
  not had time to mix with the Melanesians.
      Exploration enthusiasts will be happy to learn that, Bae a genetic
  viewpoint, it is still impossible to exclude the possibility that South
  Americans contributed in some ways to eastern Polynesia, as Thor
_ Heyerdahl implied in his voyages with the Kon-Tiki. The genetic dif-
   ference between Mongoloids and Amerindians is not sufficient to
   say exactly if and how South Americans may have contributed to
 - Polynesia. Recently discovered genetic Amerindian markers could
  undoubtedly provide a clearer answer to these questions.
      The total substitution of one language for another occurs more
  easily under the pressure of a strong political organization of new-
  ‘comers, as witnessed in the Americas. Otherwise, the separate lan-
  guages spoken in nearby countries can remain relatively unaffected
  for thousands of years, even when the genes’of neighbors experience
  a partial, and sometimes major, substitution. It is difficult to quantify
  the extent of substitution that has occurred in the Basque genome
  through admixture with neighboring populations, but it must be con-
  siderable. However, given the length of time during which Basques
  were exposed to gene flow from neighbors, especially farmers who
  arrived in the area some 5,000 years ago, the gene flow per unit of
  time was small. There were perhaps only one or two mixed marriages
  per thousand each generation. By contrast, near complete genetic
  substitution without language replacement probably did occur in the
  Hadza and Sandawe. These two populations from Tanzania speak
  Khoisan languages, but their genes are unlike South African Khoisan.
  Both groups are quite small and must have lived among Bantus for
  quite a long time. Bantus probably arrived in the general area about
  2,000 years ago. A population isolated among other, different ones,
  undergoing a gene flow of 5 percent per generation over 1,000 years,
  could result in the replacement of 87 percent of the population's

                                     153
original genes, and 98 percent over 2,000 years. The Hadza and San-
dawe were hunter-gatherers and were thus separated from Bantu
farmers by socioeconomic factors sufficient to preserve their own
languages but insufficient to prevent genetic exchange with their
neighbors. It must be admitted, however, that it is difficult to exclude
the opposite hypothesis: that both the Hadza and Sandawe have basi-
cally maintained their original non-Khoisan genetic background, and
have changed their language to a Khoisan one because of original
contact with Khoisan speakers. Eventually, however, this contact dis-
appeared after Khoisans retreated south. There are many such exam-
ples of language replacement with little gene replacement in the very
recent expansions of Europeans that followed the introduction of
transoceanic travel, resulting in the adoption of the invaders’ lan-
guage. The reverse also happened: Finns speak a Uralic language but
they have very little, perhaps 10 percent, of Uralic genes (still to be
confirmed with more powerful markers than those on which this esti-
mateis based). It is possible they originally spoke a language of the
Balto-Slavic subfamily, when they settled in Finland, a very vast
country that must have been inhabited by a low density of Uralic-
speaking hunter-gatherers or nomadic pastoralists, probably kin of
the Saami still living in the northern part of Finland. As discussed
earlier, there is genetic evidence that the original farmers who settled
in Finland perhaps 2,000 years ago were a very small population, per-
haps 1,000 or so. This is inferred from strong evidence of genetic
drift, especially for certain genetic diseases. The new settlers proba-
bly joined a good number of native inhabitants, and peaceful contact
with them helped the immigrants settle and spread. The process was
facilitated by learning the natives’ language, and eventually adopting
it. Most likely there was little genetic exchange between the two.
     In summary, the replacement of languages is not the only force
that disturbs the parallelism between genetic and linguistic evolu-
tion. Genetic change due to gene flow from neighbors into a small
group can be another one. Deeper analysis and, especially, histori-
cal information can frequently help to distinguish between the vari-
ous explanations. It is remarkable that, despite the opportunity for
genetic and linguistic replacement, we can still find sufficient

                                  154
  “coherence iin the ees linguistic and genetic jumble to recon-
 _ struct a common tree for the two evolutionary tracks. But the rate
__ of disappearance of traditional languages, a serious loss which is dif-
   ficult to fight, is so high that this investigation may become impossi-
  bleiin a few generations. —




            Interpreting the Great Human Expansions on the
       Basis of Genetic and Linguistic Data, Particularly in Asia

  We have already observed that, judging from the genetic tree, most -
  linguistic families appear to date anywhere from 6,000 to 25,000
  years ago. Some families are older; based on their time of coloniza-
  tion, the Indo-Pacific languages of New Guinea and those of Aus-
  tralian Aborigines may be older than 40,000 years. In this case the
  definition of families is aided by the great geographic isolation of
  these two regions, an island and a continent.
      Khoisan languages must also be very old, given the uniqueness
  of some of their characteristics (e.g., the presence of click sounds),
  but it is difficult to know precisely how old. I would not be surprised
  if the ancestors of these peoples were responsible for the first
  expansion from Africa to Asia. There is some support for this per- -
  haps surprising, certainly titillating, hypothesis, other than the
  possible antiquity of Khoisan languages. According to some anthro-
  pologists, the Khoisan people who now live in southern Africa once
  lived further north, in East Africa or perhaps even northeastern
  Africa. If this was the case between 50,000 and 80,000 years ago,
  then they were in the best position to expand to Asia. It is true that
  of all Africans, as we saw in figure 3 in chapter 3, East Africans are
  most similar to Asians. This is encouraging, but it might also be due
  to more recent migrations between East Africa and Arabia, which
  certainly happened much later in both directions. It is also worth
  noting that Khoisans bear some physical resemblance to East Asians,
  notably in their long-drawn eyes and large round heads. They also
  show a remarkable genetic similarity to western Asians (but not to

                                    155
                                                                         z
                                                                             he
                                                                              i!

East Asians, in spite of their superficial resemblance for facial
traits). At the time of writing, the first results of a major break-
through in the study of Y chromosomes promise to give us some
much anticipated answers to these problems.
   Let us consider, in parallel, both genetic and linguistic data in
other parts of the world, as they might illuminate the oldest expan-
sions. There clearly must have been major expansions and migra-
tions in Asia, soon after the arrival of modern humans. The principal
components of Asia clearly indicate some regions that may be cen-
ters of major demographic developments. The first five PCs give us,
in order: (1) a region of northwest Iran, south of the Caspian Sea,
bordering Iraq on the western side and Turkmenistan on the north-
eastern side; (2) Southeast Asia; (3) the region around-the Sea of
Japan, including Japan, Korea, Manchuria, and northeastern China;
(4) northern India; (5) Central Asia. One also notices a major genetic
gradient of the first PC extending between east and west. It must
have been generated by several migrations in eastern and western
directions, of which there are many indications in history and in
immediate prehistory. Obviously, there must have been many simi-
lar ones before. Also the Y chromosome analysis indicates that there
must have been several different demographic developments in
Asia, leading to the settlement of the three continents: Oceania,
Europe, and America, in this order. It gives some idea of main
migratory paths, but the data are not yet to the point of giving the
precision one would like to reach. Recent research by Li Jin et al.
(1999) comparing the Y chromosome and also a narrow but highly
variable region of chromosome 21 shows that there must have been
more than one major migration from Africa to Asia. The Y chromo-
some is particularly informative on older migrations, as shown by
recent work of Peter Underhill and Peter Oefner, who use a new
technique of discovering genetic variation called DHPLC. At the
time of writing they have found 165 genetic variants of the Y chro-
mosome, which can be divided into ten major groups (called hap-
logroups, and numbered from I to X). The first three are the oldest
and originated in Africa, but the third born, JI], migrated from



                                 156
        Africa to Asia. The other seven, from IV to X, originated in Asia
        and several of them are found also in Oceania, Europe, or America.
          They also correspond to centers of expansion indicated by the PCs:
          the VI and IX haplogroups correspond to the south Caspian. These
          two haplogroups may well include the whole Middle East, and may
          be a composite of several centers of expansion at different times,
          including earlier expansions from and to North Africa, and the
          development of agriculture. The VII and VIII correspond to the
          Southeast Asian center; the IV to the expansion from the Sea of
          Japan; theV to northern India. The expansion from Central Asia
          (the fifth PC) probably corresponds to a later branch of the V hap-
          logroup. One can also assign, at least tentatively at this stage, a lin-
          guistic family or superfamily to each expansion center: Greenberg's
          Eurasiatic to the south Caspian region, Austric to the second PC
          center in Southeast Asia, Dene-Caucasian to the eastern center of
    e     the third PC.
4            The center of origin of Dravidian languages is likely to be some-
>
,
        - where in the western half of India. It could be also in the south
#
4        ~ Caspian (the first PC center), or in the northern Indian center indi-
;         cated by the fourth PC. This language family is found in northern
          India only in scattered pockets, and in one population (Brahui) in
          southern Pakistan. It was spoken earlier further west—certainly in
          Elam (southwestern Iran), and possibly in the Indus valley (eastern
          Pakistan). The major group of residual Dravidian languages is spo- -
          ken, as is well-known, in the south of India. It may seem strange to
        . place the origin of a language family in an area in which almost no
          language of the family is represented today. But it is a reasonable
          assumption that this family was removed from its place of origin by
          the arrival in Pakistan and northern India of Indo-European speak-
          ers, 3,500 to 4,000 years ago. The effectiveness and cruelty of the
          Indo-Europeans’ war against earlier settlers of India is told in vivid
          images in battles described in the Mahabharata.
              The fifth PC indicates a center of expansion further north,
          approximately in the Altai region, and a natural suggestion is that
         this is the center of origin of Altaic languages. Two major expansions


                                            157
                                               P                 .




 appear to have originated from this area, both late: by Mongols _
 (third century B.C.) and by speakers of Turkic languages (beginning
 with the eleventh century A.D.). There surely could have been many
 other expansions before. In a period preceding the Mongolian and
 Turkic expansions, the three millennia before the Christian era, the
 area was in part controlled by Indo-European speakers (Tocharians).
     Interestingly, the first suggestion of a reverse migration from
 East Asia was a hypothesis by Michel Hammer on the basis of a
 peculiar Y chromosome mutant he discovered in Japan and also in
 Africa. We found other mutants supportive of Hammer's observa-
 tion. The origin of the specific Hammer mutant was not necessarily
 in Japan, but the migratory chain seems reasonable and indepen-
 dent from others. The haplotypes involved may be the Asian branch
 of the III Y-chromosome haplogroup, and the IV haplogroup. It is
 possible that this expansion may have brought the oldest Eurasian
 linguistic family (called Dene-Caucasian by Starostin) across Asia
 to reach Europe, perhaps 40,000 years ago. This family is repre-
 sented in refugia by linguistic isolates like Basque, a Caucasian fam-
 ily, Burushaski in northern Pakistan, Ket (on the Yenisei River in
 central Siberia, possibly ancestral to the Na-Dene family in north-
 western America) and some other extinct, less clearly related lan-
 guages (like Sumerian and Etruscan). Two major families also
 belonging to the Dene-Caucasian superfamily, Sino-Tibetan and
- Na-Dene, survived over more extensive regions. They were nearer
 to the postulated region of origin, and must have survived in larger
 numbers than the other branches of the family.
     Dene-Caucasian may have been the Eurasian superfamily par
 excellence until perhaps 20,000 years ago, which some linguists
 have given as the time of origin of Nostratic. Nostratic may have
 been a late branch of Dene-Caucasian. It started growing perhaps
 10,000 to 20,000 years ago and gave rise to the families which           —
 largely replaced Dene-Caucasian in Eurasia: Indo-European, Uralic,
 Altaic. Greenberg's Eurasiatic family lengthens the northern Asian
 range of Nostratic to the east. It excludes Afroasiatic, whose geo-
 graphic origin is obscure, but is earlier than Eurasiatic and origi-
 nated in Africa, according to Greenberg.

                                  158
                         The Indo-European Family

   Indo-European remains the most studied language family. Attempts
   to determine its place of origin have given incredibly variable results.
_ Many locations have been proposed, ranging from Germany as far as
   the northeastern Caucasus and from the Baltic States to Suez. Some
   hypotheses are even wilder. Not long ago, one of the most popular
   theories was proposed by the archeologist Marjia Gimbutas, who
   postulated an origin above the Black Sea and associated the earliest
 _ speakers of Indo-European with the Kurgan culture of the Asian
   steppes. But when Gimbutas published her hypothesis, the Kurgan
   dates were poorly known. She assumed 3,000 to 3,500 years B.C., a
   date which was rejected as too old by English archeologists. Gimbu-
   tas’s dates appear to have been vindicated by new excavations, which
   have also shown that horses were probably domesticated and
   mounted at that time and that war chariots were built in this area.
       In 1987, Colin Renfrew proposed that Indo-European languages
   were conducted north by the Neolithic farmers of the Middle East.
   In chapter 4, I mentioned his influential book, which corroborated
   our hypothesis that Neolithic agriculture spread by a demic and not
   a purely cultural process. It is tempting to champion the correspon-
   dence between the spread of Indo-European languages and the
   diffusion of agriculture, which geography brings clearly to light.
   However, in my discussions with Albert Ammerman, my archeologi-
 _ cal collaborator in the initial research on the spread of farming and
  farmers, we avoided linguistic correlations because archeology can-
  not tell us about them in the absence of a written record. Never-
  theless, on the basis of theoretical anthropological considerations,
  archeologist Renfrew came courageously to the conclusion that
  Indo-European was spread by Middle Eastern farmers.
     I learned about Renfrew’s hypothesis before he published it, on
  the occasion of a visit to Cambridge. Further connection between
  the spread of agriculture and language came to mind when I learned
  from linguistic literature that the language written in a cuneiform
  script around 5,000 years ago in the region of Elam (southwestern
  Iran) was Dravidian. Both Renfrew and I independently suggested

                                     159
- that Diwan may have originated in theMiddle Eastaioe
  spread by mideastern farmers east toward Pakistan and India. But —
  in the last section of this book I tried to shift the origin of Dravidian —
 away from the Fertile Crescent further east, either to the south
 Caspian, eastern Iran, or northern India. It seems very reasonable
 to assume that agricultural developments helped spread the lan- :
 guages spoken by the first farmers. This must have- happened
 repeatedly, and we will see other examples. But agriculture devel-
 oped no earlier than 10,000 years ago, and therefore the relevant
 linguistic families are late ones. If Greenberg is right in stating that
 Dravidian as well as Afroasiatic is older than Eurasiatic, then the
 center of origin of Dravidian is not necessarily connected with the
                                                                                :
 Middle East, and may be further to the east.
     Another interesting question related to the difficult problem of
 centers of origin of linguistic families arises with Renfrew’s hypoth-
 esis that the Indo-European languages originated in Turkey, and
 then spread into Europe with Neolithic peasants. Obviously, all
 immigrants bring their language with them, and have no reason to
 learn a new one if they fail to encounter anyone in their new terri-
 tory. It is worth pointing out that the inhabitants of Europe before
 the agricultural expansion (often called Mesolithics) usually had a
 very low population density. Since they were hunter-gatherers, they
 may have preferred living in areas that were geologically different
 from agriculturally suitable land. These earlier inhabitants and the
 new settlers, the Neolithic farmers, did not therefore have much
 contact, especially at the beginning of the agricultural expansion,
 when the density of farmers was lower than at later stages.
     Renfrew’s hypothesis, if correct, provides a date for the dissemi-
 nation of Indo-European languages equivalent to that of the initial
 spread of farming, around 9,500 to 10,000 years ago. This date may
 seem to be problematic, since old linguistic estimates (although
 very approximate) suggested an earlier date (6,000 years ago).
 Moreover, this latter date would fit more comfortably Gimbutas’s
 hypothesis of a Kurgan origin 5,000 to 5,500 years ago (kurgans are
 tombs in the form of mounds, which have been quarries of art
 objects in southern Russia). As we shall see, however, there is no

                                    160
    a- contrary, Alberts Piazza and I believe that their proposals pei force
   _ each other. If we accept this idea, it may be useful to refer to the
   _ original Indo-European spoken in Turkey 10,000 years ago as the
  _ primary Indo-European, pre—proto-Indo-European, and to that
 spoken 4,000 to 5,000 years later in the Kurgan region as secondary
      or proto-Indo-European.
        It is clear that, genetically scare peoples of the Kurgan
____ steppe descended at least in part from people of the Middle East-
      em Neolithic who immigrated there from Turkey. To arrive north
      of the Black Sea farmers from Turkey may have expanded west of
      the Black Sea, through Romania, and/or along the eastern coast of
_     the Black Sea. Shortly after their arrival, these Neolithic farmers
      domesticated the horse, which was not as abundant elsewhere, and
    _ developed a predominantly pastoral economy. This allowed them to
      survive and even prosper in an environment ill suited to an exclu-
      sively agrarian life. This adaptation took time, but with the first
      development of bronze (around 5,000 years ago), they were on the
      brink of an expansion. They had food, a means of transport, and
      powerful new weapons. Actually, the Kurgan region extended fairly
      widely, and generated many expansions after this first one, over the
      next 3,000 or 4,000 years. The very first area of origin may have
ee
it
eee
|oe
  -
      been between the rivers Volga and Don, but there were many
      expansions, both eastward to Central Asia and westward toward
      Europe. Kurgans are found over much of the steppe in both west-
      ern and eastern directions.
          The eastward expansion may have been first. It led east and
      south through Central Asia toward Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and
      India, generating the “Indo-Iranian     branch”   of Indo-European.
      These languages later completely replaced almost all the Dravidian
    A Janguages previously spoken from Iran to Pakistan and in northern

      India, but not those in southern India. Most inhabitants of India are
      Caucasoid, even if their skin is darker than that of northern Euro-
      peans, Populations in the south that speak Dravidian languages are
      genetically slightly different from, and darker than, northern Indi-
      ans. At least three ethnic layers are superimposed in this part of the

                                        161
world. The oldest and the most limited (the pre-Dravidians, or Aus- —
traloid) have unfortunately not been studied in detail. They are said —
to resemble Australian Aborigines in some respects; the similarity
can only be superficial, but these people are likely to be more or less
direct descendants from first African immigrants. As for the Dravid-
ians, they were most probably the first Neolithic farmers of India, °
but it is unclear where they actually came from—perhaps from the
Middle East, as originally hypothesized both by Renfrew and
myself, or perhaps from northern Iran or northern India, as outlined
above. Unfortunately, not much is known about the development of
Indian agriculture.
   The expansions in the opposite direction, westward, toward cen-         ~
tral and northern Europe, generated, one after the other#the Celtic,
Italic, and Germanic branches of Indo-European languages. North-
ward expansions may have originated the Balto-Slavic expansion,
which was perhaps the last. The southward expansion was less suc-
cessful, as the area was already heavily inhabited, but from the sec-
ond millennium B.c. there were various Indo-European speaking
peoples and dynasties in Turkey and the Middle East—the Hittites
and the Mitanni—whose probable origin was from the Kurgan.
     That Gimbutas’s and Renfrew’s ideas seem more reasonable in
combination than either is alone was confirmed by a recent study of
the Indo-European language tree. We conducted this research using
material published in 1992 by two linguists, Isidore Dyen and Paul
D. Black, and the statistician Joseph B. Kruskal, to make the first com-
plete, quantitative analysis of the similarities between Indo-European
languages. The data published are the frequency of common origin
of two hundred words in some six dozen Indo-European languages.
All possible pairs of languages were compared and the similarity of
each pair evaluated by calculating the percentage of words that
showed common origin by classical linguistic criteria. For instance,
“mother” in English and mére in French have common origin, while
“head” and téte do not. The words were those of a standard list
used for “glottochronology,” a method for dating the separation of
languages. Their statistical method is multidimensional scaling, a
sophisticated type of principal components analysis. Using their data

                                  162
    we applied two modem methods of tree reconstruction developed
  Bs for genetic studies, and obtained easily reproducible trees that, inter-
     estingly, correspond reasonably well to August Schleicher’s original
     one. The biggest difference is the position of the root, which as
     always is the most difficult to assess.
        The most important groups of Indo-European Biauides are the
     following subfamilies: Germanic (which includes English and the
     Scandinavian languages), Italic (issuing Latin, among other lan-
    guages spoken in Italy, in the first millennium B.c.), Balto-Slavic,
    Celtic, Greek, Indian, and Iranian. Most linguists consider Indo-
    Iranian a single branch, although Dyen and his colleagues say they
    are distinct. In our tree, several languages have an early, separate
4 origin: Albanian, Armenian, and, later, though somewhat less clearly,
 by Greek. Extinct languages like Hittite and Tocharian could not be
A   considered in our analysis. The same tree was obtained by two other
    major methods of reconstruction and is shown in figure 13.
     It is reasonable to think that isolated languages like Albanian
    and Armenian (and with less evidence Greek) originated with the
    first wave of Neolithic farmers from Turkey. Their greater.age with
    respect to other families is responsible for their early position in the
setree. They are also geographically closest to Turkey.
oe
eS
        Our analysis groups the Indian and Iranian languages into
    one Indo-Iranian group, in the classic tradition of Indo-European
    studies, but slightly contradicting the results of Kruskal and his
    colleagues.
        The later branches are likely to be derived from the second
    wave of Indo-European migrations from the Kurgan area, central
    European ones from its western part, and the Indo-Iranian branch
    from the eastern part. The order of branching in the tree is inter-
    esting: that of Celtic, Balto-Slavic, Italic, and Germanic subfamilies
    corresponds reasonably well to their geographic distance from the
    center of origin. Here the first branch of the tree is the Celtic,
    which is still spoken in the extreme western areas of Europe, and
    therefore is the most distant one from the Kurgan area. The next
    split generated the Italic-Germanic and the Balto-Slavic branch.
    The Italic branch settled in the southwest of Europe; it was unable

                                         163
                                                                                             ¥ Pers ~
                                                                                              Tadzik
                                                                                              Wakhi
                                                                                              Ossetic
                                                                                              Bengali
                                                                                              Hindi
                                                                                         —    Lahnda
                                                                                              Panjabi
                                                                                              Gujarati
                                                                                              Marathi
                                                                                              Khaskura
                                       ;                      100                   100 j Nepali
                                           100                                                Kashmiri
                                                                                              Singhalese

                                                                         100         aa
                                                                                              WelshC
                                                      100                            100 WelshN
                                                                                               IrishA

                                                                               86
                                                                                    7a        Dae
                                                                                              Macedonian

                                                                        ~_|89_f5—              Byelorussian
                                                                               2               Polish
                                                                               49             Czech
                                                                                     =        Slovak
                                                                    —               SS CacchE
                                                                               a=             LusatianU
                                                        100                                   Russian




                                  S



                     3




                                      SM




                                  Siti                  we
                                  =         S           —
     9000   8000   7000    6000



Figure 13. Tree of63 Indo-European languages. Numbers near branches indicate the
reliability in percent of the specific branch, calculated by the method of the bootstrap.
The scale on the bottom indicates years. (From an unpublished manuscript by Piazza,
Minch, and Cavalli-Sforza, based on data from Dyen, Kruskal, and Black 1992)

                                                164
           a


    © to completely replace the earlier pre-Indo-European language
        _ Basque but was successful in replacing Etruscan in the Italian
    _     peninsula. The Germanic branch settled in the northwest, north,
_         and center of Europe, being unable to completely replace the ear-
          lier Indo-European subfamily which had also survived Celtic. The
          Baltic and Slavic branches settled in the northeast and the south-
          east, respectively, competing with the earlier settlers who spoke
          Uralic languages.          .
              Recently, Tandy Warnow from Philadelphia and others have pro-
          posed a completely independent tree analysis of Indo-European his-
          tory. Their results are not fully published and therefore difficult to
          analyze. They use a small number of word roots, believed to be espe-
          cially reliable, and a very small number of languages that includes
          extinct ones. Their conclusions differ from ours mainly because they
          propose a very late branching of Celtic. This is difficult to reconcile
         with the early diffusion of Celtic languages to almost all of Europe, -
          and their suppression by latecomers, speaking Germanic and Italian
          languages, which confined these languages to the extreme geo-
          graphic periphery of northwestern Europe. The small number of
    '    words employed and the lack of a statistical test of robustness of
         conclusions may be the main problem of this otherwise very inter-
         esting analysis.




                                  The Bantu Expansion

         Many other expansions have brought new languages to new lands.
         The demic expansions of peoples that we are familiar with were
         almost all accompanied by their original languages. Among the pre-
         historic expansions studied both genetically and linguistically, the
         Bantu expansion is of considerable interest. Despite contacts and
         genetic flow from tribes speaking other languages, like Nilo-Saharan
         in East Africa, and the Khoisan in South Africa, the Bantus have
         largely maintained their genetic distinctiveness, which makes them
         somewhat different from the other West Africans from which they

                                           165
originated. Starting from Nigeria and Cameroon, they head ol 4
south, toward the Atlantic coast. The Bantus of the first expansion        _
were still using Neolithic tools 3,000 years ago, but later Bantu
expansion was aided by the introduction of iron. Only around A.D. 1
did the Bantus reach the Great Lakes region of Uganda and Kenya,
and from there they expanded south, both near the coast of the
Indian Ocean and further inland. From this time on,
                                                 mn,archeologists
find Bantus relied heavily on iron.
   The western and eastern currents moving into the south central
continent met eventually. The Bantus were apparently still a few
hundred kilometers from the Cape of Good Hope when the Dutch
landed there around 1650. Both archeology and linguistics also show
that the Bantus arrived earlier in Namibia along the West Coast.




                          Darwin's Prophecy

The origin of scientific linguistics can be dated to 1786. In that year,
the English judge Sir William Jones advanced the theory that San-
skrit, Greek, and Latin, and possibly Celtic and Gothic (the ances-
tor of Germanic languages), appeared to have a common origin, at a
famous conference at the Bengal Asiatic Society of Calcutta, which
he had just founded and served as president. The similarity of
Sanskrit and European languages had already been noticed by the
Florentine merchant Filippo Sassetti and by the Jesuit priest
Coerdoux. The latter sent notes from Pondicherry to the Academy
of Inscriptions in Paris showing that Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin
must have a common origin, but his conclusion did not have the
impact of Jones's conference. In 1863 the German linguist August
Schleicher published a tree showing the origins of Indo-Europeans
very much like one we would draw today using modem methods.
The ties between biology and linguistics were evident at once.
Schleicher was certainly influenced by Charles Darwin’s use of
trees. to explain the theory of organismal evolution. In On the Ori-


                                  166
      a   ”

      gin of Species, Darwin clearly stated that if we knew the tree
                                                                   of bio-
       logical descent of the human groups, we could extract the tree
     we_ relating languages. This effort was not attempted until 1988. I am

    | ashamed to say I was not aware of Darwin's prophecy at the time. I
         was reminded by a friend who is a historian of our science and had
       read our 1988 paper, with Alberto Piazza, Paolo Menozzi, and
       Joanna Mountain, in which we correlated together on a global scale
       data of genetics, archeology, and linguistics. Here are Darwin’s
       words:

                     The natural system [of classification] is genealogical in its arrange-
              - ment, like a pedigree. It may be worthwhile to illustrate this view of
                classification by taking the case of languages. If we possessed a perfect _
                pedigree of mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man
                would afford the best classification of the various languages now spo-
                ken throughout the world; and if all extinct languages, and all interme-
                diate and slowly changing dialects, were to be included, such an
                arrangement would be the only possible one. °

4          The correlation between genes and languages cannot be per-
a
       fect, since the rapid conquest of large territories may favor replace-
q      ment of indigenous languages with unrelated ones, as happened in
4      much of the Americas. But these events do not appear to have
3      occurred frequently enough to erase all trace of a correlation. We
       see equally that in the case of prolonged genetic exchanges with dif-
       ferent neighbors, genes can be replaced. Nevertheless, despite the
       two sources of confusion, the correlation between genes and lan-
       guages remains positive and statistically significant.
           Even at a microgeographic level, the regions subject to detailed
       study have usually shown strong correlations between geography,
       genetics, linguistics, and other cultural aspects like surnames.
       Often the genetic-linguistic mosaic we observe clearly shows the
       effects of numerous expansions—some are known historically—
       and of their superimpositions and interactions. Perturbations do
       occur, but they do not manage in most cases to obscure the clarity
       of the correlation between genes, peoples, and languages,


                                                   167
     A Hypothetical Model of Linguistic Evolutionary History
      Based Mostly on Genetic and Archeological Knowledge

Linguistic evolution is a subject of unusual interest. In this chapter,
we have restricted ourselves to explaining the similarities between
genes and languages. But linguistic evolution is also very important
to understand as an example of a more general phenomenon, cul-
tural evolution, which we will analyze in the next chapter.
     Following Darwin’s suggestion, one can attempt to use our
knowledge of genetic evolution to make hypotheses about the ear-
lier part of the linguistic tree. Figure 14 shows the linguistic history
reconstructed when a number of cues taken from the genetic tree
are correlated to linguistic information. Merritt Ruhlen drew the          =—
                                                                            o
                                                                            s


tree, using our 1988 genetic tree as a guideline. But he also took
into account new linguistic superfamilies that had been daringly
proposed in the interim. I have made few changes to his tree,
adding some probable dates. When our genetic data is entirely sat-
isfactory, the tree will probably not be as simple as this one, but it
seems likely that its major features will not change.
    The oldest linguistic families must be African: of the four exist-
ing today, Khoisan is considered to be the oldest; Afro-Asiatic the
most recent; Niger-Kordofanian and Nilo-Saharan probably had a
common origin (the Congo-Saharan superfamily suggested by
some linguists), and must have arisen at an intermediate time.
Khoisan may be the most direct descendant of the people who left
Africa, as explained before.
    For those Africans who remained, the first linguistic split is
likely to have been between the branch leading to modern Khoisan
on one side and a branch leading to the ancestral languages of
Congo-Saharan on the other. Afroasiatic is likely to have originated
much later, probably in northeast Africa, or otherwise in the Middle
East, or in Arabia.
    The Niger-Kordofanian family consists of two branches. The
very small one is the Kordofan, named after a large mountain range
in western Sudan, and the other is called Niger-Congo. Perhaps
there was a westward spread from East Africa, first to the Kordofan,

                                   168
                                                                                       Khoisan

                                                                                  Niger-Kordofanian
                                  ane                  Congo-Saharan
                                                                                    Nilo-Saharan


                                                                                      Zz          =




                                       faci
                                                                                   Indo-European



                                        ep   40-20 K                 20-10 Kya


         Ti                   :        :                                            Eskimo-Aleut
                omo sapiens sapiens
    ¥             (100-70 Kya)                                                   Chukchi-Kamchatkan       2

4                         3            _ Eurasian       Dene-Caucasian                Na-Dene
i                                      (6040 Kya)         (40-20. Kya)              |Na-Dene |
E           :                                                                       Sino-Tibetan

ro      a                                                               :   Caucasian/Basque/Burushaski

rae
P                                                                   Austro-Tai
                                                                                            Cc.


“4                    ‘            :                Austric                           Miao-Yao

                                                                                    Austro-Asiati
                          Southeast Asia/Pacific
                                  (60-40 Kya)                                       Indo-Pacific




        Figure 14. The tree of origin of human languages, drawn by Merritt Ruhlen in 1994,
        using Darwin’s suggestion to base it on the genetic tree (given in figure 12), somewhat
        modified, with the likely range of initial divergence dates (Kya = 1,000 years ago).


        then to West Africa, or the expansion may have been in the opposite
        direction. In West Africa a major population burst coupled with the
        introduction of agriculture may have occurred 4,000 to 6,000 years
        ago. I hope archeologists will note the genetic cues from principal
        component analysis of genes that suggest this may have begun
        between Mali and Burkina Faso (former Upper Volta). Agriculture

                                                              169
then spread from Nigeria and Cameroon to pal oa southe
Africa with the Bantu expansion, which took 3,000 years to reach as
far south as it would.                                                  e
    The agricultural expansion originated in West Africa found a —
forest population of hunter-gatherers, Pygmies. Most of my work in
Africa was in the forest areas of the tropical belt, where Pygmies —
have survived the arrival of farmers. They are very few and, wher-
ever the forest has disappeared, their descendants are hardly recog-
nizable. Unfortunately, the original Pygmy languages have all
disappeared, replaced by languages of neighboring farmers. The
only possible traces of these languages are in their names for forest
animals and plants. Working in an area where foraging (hunting-
gathering) barely survives side by side with agriculture has given
me a chance to observe the transition from foraging to farming,
which is still going on but will soon be over. I believe that archeolo-
gists interested in the Neolithic transition in Europe and elsewhere
should spend time in this area, while it is not too late, inorder to see
a living model of what must have happened in similar circum-
stances in other parts of the world. All the farming people in prox-
imity are dark-skinned, while those who live in the forest are less so.
    A group of very dark-skinned Africans (sometimes called “elon-
gated” because of their very elegant, tall and thin bodies), many of
whom could make a good living as fashion models, inhabit East
Africa and other neighboring regions. Linguistically, they are Nilo-
Saharan, a name that indicates their dominant living area and their
origin. The Nilo-Saharan started domesticating cattle in the Sahara
perhaps 8,000 years ago, but many of them had to leave when it
became a desert. Even today they are still mostly shepherds.
    The earliest confirmed date of modern humans in Asia is in
China, 67,000 years ago; and the first settlement of New Guinea
and Oceania is believed to have been 50,000 to 60,000 years ago at
the earliest, or at most somewhat later, 40,000 years ago. Did mod-
ern humans reach East Asia by land or perhaps by boat, along the
southern coast? Probably both. There exist archeological estimates
of the rate at which the recolonization of northern Europe took
place at the end of the last glaciation (around 13,000 years ago): it

                                   170
              a Butthe. major limiting qectiiemay have been largely that
     Periice withdrawal, rather than that of human movement. Itis possi-
    2 ble that the coastal route allowed a faster movement. How long did
     _ it take to travel by the hypothetical coastal route from East Africa, a
     : likely point of departure, to Southeast Asia (a necessary point of
       arrival, from which some may have continued north to East Asia
     along the coast of the Pacific, and others south to New Guinea and-
    _ Australia)? We may venture a minimum guess of 10,000 years. Per-
    _ haps modern adventurers might try to repeat a small part of the
a     journey in conditions similar to those of our ancestors. This could
    _ be very informative, even if today’s coast and the availability of
 4g seafood must be different from what it was then. Assuming that it
  _ took that much time to go from East Africa to Southeast Asia, the
    average displacement that may have taken place would have been
    on the order of 50 to 60 kilometers per generation (2 km/yr). This is
 about twice the rate of advance of farmers many thousands of years
 later. We are speaking of a mode of life of which there do not seem
      to exist living or historical examples (other than perhaps in Bommeo).
      I would describe it as nomadic fishing. But the model of demo-
      graphic expansion would not be very different from that of Neolithic
      farmers, in the sense that there must be both migration and reason-
     _ ably active reproduction for an expansion to take place. Of course,
       over the generations, some extended families or small groups may
       have settled or chosen to leave the coast and go into the interior, as
       others continued their almost random wandering along the coast.
      The settlement of Southeast Asia, New Guinea, and Australia led to
      the development of the Indo-Pacific and Australian linguistic fami-
      lies. Andamanese and other Negritos of Southeast Asia are the clos-
      est living descendants of Africans who were among the first settlers
      of Southeast Asia and Oceania.
          China and Japan may have been settled before Australia, and
Eemay
ae
ee
Oe         have been the first areas of development of the Dene-Sino-
      Caucasian family, which must have spread west through central
      Asia to Europe. The Na-Dene branch went to Siberia, from which
      it later (about 10,000 years ago) migrated to North America, after

                                         171
_ the Amerindians first colonized it aie 15,000 to 30,000 years “y
   ago).
       A late expansion centered in Southeast Asia was that of theAus-
                                                                             ct
                                                                             Ap
                                                                              a
   tric superfamily, which connects genetically Taiwanese aborigines _
   and the southern Mongols of Southeast Asia. The second PC of
   Asia indicates a possible genetic expansion centered in Southeast
   Asia. This may have happened both very early, and also again as late
 * as the local development of agriculture. Principal components can-
   not distinguish two expansions having the same area of origin which
   took place at different times.
       The multiplicity of migrations and expansions between Europe
 and Asia, in both directions, is well substantiated. A recent discov-
 ery of a late west-to-east migration was that of the Indo-Europeans     .
 who went as far as western China as recently as 4,000 to 1,000 years
 ago, but the languages spoken by them, Tocharian, are extinct.
 Among the last people to expand from a center located in the east
 were Mongolians who engaged China, forcing the emperors to
 build the Great Wall more than 2,200 years ago. Attila the Hun
 went as far west as Italy. Their relatives speaking Turkic languages
 started expanding from Central Asia about eight or nine centuries
 ago, eventually reaching Turkey and the Balkans.
     We have mentioned that the roughly continuous genetic
 gradient from Europe to East Asia is the result of all these migra-
 tions. Many Central Asians are herders and nomadic. Languages,
 especially those forming the Eurasiatic family, introduce apparent
 discontinuities in the gradient, as communities inevitably speak a
 single, common language. Some extend widely and may move,
 creating a complex human         geography.   Political changes and
 military events may force the replacement of languages in a rela-
 tively short time. Here the correlation of languages and genes
 cannot be perfect but it is still evident to some extent, in spite of
 the turbulence of the Eurasian history of the last four or five
 millennia.
     Genetic research can certainly help the understanding of lin-
 guistic evolution, and vice versa.



                                      172
