                                     CHAPTER6



                   Cultural Transmission
                            and Evolution




      Humans differ from other animals—even their closest cousins—by
    _ the richness oftheir culture and the importance it is accorded. Cul-
      ture, liberally defined, is not restricted to us and can be observed in
     other species. Anthropologists have proposed literally hundreds of
     definitions of culture, which are mostly abstract and exclude tech-
     nology. I prefer the converse, and give the simplest and broadest
     possible definition: culture is the ensemble of customs and tech-
    nologies that played and continue to play an essential role in the
     evolution of our behavior. Such a definition includes animal cul-
7    tures, although they are less developed than the human one
    _ because animal communication is clearly much more limited. But
     one must add to the definition that culture is what is learned from
4    others, especially our ancestors. What we add to it by our own
;    efforts are usually modest innovative contributions generated by
_    independent, solitary learning. These are sometimes passed to oth-
     ers and thus become part of culture, as they become available to
     future generations. The cultural track is the only one that allows


                                       173
                                                                          waa


knowledge about the world to pile up overgenerations. It removes —
the limit of a single lifespan on the accumulation of information.
   Teaching provided by parents (especially the mother) is essen-
tial for most bird and mammal species. There are also other forms
of indirect teaching as well as innate behavior, exemplified by
imprinting in birds: fledglings are geared by nature to identify the
individual with which they pass their first hours of life outside their
                                                                                :
shell as their mother, as well as the species to which they belong.             :
Depending on the species of bird, the process can be more or less               |
complicated. Imprinting is a form of biological adaptation probably
found in humans as well, although it remains poorly studied. It can
be identified by the existence of a “receptive period” or a “critical
period” for a specific learning.
    Human education occurs primarily by imitation or direct teach-
ing (oral or written). We usually don’t make a formal distinction
between these two mechanisms of human education. There is
always at least one transmitter and one receiver, and information
that passes between the two. Language greatly increases the effi-
ciency of this process and forms the very basis of human culture.
More than anything else, it has allowed humans to adapt to and
master their surroundings in a very short time. Throughout human
evolution, language has given modern humans much of their advan-
tage over other species and made possible the complexity of our
knowledge today.
    Language is an innovation that involves both biology and cul-
ture. It is the result of natural selection acting on anatomy and
physiology. Children are born with the propensity and ability to
learn a language. It is even likely that Neandertals had similar but
less developed language abilities. (It has been said that the Nean-
dertal larynx was not long enough to produce our richness of
vowels, but there is not yet enough evidence to support such a
statement.) While language itself is a cultural creation, it requires a
precise anatomical and neurological foundation. This development
probably came very gradually and progressively. Homo habilis may
have been able to speak in some fashion even two million years ago.
Phillip Tobias noticed a larger cavity next to the left cerebral hemi-

                                  174
              3

         “sphere ae habilis skulls analyzed. It is here that a cerebral protu-
          berance exists which is known to be one of the neurological centers
         for speech—Broca’s area. Tobias’s observation suggests that this
          center had already achieved a certain degree of development in the
          first species that we place in the genus Homo. A similar bulge is not
          found in monkeys.




                     Culture as a Means of Biological Adaptation

         The ability to learn is one of the most fundamental characteristics
         of life—even in very simple organisms. Culture, or the ability to
         learn from the experience of others, is a special phenomenon that
         relies on communication. The speed and the precision of communi-
         cation, and even our ability to memorize what we learn, are factors
         that govern the efficiency of culture. Naturally, it is not enough that
    culture exists for it to be useful from a biological viewpoint. But
    several examples can demonstrate its potential value for biological
ee
Cae
ee  adaptation. On their own, our senses of taste and smell are not
         enough to help us to safely choose the food we eat; we must also
         learn from someone else to recognize which plants are toxic and
ww
"
ee       which animals are dangerous.
    bd

=             Culture enables us to accumulate prior discoveries and helps us
         profit from experience transmitted by our ancestors—knowledge
         that we would not have on our own. In principle, it has always been
         possible for a lone individual to invent differential and integral
         calculus starting from scratch, but the odds are very low. Even
         Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton used existing mathematical
         knowledge in making these fundamental contributions. Until the
         invention of writing, the accumulation of knowledge was limited by
         human memory, which varies from one person to another. Today,
         this limit has disappeared. The abundance of information in the
         last twenty years is changing the world thanks to the rapid access
         modern communications provides to it. Such change was unimagin-
         able even a few years ago.

                                           175
   Culture resembles the genome in the sense that each one accu-
mulates useful information from generation to generation. The
genome increases adaptation to the world by the automatic choice
of fitter genetic types under natural selection, while cultural infor-
mation accumulates in a person’s nerve cells, being received from —
another person and selectively retained. Cultural transmission
occurs in a variety of ways: by the traditional path (observation,
teaching, conversation), through books, computers, or other media
developed by modern technology.
     Evolution also results from the accumulation of new informa-
tion. In the case of a biological mutation, new information is pro-
vided by an error of genetic transmission (i.e., a change in the DNA
during its transmission from parent to child). Genetic mutations are
spontaneous, chance changes, which are rarely beneficial, and more
often have no effect, or a deleterious one. Natural selection makes
it possible to accept the good ones and eliminate the bad ones. Cul-
tural “mutations” can be accidental and minor like many genetic
mutations—mistakes in the copying of manuscripts in medieval
monasteries, for example. Minor variation would result from the
errors introduced by a scribe in copying a manuscript. Most of
these errors are probably accidental, resulting from inattention.
And sometimes, the scribe will take the initiative and make a
change that, in his opinion, helps comprehension or the quality of
the text, but that may confound future philologists.
    There is a fundamental difference between biological and cul-
tural mutation. Cultural “mutations” may result from random
events, and thus be very similar to genetic mutations, but cultural’
changes are more often intentional or directed toward a very spe-
cific goal, while biological mutations are blind to their potential
benefit. At the level of mutation, cultural evolution can be directed
while genetic change cannot.
     But we inevitably arrive at the impression that most innovations
are rarely truly advantageous. Sometimes the person suggesting an
innovation makes a profit from it, but innovations that should
improve the state of an individual, or of a social situation, often miss
their mark and turn out to be unimportant, inappropriate, or even

                                  176
        mon aiciis thePicea eonfitience 4inihe heritability of
s political skill; the son of a powerful leader frequently is appointed
  to follow in his father’s footsteps. The effects are often very disap-
  pointing. Mendelian inheritance predicts this problem, because the
   similarity between parent and offspring is on average modest. His-
   tory shows that hereditary monarchies last only for a short time.
   When stripped of genuine authority, they are often incapable of
   appropriately performing even their symbolic roles. Nevertheless,
   selection generally tends to create and maintain customs and insti-
   tutions with social utility. Even if imperfect or detrimental, some
   cultural changes are adopted and persist, occasionally incorporating
   modifications based on experience. The continuous changing of
   customs makes us forget the original purpose of a particular prac-
   tice; without history, it quickly becomes difficult to reconstruct the
   reasons for certain rules and social conventions. One example that
  deserves further research is reproductive control in economically
   primitive cultures, which appears to have been quite common for a
   long time before its post-Paleolithic decline. Then, as now among
   the Pygmies     and perhaps all modern       hunter-gatherers,    pacing
   births helps slow population growth to manageable rates, avoiding
   disastrous population explosions. It was only during the Neolithic—
   or in general with the development of agriculture—that popula-
   tions began to grow rapidly, since more people could be fed in
   agricultural societies. Pygmies do not like to have children more
   than once every four years and believe that conceiving a second
   child too soon after another places the first at great risk. I doubt that
   the Pygmies consciously realize that this provides an important
   restraint on population growth, and they generally offer other
   explanations for the custom. Demographic stasis is usually impor-
   tant and necessary for peaceful cohabitation of different people,
   but so is the ability for nomadic populations to move without the
   burden of carrying several small children. With an interval of four
   years between births only one child needs to be carried by a parent,
   and the population remains stationary or grows very slowly.
   Maintaining this four-year gap between children requires great

                                      177
discipline. Some researchers think that breastfeeding—by prevent-
ing ovulation—can also prevent a new pregnancy, but that does not
appear to suffice. The truth is that Pygmies avoid frequent preg-
nancies by observing a sexual taboo for three years following the
birth of a child. They make this sacrifice for the health of their chil-
dren without thinking of the long-term advantages that result from
this celibate period, which on its own is not likely to provide suffi-
cient motivation. It seems to me that this sexual taboo would disap-
pear if breastfeeding for three years were itself sufficient to prevent.
pregnancies. The conclusion to draw is that reasonable reproduc-
                                                                           |
tive customs arose during the Paleolithic among hunter-gatherers
that have helped them keep their demographic growth near zero,
probably without their knowing or realizing it.
    Every day, we face choices that may be trivial or may affect us for
years. These choices are a sort of “cultural selection.” Unlike natural
selection, which chooses between the best naturally adapted indi-
viduals of a species, cultural selection proceeds through the choices
made by individuals. Ultimately natural selection will operate, since
it works on the cultural choices we make as well. If our choices help
us reach maturity and reproduce, then our cultural decisions (as well
as biological predispositions) that generated these particular choices
will be favored by natural selection. Thus, each cultural decision
must pass two levels of control: cultural selection acts first through
choices made by individuals, followed by natural selection, which
automatically evaluates these decisions based on their effects on our
survival and reproduction. Every cultural decision will also be
favored by natural selection if it affects survival and reproduction,
creating a positive correlation between these two forms of selection.
    Although culture can intervene and modify them, innate
impulses were passed down to us from our ancestors, upon whom
natural selection acted. Often quite strong, these impulses are
rarely absent. Many of our sensations and actions are either pleas-
ing or painful, and frequently determine our behavior. It requires a
certain amount of reflection to identify these impulses, but they can
be appreciated by noticing the emotional charge potent in certain
words. We can also observe when a word picks up an emotional

                                  178
 overtone from its context: “drunk with happiness,” “drunk with
  _ power,” and “drunk with sorrow.”
        This emotional coloringis certainly the result of cerebral struc-
    tures, although they are poorly known. We know some centers of
   the brain that, when artificially stimulated, provoke sensations of
   pleasure or pain. These internal centers, called “reward centers,”
  undoubtedly influence our decisions, although a higher level of
  decision making must exist since we can also make decisions that
we know will cause pain. For this to happen, there must be an alter-
  native, more important motivation that makes us accept costly or
   painful decisions. In any case, it is clear that pleasure, pain, and sor-
   row, or the expectation that one or more may occur at some future
   time, can influence our decisions. It is at this level that we can most
   easily see the possible dissociation of cultural from natural selec-
   tion. Drugs that induce pleasure carry the risk of death or disability.
   The conflict between sexual desire and a knowledge of the danger
   of AIDS or other sexually transmitted diseases offers another con-
   temporary example. The fear of hearing an unwelcome diagnosis
  can keep us away from a doctor who might be able to help. In the
   Fore tribe of New Guinea, relatives customarily ate their dead.
   When an infectious disease—kuru, most probably related to Mad
   Cow Disease—struck the Fore, extraordinary persuasion was needed
   to discontinue this form of cannibalism, considered a duty toward
   their ancestors, which spread the disease. Biological and cultural ten-
   dencies often come into conflict, and, in order to avoid harm, we
   must not obey every innate—or even every learned—impulse.




                        How Is Culture Transmitted?

   We acquire our culture from those around us and pass it on, in turn,
   to others. An important distinction between modes of cultural trans-
   mission must be made. We have borrowed terms from epidemiology
   to describe the two principal routes of transmission: vertical trans-
   mission describes the passage of information from parent to child,

                                      179
                                                            2"     a



while horizontal transmission includes all other pathways between
unrelated individuals. Evolution is slow under vertical transmission,   _
which resembles genetic inheritance, because the time unit is the
passage of a generation. Horizontal transmission, however, can
occur rapidly—sometimes resembling an epidemic disease spread               Te
                                                                            o a


by direct contact between a susceptible and a contagious individual.
    The ability to modulate the rate of evolution makes culture. a
                                                                            e
very powerful agent of change. Special types of cultural transmission
can profoundly affect the rates of change. For instance, when an
idea is simultaneously spread from one to many people, very rapid
evolution may result. Change comes more slowly when horizontal
transmission is only from person to person (e.g., by word of mouth).
Intermediate in rate is transmission by a hierarchical route. These
distinctions produce important differences in the dynamics and suc-
cess of cultural change. We have examined two aspects in particular:
variation of a characteristic over time and variation among members
of the same social group and among social groups. In collaboration
with Marcus Feldman at Stanford, I studied the theoretical conse-
quences of different mechanisms of cultural transmission.
   Cultural transmission occurs necessarily in two steps: an idea
must first be communicated and then it must be accepted. Any
communication can be misunderstood, forgotten, or simply be
made in an unconvincing way. In general, no innovation is assured
of success. Often, something must be repeated to meet a favorable
reception. If the originator possesses unusual charisma, prestige, or
political or religious authority, the likelihood of successful accep-
tance is increased. The ages of the communicator and of the
receiver are also important. In the theory explained below, we only
consider transmission to have occurred in those cases where a cul-
tural innovation is accepted by its receiver.
    We can identify several forms of vertical transmission and three
types of horizontal transmission comprising a transmitter and a sin-
gle receiver, a single transmitter and several receivers, or several
transmitters and a single receiver.
    1. Vertical transmission occurs between a member of one gen-
eration and a member of the following generation. A biological rela-

                                 180
                                     \ UN   2a




                    ldmay be agaliy receptive. The extent of parental influence—
              whether the child belongs biologically or by adoption—is usually
              great. This form of transmission has evolutionary consequences
            - that are very similar to biological transmission, especially if the
              _ transmission occurs via only one biological parent, or an adoptive or
              cultural “parent” (uni-parental transmission): the rules are almost
        _     the same as the simple rules of genetic inheritance (of mtDNA, or Y
              chromosome, for example). Vertical cultural transmission can be
            _ just as conservative as genetic inheritance. Variation is introduced
             _ only through cultural mutation or the immigration of individuals
            ~ coming from another society who have something new to teach.
               Transmission from grandparents to grandchildren is more conser-
               vative still—by a factor of two—and transmission over several gen-
               erations can maintain important cultural features over long periods
               of time. Vertical transmission was certainly enhanced by writing.
               Examples are the influence of Greek philosophers like Plato and
              Aristotle; or the patriarchs of the Catholic Church like Saints
              Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. The oral transmission of religious
             texts before they were committed to writing also allowed rigid con-
              servation, however, including that of rites and dogma.
                 2. Horizontal transmission, resembling the spread of an infectious
              disease, occurs between two individuals of the same or different gen-
              erations who do not have the clear-cut biological or social relation-
              ship recognizable in vertical transmission. In epidemics, the contact
              that transmits a disease between two people can be very brief; but
              cultural transmission usually requires more prolonged contact. When
              the transmitter belongs to an older generation than the receiver but
              is not a parent, we speak of “oblique transmission.” It insures that
              information passes from one generation to another. A more complete
              analysis of apopulation’s structure by age and probability oftransmis-
             sion according to the age of the transmitters and receivers is possible,
             but the mathematics involved are often prohibitive.
                 The theoretical problems of horizontal transmission are similar
aeeet
             to those facing the study of epidemics of infectious diseases, which
             have been studied in great detail. These analyses can actually be

                                                 181

%wi.
                                                 >?    oe   =



applied almost directly to horizontal cultural transmission. In
effect, a successful cultural mutation sets off a cultural epidemic. E
The number of people converted to the new cultural characteristic —
increases in time according to a “logistic” curve. This curve has a
maximum rate of increase at the beginning, slows down to a con-
stant rate of increase, which lasts for an extended period of time,
and eventually flattens until it reaches a maximum that may include
the entire population or only a fraction of it. Geographic, social, or a
economic barriers impose the primary limits to cultural diffusion.
The chance of success is determined by a number of factors, begin-
ning with the attractiveness of the idea to its potential converts. The
question to answer is whether the success of a cultural novelty is
similar to an infectious disease where the ability of the parasite or
virus to reproduce in its host must exceed a certain calculable
threshold for an epidemic to be sustained.
   3. Judging from ethnographic data, social structure has become
considerably more complex than it was in the relatively egalitarian
society of hunter-gatherers that followed the development of agri-
culture. With the increased size of social groups, the authority
provided by chiefs and clans became necessary. Society became
stratified into social classes, often within a defined hierarchy. Under
these conditions, the transmission of a chief's will to all of a group’s
members made it easier for innovations to be passed from one indi-
vidual to many others. A similar type of multiple transmission also
arose when education and teaching were formalized, and a master
had several students. The speed and efficiency of transmission from
one to many is reaching its theoretical limit in the modern media.
Information about important events can be communicated simulta-
neously to a billion or more people. In our information age the
greater number of role models among whom we can choose and
accept voluntarily can have extraordinary influence.
   Cultural transmission is easier, faster, and more efficient when a
powerful, authoritarian chief forces the acceptance of an innova-
tion. Many societal changes are probably the result of the will of a
powerful or a charismatic authority. Popes have the ability to pro-
pose new dogma, which must be accepted by the faithful under

                                  182
           ; “aeFascist Reins in» Italytried to feline ee use
       by declaring war on French and English words that had crept into
     _ the language. It also wanted to suppress the use of the third person
    __ singular pronoun /ei and generalize that of the second person plural
    __ voi for respectfully addressing people. The usage of the third per-
      son singular derives from the Spanish usted. It was imposed on
     Southern Italy by a monarchy of Spanish extraction after the
    _ Aragonese conquest. But the Fascist attempt to abolish the use of
    _ lei and other foreign words failed, though an invented word—
     autista (driver)—replaced a word then in common use, of French
      origin, “chauffeur,” which is difficult to pronounce in Italian. It is
       not easy to force things on Italians. Fascism’s greatest success was
       perhaps to compel party membership and to force adult males to
       wear party symbols. Compliance was assured by making it a neces-
       sary condition for almost every type of employment.
           More important are some cultural changes that spread through-
      out Tibet and parts of India. Polygyny (the practice of keeping
A     multiple wives) and polyandry (the practice of keeping multiple
_ ~ husbands) became popular practices, which still exist. These two
    forms of polygamy are sometimes found in the same village; there
    are even simultaneous marriages between multiple men and women.
    The wives and husbands in these multiple marriages are usually sib-
    lings, which probably explains these arrangements, since they avoid
    dividing inheritances and agricultural lands between siblings. This
      isa very bold solution to a common problem, which is acute in the
      marginal agricultural environment of Tibet. Elsewhere, this prob-
      lem has been resolved, perhaps unfairly, through primogeniture,
      under which the eldest child (or son) inherits all property. The
   history of polyandry in Tibet is not well known—some record of it
   may be preserved by monks or monastic documents. One possible
©
es
>
ee
a



   hypothesis suggests that feudal lords, with the consent of religious
leaders, were allowed to experiment with and implement these
      social changes, which may seem extreme to us today. I should admit,
      however, that my wife’s three uncles—the three Buzzati brothers,
      of whom Dino was a well-known author in Europe, and Adriano my

                                        183
 genetics teacher—declared that they all wished to marry the s
 woman. Two of them never did marry, perhaps because this es
 could not be implemented.
     4. The inverse mechanism—several transmitters to one receiver—
 is also very important. In a social group, several members (and 3
 sometimes all) often exert psychological pressure on new members. —
 Each latecomer can thus find himself the object of strong pressure —
 from many sides, in what is often a more persuasive procedure than
 when a single transmitter is influence. This “social pressure” can
 even occur in small groups, like nuclear families. The mechanism of
 transmission by multiple transmitters, usually acting in unison, has
 been called “concerted.” It tends to suppress individual variation
 and to homogenize a social group. It is thus the most conservative
                                                                         3
 mechanism of all.
                                                                         d
    The family is the most important social group, exercising consid-
 erable pressure over its members—particularly the youngest ones,
 who may not have developed critical judgment or the ability to
 resist. But we all know that some people can resist most influences.
 Rebellion tends to develop only later, but when this mechanism of
 social pressure meets little resistance, it is the most powerful.
      Hervé Le Bras and Emmanuel Todd (1981) have recently
 refined ideas by the French sociologist Fredericq Le Play. They
 believe three major types of families exist in France: (1) The family
' with absolute patriarchal authority in the northwest in which the
 head of the household makes all decisions on behalf of the family’s
 members, a custom that may have been inherited from the Celts.
 (2) A more relaxed form of patriarchy that emphasizes mutual sup-
 port and allows the children to marry, have children, and continue
 to live in the family home if they are unable to support themselves.
 Older members also live with the family and are cared for by rela-
 tives. This type of family is common in the southwest in an area that
 corresponds, at least according to genetic data, to the proto-Basque
 area. (3) The strictly nuclear family frequent in the northeast, in
 which children can marry and have children only if they have the
 ability to live independently. This practice is most frequent where
 the Franks had the greatest influence. Franks were barbarians of

                                  184
            vanic origin who conquered France in the early Middle Ages
      and   later extended their control to the rest of France. Itis interest-
    ing to note that recent historical research has shown that this type
   _ of family was also common in Germany and in England after the
    _ Anglo-Saxon conquest. This arrangement that, among other things,
   _encourages youth to relocate in the search for employment proba-
     bly favored industrial development.
 ____ Le Bras and Todd have proposed a controversial but stimulating
__hypothesis that says family structure influences political outlook:
customs learned in the family microcosm largely determine those
  q_that will be more easily accepted when the young are introduced to
  the social macrocosm. Family members search for social systems
   ~ that mimic, to some extent, the family life with which they are famil-
    iar. That is why monarchy and authoritarian systems may be more
      popular in northwest France than in the southwest, where the
      Socialist vote is quite strong; in the northeast, the vote favors a free
__ market economy. Todd (1990) applied this analysis with success to
    _ other parts of the world. It is also interesting to note that the division
__ of France by family type shows a strong correlation with genetic his-
  __ tory. I don’t believe it is worth looking for a genetic explanation here;
 _ the sociological explanation for the agreement between the family
     microcosm and the social macrocosm seems consistent with our the-
_ ory of cultural transmission. The correlation of sociological differ-
ences with genetic differences is simply the consequence of ethnic
separation. Deep and ancient ethnic differences can easily be con-
’ served for twenty centuries or more, thanks to the conservation of
_ family structure. This conservation itself is due to the inevitable fact
_     that family structure is inherited by vertical transmission and rein-
forced by powerful social pressure within the social group, which
acts on new members when they are young and most sensitive.
|    This hypothesis was confirmed by an independent study of Ro-
    salba Guglielmino and others (1995). In an analysis of data from
_     Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas, restricted, for the time being, to
      Africa, we have observed that the most conserved cultural charac-
      teristics are familial. This study showed that very few other cultural
      characteristics are as highly conserved although some cultural

                                         185
traits, like the form and structure of dwellings, as well as certain 5
socioeconomic characteristics that depend on the degree of social
evolution, do not change rapidly.
    With Marcus Feldman, our team has studied the evolutionary -
consequences of these transmission mechanisms—the way in which
social groups evolve—when a social innovation is introduced (1982).
 Will it establish itself readily or not? We chose to do this work math-
 ematically, which has the advantage of precision but is not always
 appreciated by readers. It is perhaps for this reason that anthropol-
 ogists have not shown much interest in these models, unlike econo-
 mists, for example,      for whom the use of mathematics poses no
‘problem. However, one could reach the same conclusions by using
just a bit of common sense. And it is worth reiterating that analysis
of cultural transmission, and in particular the distinction between
vertical and horizontal transmission and their major forms, is essen-
tial to our understanding of cultural inheritance.
     A novel behavior could be a variant of an existing custom that
has not been universally accepted. It could also be a completely
new invention. When parents teach a new behavior to their chil-
dren, there is a very good chance that it will be accepted, since chil-
dren are more receptive to new ideas than adults. Acceptance
within the family may be successful, but, like genetic inheritance,
many generations of transmitting the innovation, or other mecha-
nisms of transmission, are required to spread the cultural change
from one family to many, or to all members of a society.
    In the case of horizontal transmission, the diffusion of an inno-
vation through a population can be more rapid (occurring within
the space of a generation, in some cases) as long as learning it is
easy and its consequences are agreeable. As with an epidemic, dif-
fusion can stop before reaching the entire population.
   The speed of innovation adoption is maximal when one person
communicates with many others. The decision of an authoritative
political chief will be accepted almost immediately by all subjects,
as long as it does not present serious disadvantages. History shows
that many social and political events were completely determined           -
by monarchs or by influential people of the ruling elite. In modern

                                   186
              aeprocesses, adhocah a small number of people from the political
           ~ or business world continue to control an important number of daily
            _ decisions. The hierarchical structure of society can help a transition
              proceed, starting with the upper echelons of power and descending
          x to the lower ones.
                On the other hand, under the fourth transmission mechanism,
             which we have called “concerted” (where many people transmit the
      _      same cultural trait to a single person, usually of the next generation,
          ___ and do so in turn with each member of it), an innovation has a very
            small chance of success. A single person sympathetic to the change
             would first meet resistance among the allies he needs. Unless the
             innovation is unusually useful, or the proposer prestigious, success
             is unlikely.
                  Most cultural characteristics are transmitted by a variety of
              means that often conflict. This conflict is common; for instance it
              occurs when one learns rules of behavior at school that differ from
              those taught at home, or when companions at school have very dif-
              ferent opinions from school authorities and/or the family. The con-
            ~ sequences of these conflicts vary significantly among individuals
             and particular cultural traits.




 .

                               Examples of Cultural Transmission

             Cultural transmission comprises education received from both
             family and school. It also includes all the habits and customs that
             are not explicitly part of one’s education. Certainly, an individual
¥            acquires these through personal experience, but here again, con-
             scious or unconscious imitation must play an important part.
:             __ It is not easy to distinguish between relative contributions. The

.            similarity between two friends or between two individuals with a
             more intimate relationship, like a husband and wife who have lived
             together for a very long period of time, are partly the expression of
             what the two have learned from each other and what may have

                                               187
ei
wer
 attracted them in the first place. These forces are often very strong,
 and we sought to examine them by surveying a group of students |
 about similarities between husbands and wives, parents and chil- —
 dren, and between friends. We asked about forty questions, and
 queried the students about themselves and their parents, as well as
 the parents about the students and themselves. On average, the
 correlations (the similarities) between husbands and wives (the stu-
 dents’ parents) were the greatest, followed by those between par-
 ents and children, and finally between friends. The characteristics
 studied addressed social activities, habits, leisure activities, super-—
 stitions, beliefs, and so on.                                              sS

    The most interesting result of this study is that the highest cor-
 relations were shown by characteristics of two categories—religion
 and politics. Both show the major role played by parents, that is, by
 vertical cultural transmission. In the first case, children resembled
 their mother to a remarkable degree, both in the choice of religion
 in mixed marriages, and in the frequency of prayer. The choice of
 religion is not surprising, since a child’s religion is almost always _
 chosen by his parents, or at least by one of them, at an age when the
 child cannot express his own preferences. Conversions do occur,
 but only rarely, and later in life. That a twenty-year-old should
 continue to pray to God, however, does seem to imply more than
 familial constraint. Unfortunately our data do not indicate whether
 prayer continues to be an important activity throughout the life of
 children raised to pray. If the mother’s influence prevails in the
 choice of religion, the father appears to exercise influence only on
  the regularity with which a religion is practiced, which is a social
  rather than a spiritual decision—and even in this case, the mother’s
  influence is as great as the father’s. Both parents appear to con-
  tribute equally to a child’s political outlook.
_     It is always possible that some part of the similarity between
 parents and children has a genetic basis. The distinction between
 biological and cultural transmission is not always an obvious one.
 For example, it was long believed that the similarity between the
 1Q of parents and children was entirely genetic in origin. The
 famous British psychologist Sir Cyril Burt, undoubtedly carried

                                   188
        av ay byenthusiasm, even stooped so low as to publish false dento
       “prove” a genetic basis for IQ. It is thanks to the American psychol-
     _ ogist Leon Kamin that Burt's fraud was discovered.
           At the beginning of work on IQ, the French government asked
     3 Alfred Binet to develop a method for identifying children with
       mental handicaps in order to provide them with special schooling at
       an early age. But it was primarily American psychologists who tried
       to change Binet’s IQ scores into a measure of “pure” intelligence—
       independent of the culture or social milieu in which the tests were
       conducted. This misplaced enthusiasm led to several serious social
       mistakes, of which not all have been corrected. The study of
       adopted children was decisive in showing that cultural transmission
       exerts a strong influence on the determination of IQ. American
       studies in 1980 and 1981 established that only one-third of the vari-
       ation in IQ among individuals was due to biological heredity.
       Another third can be explained by cultural transmission, while the
       last third appears mostly due to other unspecified, mostly random
      _ differences in-personal life experience. This is a far cry from the 80
       or 90 percent genetic contribution suggested by Burt and his many
ib     American colleagues. Similarly, Arthur Jensen’s statement that the
       low IQ average of African Americans relative to Whites is genetic
Fe
*
       was contradicted by studies of Black children adopted by Whites in
       England and the United States.
4          Theories about the role IQ plays in social stratification have
      also been disproved. Some researchers have claimed, without real
       evidence, that the difference in IQ observed between high and
       low social classes was genetic, because people with a high IQ
       automatically became part of the high social classes. A French
       study on adoptions again showed that the difference was primarily
       sociocultural and not genetic.
           There is probably still very widespread prejudice in America
       concerning the low IQ of Black Americans: the majority is likely to
       be still convinced that it is the result of a real genetic difference and
       not of a strong social handicap that cannot be reversed in a short
       time. Contrast the enthusiastic acceptance of the book The Bell
       Curve and its racist message with the response to the information

                                          189
  cans by 11 points, almost as much as the average difference bet
 White Americans and Black Americans. Then, the response was: it
 is clear that American high schools are very bad.
       Adoption studies provide the best guarantee against the conte
  sion of biological and cultural transmissions, but these studies are dif- |
  ficult and costly, largely because there are so few subjects. The most
  ambitious studies use identical twins who have been raised sepa-
  rately. But these studies are hampered by small samples and because
  the very early environments of twins, pairs, and their rearing is not
- always independent. But other methods exist that help limit confu-
  sion between cultural and biological inheritance. For example, in the         —
  case of religious or political similarities between parents and chil- —
  dren, we used published research data comparing identical twins,
  fraternal twins, and regular siblings. Fraternal twins should not
 resemble each other more than regular siblings if biological heredity          _
 were the only important factor. In the case of religious or political          |
  creeds, the similarity between fraternal pairs was almost the same as
  for identical twins, indicating that genetics plays no (or only a very ©
  small part) in this trait. Family background does have a major effect. —
  The purely or predominantly maternal transmission of some religious
  characteristics would be difficult to explain in a strictly biological way.
  Maternal transmission exists for biological characteristics deter-
  mined by the mitochondrial genome. However, it would be very sur-
  prising if these cytoplasmic organelles, which supply the cell's energy,
  had any effect on individual religious beliefs.
      We can study cultural transmission directly, instead of taking the —
  indirect approach of twin studies. In this way we avoid confusing
  biological inheritance with other mechanisms. We can question
  people directly for certain characteristics, and the depth of memory
  revealed   in subjects is often     surprising.   In collaboration,   the
  anthropologist Barry Hewlett and I asked African Pygmies from
  whom they learned certain basic knowledge essential to their life:
  information   about hunting, gathering, preparing food, building
  houses, and so on. They perfectly remembered learning these
  things and often they even remembered the time and place where

                                     190
       m 80 to 90 percent of the time, parents were responsible for the
   transmission. Because some of the skills were known to only one
     ‘sex,teaching usually occurred via the parent of the same sex. Only
    for important communal activities like dancing, singing, rules for
     dividing food, and other characteristics of Pygmy society did mem-
   _ bers of the wider community participate with the parents in educat-
 _ ing children. The contribution of other African villagers with whom.
  _ Pygmies associate during parts of the year is restricted mostly to
    farming, which Pygmies do in a very limited way, having been
   _ exclusively hunter-gatherers until recently. The Pygmies have also
    learned how to make and use certain hunting weapons, like the
 _ crossbow, from villagers. This knowledge has diffused very quickly _
     among the Pygmies. Our notes show that several Pygmies learned
how     to make crossbows directly from a villager, although we also
_ observed one instance of a Pygmy father teaching his son. A tradi-
 _ tional society like that of the African Pygmies that lacks leaders and
    schools, and is organized in very small social groups, tends to
  _ remain independent from nearby villagers, even when those vil-
   lagers try to establish control over the Pygmies. Therefore, cultural
  _ transmission tends to be vertical within both groups, with very lim-
; ited horizontal exchange between them. Vertical transmission and
 _ the social pressure exerted by the group’s members tend to make
_ Pygmy society very conservative. African farmers, on the other
4 ‘hand, have more contact with the exterior,          missionaries,   for
_ instance, and have radios and schools.




     Critical (Receptive/Susceptible) Periods and Their Importance

   Most culturally determined characteristics are more easily changed
   than genetic ones. Even for clear-cut genetic diseases, onset can
   occur very late in life, with much variation from one individual to ~
   another. Huntington’s chorea can strike individuals ranging from

                                    191
two to eighty years old, although most cases manifest themse
around the age of forty. But the pattern of inheritance is very st
Some genetic diseases disappear with age, as do certain types of —
allergy. But in general, genetically determined characteristics are
rather stable and rarely reversible. The same is not true of cultural—
characteristics. We have already observed that religious conver- _
sions take place. Political affiliations also change with appreciable ¥
frequency.       ;
    Nevertheless, some cultural traits change less readily than oth-
ers. Stability of certain behaviors may be favored by biological fac-
tors that render changes more or less likely at certain ages. In other
words, there may be sensitive or critical periods in life, the phe-
nomenon sometimes called “imprinting.”
    The most obvious critical period, although inadequately stud-
ied, is undoubtedly the one governing our ability to learn a first and
a second language. The first language must be acquired in the first
years of life. One can learn other languages after the first, but
rarely, if ever, as well; it is particularly difficult to learn proper pro-
nunciation of a foreign language after puberty.
    The time before puberty is also a sensitive period for acquiring
the incest taboo. The psychologist Edward Westermarck has sug-
gested that the cohabitation of brothers and sisters before puberty
could diminish sexual interest and explain why incest between
brothers and sisters is as rare for humans as it is for other mammals.
There have been notable exceptions in some ancient dynasties such
as those in Egypt and Persia, where the marriage of siblings was
encouraged, but this custom quickly disappeared. In some commu-
nities, especially in the Middle East and India, marriages between
close relatives (e.g., uncle and niece, first cousins) are still frequent,
but this is a different phenomenon.
    Westermarck’s hypothesis was tested by Arthur Wolf (1980) in
Taiwan, where marriages have occurred between a boy and an
adopted sister of similar age. The daughter would be adopted by
the boy’s parents after his birth. In a society where spouses are
bought, adoption at a very young age guaranteed a lower buying
price. This custom     also afforded the mother the opportunity to

                                    192
              ea Fibre ecditsicin law's
                                      in the art ofserving her hus-
       band. Wolf showed that these marriages were less successful than
       _ oth ers; they ended more often in divorce and produced fewer chil-
       dren on average. This result is consistent with data from Israeli kib-
        f‘butzim where children are raised together in a sort of communal
        nursery, and have little contact with their parents. These children
        _essentially have a very large family of adoptive brothers and sisters,
     and very few marriages occur between children from the same kib-
     __ butz. It is harder to fall in love with someone whom you are used to
        _ seeing on the potty.
              There are certainly many ther critical periods in the formation of
     human societies, about which we don’t currently know much. Even
      __ those that I've just cited have not been studied in sufficient detail. I
      ~ could mention just two other areas deserving further inquiry. Gianna
        Zei, Paola Astolfi, and Suresh Jayakar have shown that daughters of
        an older father tend to marry men considerably older than them-
      _ selves. This may be part of a more general phenomenon, which
       deserves to be investigated in great detail: it is likely that we have a
        tendency to choose spouses who share some physical resemblance
        (and perhaps behavior) with our opposite-sex parents. This phenom-
        enon could explain the pronounced physical resemblance observed
        among individuals of the same social group—especially obvious in
__
%
       the small and isolated ones. The same phenomenon broadens differ-
4      ences between groups.
           In another investigation aided by psychologists, we studied the
       propensity of our Stanford students to identify with a particular
Z      region or physical habitat. Our preference for mountains, plains,
       seashores, lakes, big cities, or small towns is probably set at an early
       age. I became interested in this when I realized that I had no partic-
     ~ ular preference. The desert, countryside, or city were all the same
       to me, so long as the humidity was not too high. I thought this might
       be due to my parents’ frequent changes of residence before I was
       four years old. In America the importance of the environment in
       which one lives can be seen in the frequency with which immi-
       grants establish themselves in areas that resemble those they have
       left. Our studies of Stanford students confirmed that those who

                                          193
moved frequently during childhood had trouble Gantee vith
particular environment and adapted more easily to all environments.
Our data did not allow us to determine the most sensitive age, but
the study did succeed in showing that a nomadic tendency can be —
culturally inherited, and that a psychological imprint received while _
young is difficult to erase later in life. Governments or countries
with large nomadic populations (e.g., Gypsies, Bedouins, Berbers,           |
Tuaregs, Pygmies) have difficulty changing their nomadic habits.
This poses serious problems for the schooling of their children.
Moreover, the freedom of nomadism is fascinating, and if that is the
way in which one was raised, it must be very difficult to settle down.




     Linguistic Evolution as an Example of Cultural Evolution

Amazingly, linguistic evolution has not been studied much. There is
great potential for rigorous quantitative analysis, and research is not
very expensive. Interest in language evolution began in the second
half of the nineteenth century, by applying the methods of evolution-
ary trees to the history of language differentiation—especially the
Indo-European languages. I have already mentioned that August
Schleicher constructed a tree of this family that resembled one based
on a recent study. Even though the phenomenon of borrowing words
from other languages, especially from neighbors, is well established,
the most studied evolutionary trees give the impression that a lan-
guage changes in ways that are largely independent of changes taking
place in other languages. This is a prerequisite for the applicability of
tree analysis. We know that languages are often spread over large
areas with different varieties (or dialects) developing locally. We are
aware that a language changes slightly even within an individual life-
time, but knowledge of old languages is limited, making variation in
time somewhat less easy to study than variation in space. Neverthe-
less, variation in time almost automatically implies variation in space,
and the basic rules are the same for both.


                                  194
          ween fats and sith, igi and west. With a little experience,
        e can easily guess someone’s native region. The pronunciation of
     words changes in time and space—often significantly.
        _ Another aspect of phonological variation is the richness or
      Ri sieityof sounds in different languages. Polynesian languages have
     _ among the fewest sounds. They have only three vowels: a, i, and u.
       English is at the opposite extreme with twenty or so vowel sounds
   (including diphthongs), which are different from those found in all
 other languages, making the acquisition of English very difficult for
      foreigners. The speed with which vowel sounds change is particu-
  _ larly astonishing. To paraphrase Voltaire:ifthe consonants are not
    very useful for etymological reconstruction, the vowels are com-
    pletely useless.
        Semantic variation is the change of word meanings. For exam-
 _. ple, the French word femme has acquired a second meaning, to
      include both “woman” and “wife.” In Italian, the word donna (origi-
   nally derived from the Latin word domina meaning “household mas-
   ter”) means “woman,” but Italians use moglie (from another Latin
 word, mulier) for “wife.” Italian also uses femmina (from the same
      root as femme in French) to mean only “woman” and not “wife.”
          Although grammar is the most stable part of a language, it too
      can change with time. In English, as in French and Italian, the nor-
      mal word order in a sentence is subject (S), verb (V), and object
      (O)—or SVO. But all eight possible word orders exist in various lan-
      guages, even if SVO. and SOV languages are much more common.
      The rarest are OVS and OSV. In the film Return of the Jedi, Yoda,
     ‘the master of the Jedi, uses the OSV style: “Your father he is.”
         For each of these three modes of linguistic variation (phonologi-
      cal, semantic, and grammatical), change in space is more obvious and
bs
A     easier to study than change in time. We can illustrate on a geographic
      map the variation a word experiences by drawing a curve delimiting
      the areas where the word has a particular pronunciation. This curve,


                                       195
which separates one homogeneous region from another, is calledan
“isogloss.” By tracing the isoglosses of many words, we notice that—
most words display a unique pattern: the limits of pronunciation
differ for every word, Where, then, is the region where a single and —
discrete language or dialect is spoken? The representation of lan-
guages with a tree-like monolith, where languages are differentiated —
 from each other in a totally regular manner without being influenced
by other languages, is only an approximation.
    Five years after Schleicher’s work, in 1872, one of his students,
Johannes Schmidt, emphasized the importance of local linguis-
tic variation and proposed a theory that in some ways opposed
 Schleicher’s. According to Schmidt, each new form of a word spreads
 over a geographic area like the waves spreading from a rock thrown
 into a pond, influencing neighboring speakers to various degrees.
 This metaphor is particularly apt; it sets itself apart from the model
_of a tree, which presents completely isolated languages.
                                                       Can these
 two views be reconciled?
    Theories of biological variation in space, developed in the mid-
 dle of the twentieth century by several different mathematicians,
 resulted in very similar models. They have the generic name of “iso-
 lation by distance” and show that genes vary randomly in geographic
 space, following exact rules derived from statistics and probability.
 The most significant regularity is the relation between genetic dis-
 tance (calculated from averaging a number of genes) and geographic
 distance. We have seen that genetic distance increases regularly (but
 always more slowly) as geographic distance increases, until it reaches
 a maximum. The shape of the theoretical and empirical curves is
 determined by two measurable variables: the mutation rate, which
 increases genetic differences between two places, and the rate of
 genetic exchange between neighbors due to migration, which tends
 to increase genetic similarity between them—so these forces are
 opposed, to a certain extent, and balance each other,
     The same mathematical theory can be applied to linguistic evo-
 lution: the equivalent of mutation (which produces new forms of
 genes, or alleles) is innovation, which in linguistics is the generation
 of new sound, meaning, or grammar. Migration propagates these

                                   196
                  sect WilliamWang kaaI iste applied this genetic ae
       ory of isolation-by-distance to linguistic variation in Micronesia
     ~ (1986). One of the most interesting results we have obtained
       demonstrates that the mutation rate varies greatly for different
     ¥ words. Genes also differ in mutation rates, but less dramatically.
          I have already mentioned that there are some words that change
 very little over time and space, either in their phonology or mean-
 : ing; they are especially useful for establishing relationships
       between languages that have been separated for a long time. Unfor-
 _     tunately these words are rare. At the opposite extreme are the
      highly variable words, the ones that have a high mutation rate.
    Highly variable genes have a great number of alleles; similarly,
 __ highly variable words have a great number of synonyms. They can
    be found in a thesaurus. For example, there are many synonyms for
___ the word “drunk,” undoubtedly because the numerous occasions to
    use them have produced many jokes. The same is true for the word
    “penis.” Studying the variation of words would certainly offer inter-
      _ esting psychological information.
          We must note a significant difference between biological and
      linguistic mutation. A genetic mutant is generally very similar to the
       original gene, since one gives rise to another with only a small
       change. Words vary in more complicated ways. The same root can
       vary phonologically from language to language and it can also
       change meaning. One word can have many unrelated senses. One
       could try to establish greater similarities between genes and words
     - taking into account all of these peculiarities, but it is not clear that
      this would be useful.
          Does the theory of isolation-by-distance destroy the theory of
      trees? This theory, like Schmidt's, imagines that geographic space is
      homogeneous. But as we have seen that is not the case. Geographic
      barriers—seas, oceans, mountains, rivers, and so on—divide the
      earth into numerous and varied regions. They impede migration
      and thus hamper the spread of genes and words. By so doing, they
      create differences between isolated populations. This is what our
      trees indirectly demonstrate. If the earth’s surface were homoge-
      neous and without barriers, a tree would not be useful since the

                                         197
ae
—
     >     ee    eee
                                                 wR
     theory ofisolation by distance mightprovideas uth
     description. But if we want a more realistic pi         mt
     sider the great geographic variability and the tichness af hi
     events which have determined genetic and linguistic patterns.
     tree, then, is a useful balance between approximation and rez
     Can we sharpen its precision?                                      ;
         Adapting isolation-by-distance theory to a linguistic context     _
     allows us to resolve the problem created by Schmidt's theory of
     waves, and to understand its links with Schleicher’s tree-based
     model, Trees and wave theories show that genetic and linguistic—
     change can be modeled in similar ways, and that it would be useful
     to explore the similarities and differences between these two types
     of evolution. In the most basic evolutionary models, four factors
     interact to cause change: mutation, selection, genetic drift, and
     migration. Because genetic studies are usually restricted to simply —
     inherited genes and traits (those transmitted by both parents in the
     way outlined by Mendel), this representation of genetic evolution
      ‘an ignore a fundamental factor—method of transmission. We have
                                                                             |
     already discussed cultural transmission in general. Regarding lin-
     guistic transmission, I will only note that in primitive societies, chil-
     dren learn the language of the family member (mother, sister, ete.)
     with whom they spend the most time. Thus one would speculate
     that here transmission is usually vertical, maternal, and uni-
     parental. In more advanced economies, several people may be
     involved in raising children. At the age when children begin school-
     ing (which differs among cultures and social classes), the teacher
     has some influence, although friends and classmates do, as well.
     Here the cultural transmission of language is much more compli-
     cated. A child frequently pays inordinate attention to one person
     (independent of linguistic considerations) and imitates his or her
     habits, manners, and way of speaking. One person who represents a
     “role model” can later be replaced by another. Pronunciation is
     labile until the age of thirteen vears or so, after which imitative
     changes become more rare and potentially unsuccessful. Vocabu-
     lary probably comes from the social group of origin but tends to


                                        198
           ase      thoiighoutlife}with exposure to a greater number of peo-
                 h re one jeamunicates. -




       ;‘none, but oot parents as up the slack. Each transmitter
   _ may contribute something, and the language of an individual may
    end up as a sort of linguistic mosaic with many different contribu-
  __ tions juxtaposed (although a single influence may predominate).
    q‘After puberty, the cultural product is more or less crystallized.
  ~ Everyone has his or her accent, which reproduces—with slight vari-
      ation—those prevalent in the environments where one was raised.
     Traces of one’s earliest learning, covered by later socialization, prob-
  a ably persist, and can reappear in certain circumstances as, for exam-
  ple, when one is tired or placed in a new learning environment.
      _ This analysis, in part autobiographical, is probably not very use-
   ful for the scientific literature. But some simplification is necessary
 ~ and legitimate in order to communicate with a broad audience. We
  _ spontaneously correct ourselves, often unconsciously, to-use lan-
    guage that will be understood by those with whom we speak. This
    component of cultural transmission is part of what I have called
    “concerted” insofar as we make the necessary modifications when
    we are not being understood.
        I have already said that in genetics, as in linguistics, mutations
    or innovations appear more or less spontaneously in a single indi-
    vidual. They end up comprising part of the linguistic heritage of
    a population when they are accepted by a significant number of
    people. Even when change initiated by a single individual is wel-
    comed by the people with whom he is in contact (as a mutation is
  - adopted by the genome), it can take centuries for it to be fully inte-
7r
be
   grated.       In genetics, the mutation rate is much lower, and the
    process of substitution is governed entirely by vertical transmission.
    Full replacement of the old allele by the new one can take tens or
    hundreds of thousands of generations. We must, then, understand
    how and why this increase in frequency occurs.


                                         199

eee
eee
ee
     It is not likely that mutation frequency alone can petea eS
 word diffuse and establish itself in a population—a phenomenon _3
 that has been called “mutation pressure” in genetics. But we know
 that two of the factors in biological evolution—drift and selection— _
 act similarly to affect the rate of substitution of new words. In
 genetics, drift is the effect of chance. I think that it is difficult to |
 apply the concept of this genetic phenomenon to linguistic change
 in exactly the same way. Genetic drift depends on the number of
 individuals in a population and also on the variation of reproductive
 output of individuals. Not everyone is equal in this respect. Those
 who reproduce most count the most, although the difference in
 number of children per parent is usually small. In Europe, only
 wealthy patrons, like Francesco Sforza, could have thirty or so chil-
  dren. In other countries, a few sultans or chiefs sometimes had
~ hundreds of children. A similar but greatly exaggerated situation
  applies to language: some people rarely speak, while others talk all
 the time; variation in the amount of communication is enormous.
 Moreover, some sources are more highly regarded than others.
 When these respected people decide to use a new word, it has a
 greater effect. It is difficult to incorporate such variation in a theory,
 but it is clear that in linguistic change certain dimensions are more
 important than in genetics. One can say variation in the prestige of
 speakers may add greatly to the power of drift. In the past, for
 example, royalty and nobility determined’ many changes in lan-
 guage. If they introduced a new word, it was essential to learn it.
 Today, our language is enriched by radio and television. If one per-
 son, accorded great prestige, promotes a new word that is widely
 accepted, we may say we have an extreme case of drift. But the
 element of prestige is an unfamiliar and extreme component of
 drift, and it might seem more appropriate to consider it as a case of
 cultural selection or of transmission rather than of drift. It is clearly
 a matter of definition. In some cases, however, the analogy with
 drift is obvious. Though it is difficult to have precise statistics and
 valid international comparisons, there is some indication that the
 U.S. culture is one of the most religious in the world. It is clear that
 there is a good reason. The religiosity of the U.S. population must

                                    200
                   ts in the iecath wee who came mostly in search of
              freedom from religious persecution. American religiosity must be a
              case of cultural drift.             i
               - Imposing biological models on linguistics can present some
              Fecbonas One is entirely semantic: mostly under the influence of
            _ Edward Sapir, linguists use the word “drift” for a different phenom-
              enon. Linguistic drift refers to a trend in a specific direction, noted
            _ in a number of similar cases. “The linguistic drift has direction,”
            q wrote Sapir. It may be due to a tendency of some linguistic muta-
            _ tions to occur in certain directions. An example is the “Great Vowel
             Shift.” It began in Middle English around the fifteenth century, and
              is a trend in the change of vowels. Thus, oversimplifying, i + ei >
              ai a,a—e—         ei: eu > au — ou > un. Drift in Sapir’s sense does
        not only affect pronunciation but all other aspects of language as
        __ well. We will see specific examples later.
           _   This linguistic use of the word “drift” is quite different from the
              use of the word in genetics, where it has a somewhat-opposite
        _     meaning. Genetic drift is the effect of chance on gene (allele) fre-
            _ quencies; it is totally devoid of direction, although when allele fre-
              quencies of 0 or 100 percent are reached, the process must stop, at
              least until the lost allele is reintroduced by mutation or immigration
              from the outside. The use of the word “drift” to indicate the ran-
              dom evolutionary changes of gene frequencies due to chance was
              suggested by Sewall Wright, who contributed greatly to mathemati-
              cal work in this area. It was previously called the Hagedoorn effect,
              after the person who first described it. Another famous mathemati-
              cal geneticist who also gave much impetus to the theory of drift,
              Motoo Kimura, suggested the phrase “random genetic drift” might
              be more precise. The word “drift” is used in linguistics and in other
    disciplines, like physics, to define systematic effects, as opposed to
eae chance effects.
ee
Oe
ye
aT
ou
©       Selection also works differently in the evolution of language
              than in biological evolution. It is-very rare, of course, that a new
=
7.
    :         word will increase the survival, or reproduction, of the people who
oe

4                  :          .                 201
                                                                    =   he
                                                                        es
use it. Instead, it is a matter of cultural selection: a word, a pronun- —
ciation, or a rule pleases us because the word is shorter, easier to |
pronounce, more elegant, et cetera, or because it is recommended
by someone we respect. We could adopt the language of kings, or
assume the accent of Oxford dons, but the opposite phenomenon is
also popular. Slang seems more efficient to us, because it is richer —
in emotional undertones. Likewise, a well-educated person might
prefer to use a vulgar word, precisely because its use is shocking
and therefore powerful. We said that lower social classes often tend
to imitate higher classes and vice versa. This tends to create cyclic
behavior. In England, mostly in the higher social classes, it was con-
sidered more elegant to use words from Latin or its Romance
descendants than to use Anglo-Saxon words—for example “servi-
ette” instead of “napkin.” Today Anglo-Saxon words have acquired
a new dignity and the opposite trend has begun.
    So far, we have neglected the fourth factor—migration, both
of individuals and of words. Today, words can spread without the
movement of people. Once, they spread only with the people
who spoke them. We often think that each ethnic group is totally
endogamous—that is, marriages are limited to specific social classes
or geographic neighborhoods. In reality, there is almost always some
genetic exchange between geographic, ethnic, or socio-economic
groups. The frequency with which a spouse (usually the wife) comes .
from another tribe or another village is highly variable, and ranges
mostly between 5 and 50 percent. Linguist Joseph Greenberg has
observed that transplanted spouses are likely to bring linguistic
novelties with them. An interesting rule, which I learned from
Claude Hagége, is that island populations exhibit linguistic inertia: it
appears that their language ceases almost entirely to evolve. This has
happened in Iceland, which was settled by Norwegians in the ninth
century A.D. Modern Icelandic is very similar to ancient Norse, and
Icelandic speakers are easily able to read the great epics, the sagas
that date from the colony's founding or earlier. Outside contact
diminished greatly and virtually stopped after the eleventh century;
linguistic novelties then ceased to arrive. The rarity of migrants was


                                  202
            |          Tack ofmutation. Without new material, evolution stops.
                Abr ost the entire Icelandic population used to meet yearly when
                ‘Parliament (the firstin European history) met; this probably helped
                avoid excessive local differentiation within the island, and con-
       _ tributed to slowing down evolution.
        ;    Another example is Sardinia—the most isolated Mediterranean
        _ island—though it has a longer history than Iceland. The coast was
       __ less isolated than the interior, where mountains hindered even the
       _ Romans. Besides its insularity, every aspect of Sardinia’s geography
         _ favors the conservation of local culture and language. As a result,
        ~ some words and endings remained closer to Latin in Sardinia than
    in ccontinental Italy.
                  We could not leave this subject without mentioning the most
            _ interesting aspect of linguistic evolution—lexical diffusion, whose
              importance was demonstrated by William Wang. Lexical diffusion
               does not refer to the way an innovation spreads from one person to
        another, but to the effect that the change in one word may have on_
       @ _ other words in one person’s vocabulary. This is especially important,
                because it also tells us about the working of the brain, which seems
                to operate from a set of rules. Although each language preserves
                many grammatical, phonological, and syntactical irregularities,
                there is a tendency for homogenization and extension of rules. En-
                glish verbs are in the process of becoming more regular as time
                passes. Another example is the differentiation of verbs and nouns
                by the position of the accent: the word “present” is a noun if the
                accent is on the first syllable, and a verb if on the second syllable. In
_               1570 there were      only three examples      (outlaw, rebel, record).
 ___            Between 1582 to 1934 they grew steadily from 8 to 150.
        ;          In general, lexical diffusion means that changes which, for vari-
                ous reasons, are made in one word are often extended to words
              which are in some way (usually phonologically or grammatically)
              related to the first. As always, the phenomenon most probably pre-
            - sents itself at first in one or few persons, but then spreads to other
                people; there is thus a double diffusion, to related words within a
                person, and to different persons.


                                                    203


es.
©~~
     Lexical diffusion may be very general. Some linguists may be —
  shocked because the idea was never presented to them, but it seems —
  reasonable to consider as an example of lexical diffusion the classic_
  correspondence of sounds called Grimm’s Law, which explains that _
 the letters p, t, and k of ancient languages like Sanskrit, Greek, and
  Latin have usually become f, th, and h, respectively, in English and f,_
 d, and h in German (e.g., pater in Latin, “father” in English, vater
  pronounced “fater” in German). In English, spelling rules were fixed -
before the Renaissance and an important shift in vowel
  pronunciation, the “Great Vowel Shift” mentioned above, began at
  the end of the Middle Ages. A difficult English orthography devel-
 oped as a result. For example, before the Great Vowel Shift the
 words “mine,” “fine,” and “thine” were pronounced phonetically, as
 they were written—in other words, the i was pronounced as in Italian
 and the e was not silent. Then the pronunciation of i became ii, then
 ei and in modern English ai. In some parts of England, especially
 those far from London, the old pronunciations have been preserved.
  Elsewhere, other pronunciations are found like a or oi.     From an evo-
  lutionary point of view, some are more advanced, because they prob-
  ably already passed through the forms of ei and ai. As change tends to
  be cyclic in the case of vowels, the original pronunciation may return
  to favor. One reason for this is that the space in which phonological
  variation can take place is limited, and repetition unavoidable. Cycles
  form because there are preferential patterns of change.
       In Brazil, the old form of Portuguese, which pronounced the t
  at the end of words, as in the English “dent” and “president,” per-
  sists in the south, but has been replaced with the pronunciation tch
  in the north. The n that regularly precedes st or sc in Latin has been
  kept in most European languages, but has been dropped in a large
  number of Italian words. Thus “institute, instance, inscription”
  have become istituto, istanza, iscrizione.      When n was useful to dis-
  tinguish two. meanings it disappeared in one and remained in the
  other: ispirare (inspire), but inspirare (breathe in).
     The extension of changes to similar meanings or sounds is the
  fundamental    characteristic   of lexical diffusion.    It occurs   with


                                     204
                  blespeed, sometimes perhaps within a single generation, a
              indication that our brain uses rules for speaking. The need for
              yuman brain to function according to rules must be based in
                ¢ neurological structures. Some pathological conditions pro-
           ne dyslexias, which seem to affect the relevant part of the brain.
       asIne of these dyslexias that appears to be inherited as a regular gene
       in a particular family is being studied from a genetic perspective.
        This single gene apparently affects the capacity to apply grammati- |
        cal rules, like the formation of plurals. In affected members of this
       family, only words for which the singular and plural were learned
     a separately are used correctly. Perhaps one could consider an exam-
      __ple of lexical diffusion the increasing rarity of the use of the sub-
      _ junctive in English (and in Italian). Grammar appears to require
      _certain neurological centers, and genetic defects or cerebral trauma
      _ that damage them can interfere with the application of grammatical
      _ tules. The same defects can sometimes spread without any obvious
      _ pathological cause. Such observations reveal mechanisms, previ-
     ~ ously unknown, that help us use words in a coherent fashion. Lexi-
      cal diffusion must depend on equivalent mechanism      s facilitate
                                                           that
     linguistic function.




—       «                        Humanity’s Future

__     Rest assured that my intention in this section is more modest than
     _ the title above suggests. From a genetic perspective our human
       future is not terribly interesting—our species will probably not
        evolve much more. In any case, it will not evolve as rapidly as it has
   so far. Cultural development has effectively slowed biological evolu-
tion. Natural selection, by acting-on fertility and mortality, has been
the greatest evolutionary factor in human biology. But progress in
q medicine has virtually eliminated pre-reproductive mortality to such
; an extent that demographic growth must now be sharply curtailed to
"prevent serious overpopulation. If pre-reproductive mortality were


                                         205
reduced to zero, wenion married, and each familyhad two chil-
dren, there would be no natural selection. Because of the large, con-
tinuously increasing size of human populations, the other cause of
evolution, genetic drift, is almost completely frozen. We now con-
sider mutations dangerous, since they involve changes to DNA that
are on average harmful. Why not stop mutation if it becomes possi-
ble to do so? Human biological evolution would then stop com-
pletely, as long as we avoid the mistake of voluntary evolution by —
artificially modifying genes. Fortunately, the likelihood of geneti-
cally engineered humans is still almost nonexistent, and we do not
yet have to worry about some arrogant fool attempting to create an
“improved race.” Naturally, special resolutions, such as those gov-
erning nuclear weapons technology, will have to be implemented to           .
avoid a nightmarish distant future.                                         1
    One important genetic change is, however, currently occurring           |
via migrations that produce increased mixing of populations. If, as
is likely, the process continues, genetic differences between groups
will diminish. But the overall global diversity will not change, and
differences between individuals of the same population will in-
crease. There will thus be even fewer reasons for racism, which is a
good thing.
   It is not strictly correct, however, to say that global variation will
remain unchanged. At the moment, different ethnic groups have
different reproductive rates. Europeans are largely at a standstill
while populations in many developing countries are exploding; thus
blonds and light-skinned people will decline in relative frequency.
But even those who do not worry about the excessive reproduction
of the human species will soon learn that the current population
boom cannot continue beyond what Earth’s resources can support.
This means that it must stop in a few decades.
    It is clear that the rate of cultural change will continue to
increase in the future. Communication forms the basis of cultural
change, and we are currently in the midst of a communications rev-
olution. Where will it take us? Computers have acted to some
extent as an extension of our brains and have greatly increased our


                                   206
         ity for numeric calculations. Artificial intelligence is currently
   _extending computer applications in new directions.
   p - As it was during the Paleolithic, human communication is lim-
  _ited, despite technology, by linguistic barriers. Computers have so
  - far been unable to translate human languages automatically. Diffi-
  — eult asit is to resolve the problem, it is only a matter of time before
 _ we have automatic translation of a reasonable quality. Perhaps we
 _ will be able to learn to speak in a less ambiguous way, allowing the
  _ computer to understand and translate our thoughts with fewer
  errors. It seems incredible in light of recent progress that comput-
    ers still have this difficulty. Certainly our expressions are often
 _ ambiguous. Sometimes we confuse each other on purpose. Decreas-
_ ing language ambiguity may reduce the chances of writing good
__ poetry, and perhaps a remedy could be found for that, but it should
  _ force even politicians to think clearly and productively for their
    constituencies, not just for their reelection or profit.
       Nevertheless, automatic translations are not the solution to all
our problems. Communication is certainly essential, but only as a
  ~ first step. It will be necessary, for example, to be more successful in
    spreading the necessary moral values to the whole world. Is the
    amount of deception, hatred, exploitation, and unrestrained selfish-
   ness we observe in almost every society inevitable? We need not be
 _ too pessimistic and should admit that people do not always display
   their worst qualities. But it would be valuable to learn exactly the
   conditions that elicit these destructive tendencies, in order to sys-
   tematically prevent them. Overpopulation and extreme competi-
 tion for valuable resources undoubtedly contribute. Our aptitude
~~ for social engineering is limited, although we must become more
serious about work in this area, so as to end—or at least reduce—
_ major social ills such as poverty, ignorance, population growth,
racism, drug addiction, crime, and other social epidemic and endemic
   diseases that afflict us. Our efforts in this regard can be helped by
   studying cultural transmission and the forces of conservatism that
   hinder useful innovations, as well as the danger posed by promoting
   and accepting great changes too soon.


                                     207
                               -       BIBLIOGRAPHY




i             ¢ Genetics of Populations in Europe (Princeton University Press, Prince-
    4 ton, N f):
 a aah D. W. (1995) oe, ihe                    and chariot: Indo-European languages

    Bailey,     N. J. (1957) The Mathematica Theory of Epidemics (Hafner, New
      York).
    Barbujani, G. and Sokal, R. R. (1990) Zones of sharp genetic change in Europe
are also linguistic boundaries. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87(5): 1816-19.
 Barbujani, G., Magagni, A., Minch, E. and Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1997)
_ An apportionment of human DNA diversity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94:
 _ 4516-19.
_ Barrantes, R., Smouse, P. E., Mohrenweiser, H. W., Gershowitz, H., Azofeifa,
     J., Arias, T. D. and Neel, J. F. (1990) Microevolution in lower Central Amer-
       ica: Genetic characterization of the Chibcha-speaking groups of Costa Rica
       and Panama, and a consensus taxonomy based on genetic and linguistic
affinity, Am. J.Hum. Genet. 46(1): 63-84.
- Biraben, N. -J. (1980) An essay concerning mankind's evolution, Population 4:
       1-13.
-Bowcock, A. M., Kidd, J. R., Mountain, J. L., Hebert, J. M., Carotenuto, K.,
       Kidd, K. K. and Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1991) Drift, admixture, and selection

                                             209
                                                                 a
  in human evolution: A study with DNA polymorphisms.
                                                  Proc. Ne
  Sci. 88: 839-43.                                                            “i
Bowcock, A. M., Ruiz-Linares,A.,Tomfohrde, J., Minch, E., Kidd,J.R. and —
  Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1994) High resolution of human evolutionary trees .
  with polymorphic microsatellites. Nature 388: 455-57.
Cann, R. L., Stoneking, M. and Wilson, A. C. (1987) Mitochondrial         DNA and
  human evolution. Nature 325: 31-36.
Cappello, N., Rendine, S., Griffo, R. M., Mameli, C. E., Succa, V., Vona, G.
  and Piazza, A. (1996) Genetic analysis of Sardinia. Ann. Hum. Genet. 60:
   12541.
“Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1963) The distribution of migration tac           models
  and applications to genetics, in Human          displacements: measurement,
  methodological aspects, ed. Sutter, J. (Editions Sciences          Humaines,
  Monaco), pp. 139-58.
       (1986) African Pygmies (Academic Press, Orlando, Fla.).
          (1998) The DNA revolution in population genetics. Trends in Genetics.
   14(2): 60-65.                                          :           :
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Cavalli-Sforza, F. (1995) The Great Human Diasporas
   (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, Calif.).
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Edwards, A. W. F. (1964) Analysis of human evolu-
   tion. Proc. 11th Int. Congr. Genet.2:923-33.
          (1967) Phylogenetic analysis: Models and estimation procedures. Am.
  J. Hum. Genet. 19: 223-57.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Feldman, M. (1981) Cultural Transmission and Evo-
  lution,   A Quantitative Approach (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
   NJ).
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Feldman, M. W., Chen, K. H. and Dombusch, S. M.
   (1982) Theory and observation in cultural transmission. Science 218: 19-27.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Menozzi, P. and Piazza, A. (1993) Demie expansions and
   human evolution. Science 259: 639-46.
          (1994) The History and Geography of Human Genes (Princeton Uni-
   versity Press, Princeton, N.].).
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Minch, E, and Mountain, J. (1992) Coevolution of genes
   and language revisited. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89: 5620-24.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Piazza, A. (1975) Analysis of evolution: evolutionary
   rates, independence and treeness. Theor. Popul. Biol. 8: 127-65.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Piazza, A., Menozzi, P. and Mountain, J. L. (1988) Recon-
   struction of human evolution: Bringing together genetic, archaeological, and
   linguistic data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 85: 6002-06.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and Wang, W.S.-Y. (1986) Spatial distance and lexical
   replacement. Language 62: 38-55.

