                            CHAPTER 4



        Technological                Revolutions
              and Gene Geography




                    Modern Human Expansions

Between 100,000 and 50,000 years ago, modern humans began to
migrate out of Africa and adapt to new and diverse environments.
Migration must   have been a response   to population growth and
local overcrowding; Without growth, population density would fall
in the region of origin, so these migrations should more accurately
be called expansions.
    Until 10,000 years ago, humans depended exclusively on hunt-
ing and gathering, a way of life that sharply limited population
growth. We do not know precisely what the population size was
100,000 years ago, when people who were beginning to resemble
contemporary humans inhabited Africa. Calculations based on the
amount of genetic variation observed today suggest that the popula-
tion would have been about 50,000 in the Paleolithic period, just
before expansion out of Africa.
    It is possible that the human species had nearly attained the
point of population saturation in Africa when the expansion to the

                                92
 rest of the world began. When population density approaches satu-
_ ration, humans, and probably all organisms, have a tendency to
  migrate to less populated areas. A very recent historical example is
  the great European migration to America and Australia in the last
  two centuries. The amount of territory available to Paleolithic
  Africans was both vast and generally accessible. The process, started
  in Africa, continued in each of the successive areas colonized.
      High population density alone is probably not sufficient to initi-
  ate a geographic expansion, but it can stimulate cultural develop-
  ments that allow or even encourage migration. The advent of
_ sailing—even if primitive—may have aided some of the first expan-
  sions out of Africa. Boats were certainly needed to reach Australia
  40,000 to 60,000 years ago. If they were invented earlier than that,
  they may even have been used to leave Africa for the southern Asian
  coast. It seems very likely that maritime navigation, however primi-
 tive, began in eastern or northeastern Africa. From the Red Sea the
  migration would have proceeded along the coast of southern and
 southeastern Asia, where it could then branch toward Oceania in the
 south and the Pacific rim as far as Beringia to the north (figure 4).
     But I am convinced that another factor played a major role: the
  late Paleolithic expansion out of Africa was greatly served by the
 development of language. Our most distant human ancestors might
 have had some primitive linguistic ability, but the complexity char-
 acteristic of all contemporary languages probably wasn’t attained
 until around 100,000 years ago. This formidable instrument of com-
 munication helped humans explore and establish small societies
 in distant lands, adapt to new ecological conditions, and rapidly
 absorb technological developments.
      Be that as it may, demographic growth during the late Paleo-
 lithic was very slow. Agricultural development came at the juncture
 between Paleolithic and Neolithic, 10,000 years ago. Using ethno-
 graphic data collected from contemporary hunter-gatherers, we can
 approximate the global population density at this time. By extrap-
 olation, we arrive at values between one and fifteen million in-
 habitants. Let’s assume there were five million. This is a very slow
 rate of growth, from 50,000 people alive 100,000 years ago to five

                                   93
94




                                                                                                             “ae,


        omsrg
           ‘7   deyjo   jsarjive        jo
                                     suonRISTU LopoUr ‘sueUNY       UI
                                                                 SuTUUIsaqRoUyy   Ueeayoq ®000001
                                                                                                pu    0000 s1vac ‘o8e   Sumuuoo
                                                                                                                           oyu
     eISy pur0} oY} 19430        ‘syuaupUOD
                                      yim         oyeunrxoidde
                                                        sayep    poysossns
                                                                    Aq  oxy         [eorsopoayore
                                                                                            ‘p1odai
                                                         — 2 -s -


           by the end
                  nd  ofthePaleolithicee                   erasdeliocad
               leaaviaitons It took 10,000 years to go from five million
           ualstothe  present  world population: a growth rate  on aver-
   ge more than    14times greater than during the Paleolithic,
   In morerecenttinesgrowthrates increased considerably: in
          t century alone, the world population grew from 1.6 to almost
   b illon, nearly   250 times the average rate during the Paleolithic,
  Ww(ep                     a       ene ae ene popula-
    nea                       or emrceipont fe thesipaing decades.
        ire controls an excess of human births in three ways: epidemics,
  iets e, and war. All ofthese brakes seem to be at work today:
 AIDS, an epidemic we still cannot control, is raging; extreme mal-
 nutrition affects more than a billion people; and an unprecedented
  number of civil and religious wars is shaking the world, So far,
  atomic bombs have not been used in these conflicts, but nothing
 should prevent us from worrying that a Russian scientist or engi-
 _neer, reduced to unemployment and hunger, or a group of religious
  extremists working for a fundamentalist government, could place
  the human species at risk of a global Hiroshima.
 The recent study of gene geography provides many examples of
  expansions—or diasporas, to use an ancient Greek word, which J
 shall use as a synonym for the numerical and geographic expansions
    of populations, Many significant diasporas occurred during both
    the Paleolithic and Neolithic periods, History records many that
    have happened in the last 5,000 years, Can we detect them in the
    geographic distribution of genes?
   The small size of the human population during the Paleolithic
_ favored the genetic differentiation of populations by genetic drift.
 _ Drift produces random variation in all genes, Therefore a great
  - genetic distance between small populations is expected, Expansions
    across wide geographic areas encourage mixing between neighbor-
    ing and distant populations, which leaves rather profound traces in
    the geography of genes. We can observe these migrations on geo-
    graphic maps of genes even after several thousand years, When sev-
    eral successive migrations and expansions happen in the same area
    they begin to overlap and obscure each other, but it is often possible


i
                                                      7




to recognize and distinguish each wave through
                                           avariety of statisti-_
cal techniques—provided each has a different geographic origin. _
    Our analyses have shown that, in general, all the great expan-
sions were due to important technological innovations—the discov-
ery of new food sources, the development of new means of
transportation, and the increase of military and political control are
particularly powerful agents of expansion. The innovations respon-
sible for the most significant expansions are those which produce _
local demographic growth and accompany populations as they —
move. The culture of cereal agriculture could be exported along —
with the cereals themselves. Wheat and barley, native to the Middle    —
East, were domesticated there at the beginning of the Neolithic. At
the same time almost all the domestic animals we are familiar with
today were domesticated. The farming population grew and even-
tually spread to other fertile land where the cycle of demographic
growth and expansion started all over. Expansion led anywhere the
land was capable of supporting the growth of domesticated plants
and animals, and would halt where the environment was not con-
ducive to agriculture, as it did in the extreme north of Scandinavia
and Russia, where it was too cold.
_ Fortunately, not all technological revolutions produce demo-
graphic growth and population expansions. One important period
of population growth occurred in Europe during the second half of
the Middle Ages. The increase was due to various agricultural inno-
vations that reversed the economic decay that followed the destruc-
tion of the Western Roman Empire by barbarians. This demographic
and economic expansion was restricted to Europe until the advent
of transoceanic travel in the fifteenth century.




                   The First Agricultural Expansion

Many details about the Paleolithic expansion of modern humans
may remain unknown to us forever, but more recent expansions are
less mysterious.    In collaboration   with the archeologist Albert
        Ammerman, I studied one such expansion stemming from the
      _ development of agriculture in the Middle East. This event is called
      _ the Neolithic transition because, at least in the Middle East, the
      _ shift from hunting and gathering to the cultivation of crops and ani-
__ mals was accompanied by new techniques of stone tool production
 _ from which the period takes its name. Somewhat later, the intro-
     duction of ceramics—probably invented elsewhere—prompted
 _ other developments that provide us with a very useful archeological
__ marker. Such a marker can help track the spread of agriculture into
   _ Europe more reliably than Neolithic tools. The best marker, how-
  ever, is the expanding presence of wheat or other crops that were
     unavailable before the expansion.
       _ Population density was relatively high, considering the subsis-
        tence means of hunters and gatherers, at the end of the Paleolithic
         around 10,000 years ago, especially in the subtropical zones most
        favorable to human habitation. Around that time, a climatic change
      _ modified the fauna and flora, forcing humans to find new ways to
         gather food. Food production started supplementing hunting and
         gathering at about that time in at least three widely separated
        regions. The domestication of local plants and animals that already
        were a part of the human diet began in the Middle East, in China,
        and also in Mexico and the nearly adjacent northern Andean high-
        lands of South America. Each of these areas developed unique
        practical strategies for food cultivation. In the Middle East, future
        farmers started growing several types of wheat and barley, and kept
        cows, pigs, goats, and sheep. Millet was farmed in northern China,
        rice and buffalo in the south. Pigs were raised almost everywhere.
="a     In the Americas there were corn, squash, beans, and many other
        plants, but few animals could be domesticated there. These changes
       occurred almost simultaneously, suggesting some external pressure
        such as global climate change paired with various individual changes
        in each of the three areas, such as the depletion of natural resources
        and demographic pressure. These last two factors might themselves
        actually result from, or be exacerbated by, climate change.
            The oldest known ceramics were found in Japan. Approximately
        12,000 years old, they mark an important moment in the area's

                                          97
                                                             aioe er Pt




 history. Oddly enough, agriculture would not reach Japan for another
 10,000 years, whereas in the Middle East ceramics appeared about
 1,000 years after the local development of agriculture, and 3,000
 years after they had appeared in Japan. It is difficult either to confirm
 or disprove that pottery came to the Middle East from Japan—
  indeed, it may well have been invented in both places independently.
  There was another earlier source of ceramic technology, which was
  closer to the Middle East, in the Sahara Desert. The Sahara—not in
~ fact a desert at all then—supported in its mountainous areas a consid-
  erable population, as numerous paintings and carvings in the Tassili
  and Tibesti mountains prove. There is evidence in various oases of
  the Sahara that ceramics were being used at least a thousand years
  earlier than in the Middle East, but here also it is difficult to decide
  whether by independent invention or diffusion.
       Population pressure was relieved, after a brief lag, by the
  increased resources provided by agriculture. Human populations
  rapidly multiply when living conditions are favorable. Even with
  only a primitive form of agriculture, populations will double with
  every new generation, and this continues to happen in many devel-
  oping countries. At this rate it would take only a few centuries after
  adding farming to its hunting and gathering habits for a population |
  to reach a new, higher saturation density.
       If at all suitable, neighboring territory would be occupied by
  farmers in search of arable land. Primitive farmers lacked fertilizing
  techniques and had to leave fields fallow periodically, or search for
  completely new land. This was further impetus for expansion. The
  introduction of agriculture thus increased local population densi-
  ties, and also favored geographic expansion to an extent governed
  by the local ecology.
     Geographic expansion was easier from the Middle East than
 elsewhere, because wheat, barley, and domestic animals were well
 adapted to a vast surrounding area, including most of Europe,
 North Africa (which was not yet a desert), and western and south-
 ern Asia. In Mexico, corn and other crops spread north much more
 slowly, perhaps because of the difficulty of crossing a vast desert
 region, but they did diffuse southward. The spread of crops was

                                    98
morear in the Andes, ee ecological diversity is greater. Much
  of the rest of tropical South America, excluding the Andes, was also
  slow in developing agriculture for ecological reasons. The variety
  of environments in and near China explains the rather different
  courses of its agriculture development. There were limits to the
  spread of agricultural innovation from these areas. A steppe bor-
   dered China in the north, there were deserts in the west, but South-
 ~ east Asia, including southern China, was suitable for rice cultivation.
     _ The Neolithic period began in the Middle East approximately
   10,000 years ago. It started perhaps a little earlier than the agricul-
   tural revolution in Mexico or China. It lasted 5,000 years, until the
   coming of the Bronze Age. The agricultural economy spread from
   the Middle East in a northwestern direction toward Europe, but
   also eastward toward Iran, Pakistan, and India, and southwest to
   Egypt. Its agriculture was fairly complex, supporting a great variety
   of cereals and domestic animals. The expansion to Europe is better
   known than any other, because European archeology has been
   studied more intensively and for a longer time.
       Domesticated cereals spread very regularly from their area of
   origin in the Middle East. Their dispersion in Europe is particularly
   well documented by archeologists. It took farming more than 4,000
   years (starting 10,000 years ago, traveling one kilometer per year) to
   reach England through Anatolia (Turkey). It spread a little more
   rapidly along the Mediterranean coast, since it is easier to cover
   great distances by sea than by land. A map of the archeological
   dates by radiocarbon of the spread of wheat in Europe is given in
   figure 5 (see page 109).
      Changes and adaptation to local climate were bound to happen.
   Expansion proceeded from Macedonia and Greece down the
   Mediterranean coast past southern Italy to the western Mediter-
   ranean. Obsidian tools are found early in the Aegean islands and
   prove that people knew how to build and use boats during the
   Neolithic. An intact Neolithic boat was in fact found in the Seine in
   France and another in Lake Bracciano in central Italy. Central
   Europe was settled by Neolithic people going up the Danube and
   down the Rhine and the other rivers of the European plain, where

                                     99
 we have found a pottery with characteristic geometric decorations —
 (so-called “linear” pottery).
     The first farmers of the Middle East did not use ceramics, nor
 did the first agricultural colonists of Macedonia. But when pottery
 finally did arrive it traveled very fast, advancing into the rest of
 Europe along with agriculture, almost without exception. I said ear-
 lier that elsewhere—especially in Japan—ceramics were developed
 well before the advent of agriculture. There is confusion here in
 archeological terminology, because societies using ceramics are
 called “Neolithic” (a term applied to stone technology) in Europe
_ and Japan. In-Europe the term “Neolithic” is applied to agricultur-
  alists who had not yet adopted ceramics (a delay of about a thou-
  sand years), while in Japan it is applied to people who used
  ceramics almost 10,000 years before they adopted agriculture.
     I mentioned that it is difficult to exclude the possibility that pot-
 tery spread from Japan to the Middle East. It is possible that trade
 routes through Central Asia were established early. The Silk Road
 was so named because silk was carried on it from China to Europe
 in Roman times, and it was revived during the Middle Ages. There
 is earlier evidence of exchange between East and West by what
 might have been the same route. Huge cemeteries full of northern
 Europeans in the westernmost part of China, in Xinjiang Province,
 show that the path is quite ancient. This very dry desert region near
 the ancient basin of Tarim has thoroughly desiccated and preserved
 scores of bodies, especially those who, having died during the win-
 ter, were effectively freeze-dried. Some of these mummies have
 unmistakably blue eyes and blond hair. Their mtDNA confirms
 what can be observed with the naked eye. In addition, their equally
 well-preserved clothing seems to suggest a northern or central
 European origin. A fabric similar to modern Scottish tartan, which
 at that time was also made in Austria and Switzerland, was found
 on one body. Radiocarbon dates show that these people lived at
 least 3,800 years ago. They probably spoke the now extinct Indo-
 European language Tocharian, of which some writings in an ancient
 Indian script still survive. A fresco in China dating from the seventh


                                    100
              —   a ae


           _ century A.D. also shows elegantly dressed northern Europeans with
            blond and red hair. Victor Mair, an American orientalist, surmised
             from these recent discoveries that the Central Asian route connect-
is   =
             ing Asia and Europe may have opened very early, perhaps more
     =
     r       than 4,000 years ago. It may well have been traveled at the very
             beginning of agricultural practice or earlier. Northern European
hh
be
2
.
            peoples probably disappeared from this region as a result of Mon-
_'
             gol expansions, although several genes of European origin persist in
©&
Se
2
    Ee
             Xinjiang, the westernmost province of China. The Uighurs who live
             there are a population characterized by a great variety of complex-
             ions and show an approximately 3:1 ratio of Mongol to European
     we,
      d
             mixture.
oe
a
Vf




                            Demic Diffusion or Cultural Diffusion?

           _ Albert Ammerman and I asked the following question: did migrat-
             ing farmers bring agriculture along with them (a process we called
             “demic” diffusion), or was it only the knowledge and technology of
             agricultural production that spread (“cultural” diffusion)? Archeol-
             ogists have shown little interest in this question for several reasons.
             First, it is very difficult to distinguish between these two possibili-
             ties using the archeological record alone. Thereis another diffi-
             culty, of a psychological nature. Archeologists working between the
            two world wars were trained to interpret every cultural event—
            from stylistic changes in axes and pottery to changes in burial prac-
            tices during the copper and iron ages in central Europe—in terms
            of grand migrations and conquests. After the last world war, this
            approach was attacked, particularly by the English school of arche-
            ology. Researchers began to theorize that innovations could spread
            in densely populated regions as the result of well-developed com-
            mercial networks. This critique was important, but it eventually was
            carried to a dogmatic extreme. Before World War II, all cultural
            change was thought to result from massive migrations; afterward,


                                               101
migratory explanations were considered unacceptable. Only mer-
chants traveled, carrying objects later recovered in diggings.
    Archeology has shown that the spread of agriculture was very _
slow and was accompanied by a considerable increase in population
density. By contrast, all purely cultural diffusions were very quick
and rarely had demographic consequences. Ammerman and I
asked, as critically as possible, whether the spread of agriculture in
Europe was a cultural or demic process, that is, did farming or
farmers spread? Its slow pace across the continent suggested a _
demic process, but would it be possible to predict the rate of demic
expansion merely on the basis of the growth and migration rates of
human populations? And, how would it compare with the observed
rate of agricultural diffusion?
    We were aided by a genetic theory developed by R. A. Fisher,
which was easily applied to the ecological and demographic prob-
lems that concerned us. In the demographic formulation, the the-
ory quantitatively predicted the rate of radial spread (starting from
the center of an expansion) for a population that started searching
for new territory when it was approaching the point of saturation.
Without fertilization, which was unknown at the time, soil deple-
tion is rapid and motivates people to move when overpopulation
threatens. Naturally, migrants occupy the nearest unpopulated
regions first. Nevertheless, there is a limit to the distance that prim-
itive peasants could travel. Fisher's theory shows that a growing
population spreads at an easily calculable rate that depends on two
demographic variables: the population’s growth rate and the migra-
tion rates. The archeological record showed that agriculture spread
approximately one kilometer per year. It was a bit more rapid when
people used boats or traveled along rivers or coastlines, and slower
near physical barriers or areas of ecological change.
   If the migration rate is low, a high population growth rate is
needed to sustain an expansion of the observed speed. Conversely,
if migration is high, the growth rate can be slow. The highest known
reproduction rates, more than 3 percent per year, lead to a doubling
of population size in less than a single generation. When met with
this level of population growth, the migration rates observed for

                                  102
             3   7



       © primitive farmers would lead to a rate of expansion as great or
         greater than that observed for the Neolithic expansion in Europe.
            It is very difficult to measure the relevant growth rate from the
        archeological record, since the rate of change varies, diminishing
        continuously from the initial rate. The velocity for the most general
        growth curve, the logistic, is highest at the beginning and decreases
        to zero. But it is the initial rate—only briefly sustained—that mat-
        ters to us. History shows that high growth rates are eminently pos-
        sible when a population of farmers occupies a sparsely inhabited
        area. This was the case, for example, in the province of Quebec more
        than three centuries ago, where the original population included
        about 1,000 French women. They were recruited by Louis XIV as
____    prospective brides to the men, mostly trappers and traders, who had
        earlier settled French Canada, and had no other chance of marry-
        ing French women. Louis XIV gave a dowry to each woman who
        agreed to marry under these conditions. These women, who often
        did not know their future husbands, were called “the King’s daugh-
        ters.” The population grew at an explosive rate, almost as high as
        that of the first Dutch settlers in southern Africa, where the rate of
        growth (crudely measured, it must be admitted) was similar. Natu-
        rally, all of these peasants practiced a more refined form of agricul-
        ture than the Neolithic cultures, but their demographic behavior
        may be comparable.
           Such rapid growth ensures that even very gradual migration
        would guarantee an expansion rate of one kilometer per year. We
        concluded that demographic data of population growth and migra-
        tion are indeed compatible with the theory of demic diffusion of
        Neolithic cultivators.
            But this hypothesis was not immediately welcomed by Anglo-
        American archeologists. Only recently has the situation begun to
        change. Colin Renfrew, Professor of Archeology at the University
        of Cambridge in England, enthusiastically endorsed the theory in a
        1987 book, and in a 1989 Scientific American article. Several other
        archeologists have now accepted the theory we proposed in 1972.
        This is a prime example of how hard it is for new and revolutionary
        ideas to gain acceptance in the scientific world.

                                          103
         A Genetic Demonstration of the Demic Diffusion
                of Agriculture from the Middle East

Archeology can verify the occurrence of migration only in excep-
tional cases. Demographic studies of modern developing countries
have helped convince us that the slow diffusion of agriculture is
consistent with information about the growth and migration of
primitive cultivators. Unfortunately this concordance-can only sug-
gest that the expansion might have been demic, but it cannot prove
it with any certainty.
     So we searched for new methods. One in particular turned out
to be very satisfying: drawing synthetic geographic maps of genes.        7

   A single gene cannot provide sufficiently clear and unambigu-          |
ous results. Any gene is subject to the vagaries of chance, and maps      7


illustrating a single gene frequency lend themselves to multiple,
equally likely interpretations. As an example, let’s discuss the geo-
graphic distribution of two well-known genes: the RH- gene in
Europe, the frequency of which is highest in the Pyrenees Moun-
tains and decreases all around, and the ABO blood group genes. Of
these, the O form frequency reaches nearly 100 percent among
American Natives, while B form frequency is maximal in East Asia
and decreases toward Europe.
    The RH- gene is a European allele—rare or entirely absent
elsewhere. We can guess that the mutation from RH+ to RH—
occurred in western Europe. Since we know that Europe was set-
tled by modern humans about 40,000 years ago, the mutation prob-
ably occurred after that time, increased in frequency, and spread
from its point of origin. Why did the frequency of RH—increase in
the first place? It may have provided a selective advantage to its car-
riers, although it is difficult to imagine how or why, since the only
selection we know of is that RH+ children of RH— mothers have a
significant chance of suffering birth defects or even death. The risk
exists for the second RH+ child of an RH— mother, and increases for
subsequent RH+ children. Fetal damage is caused by the mother’s
antibodies to the RH+ gene raised during the first pregnancy with
an RH+ child. We now know enough about this gene to minimize

                                  104
a ‘therisktoRH+ children; but it is still hard to imagine how the RH—
gene could have increased in a predominantly RH+ population. It
  is worth noting that the RH+ gene would face a similar disadvan-
  tage in an RH— population. How can we explain the increase in
      western Europe of RH— genes?
         Two hypotheses are possible: either natural selection, which
      may have favored RH- genes, is responsible for reasons unknown
      to us, or the RH— form has reached a high frequency through drift.
      As always, it is difficult to choose between these two standard alter-
      natives. The drift theory is supported by the fact that the last gla-
      cial period began in Europe about 25,000 years ago, and reduced
      Europe's overall population, isolating western from eastern ay
      and most probably favoring genetic differentiation.
         In chapter 2 we had to ask the same question about the ABO
    blood groups: did natural selection or drift cause the near disap-
      pearance of the A and B genes from the Americas, leaving the O
      gene at almost 100 percent frequency? The O blood type is rather
      frequent elsewhere, 50 percent on average, and the difference
      between 50 percent frequency in one population and 100 percent
      in another is hardly negligible. A possible explanation is that the
      trek over the Bering land bridge might have involved only a very
      small group of Siberian nomads, thus allowing drift (in the form of a
      “founders’ effect”) to erase any trace of the A and B genes. The A
      gene has been found in a part of northern Canada. It may have
      resulted from novel mutations or admixture with later American
_     settlers, or other selection episodes. A further study of these genes
     at the DNA level in present-day populations and in earlier human
     remains might finally provide an answer.
         On the other hand, natural selection could have eliminated indi-
     viduals bearing the non-O blood groups, and a potential reason has
     been identified—syphilis, a disease that burst into Europe only
     after 1492. An event that helped spread the disease in Europe was a
     war against Spain fought by Charles VIII, king of France, near
     Naples, beginning in August 1494 and ending in February 1495
     with the fall of that city. Naples was under Spanish control from
     then on, but the contagion spread from Spanish to French troops

                                       105
and the Italian population. The disease therefore acquired different
names in different countries: Spanish, Neapolitan, F rench, and Gal-
lic. The hypothesis of an American origin was suggested in the first,
excellent scientific description of the disease, which gave the illness
its name. This happened, according to the customs of the time, in
the Latin poem “Syphilis sive Morbus Gallicus” (Syphilis or the
Gallic disease), written by Girolamo Fracastoro in 1530. In the
poem, a young American shepherd named Syphilis is unfaithful to
the sun god and plagued by ghastly syphilitic ulcers as punishment.
But the god forgives him and teaches him a treatment involving an
American plant and mercury. In another work, “De contagione et
contagiosis morbis” (Of contagion and contagious diseases), 1546,
Fracastoro interprets infectious diseases including syphilis, leprosy,
tuberculosis, typhus, and so on, in a remarkably modern way. Fra-
castoro’s extraordinary intuition in all these matters leads me to
believe that his theory on the American origin of syphilis, and its
transportation to Europe by Christopher Columbus's sailors, is also
correct. The theory is given further credence by our current know!-
edge that type O individuals under treatment for syphilis recover
more   rapidly (from    an   immunological    viewpoint)   than   those
belonging to other blood groups.
   As mentioned before, it is generally hard to explain the geo-
graphic map of a single gene. In the case of ABO I believe both
hypotheses of drift and selection are correct. The map of the RH-
gene is compatible with the diffusion of Middle Eastern farmers, if
we agree that the Neolithic cultivators were predominantly RH+,
like the rest of the world, and that in the Paleolithic period, western
Europeans were mostly, or all, RH—. However, many other explana-          ‘
tions are possible.
    Fortunately, a number of genes other than RH agree with this
interpretation. Only those genes that had frequencies different in
the population of the Middle East than in the tribes living in
Europe before the dispersal of Neolithic groups can provide us
with useful information. We don’t know in advance which genes
displayed such differences between the two regions, but we would
guess that those that show a significant gradient from the area of

                                   106
         ;. “origin to the area
                              of ultimate arrival today probably differed in the
     ___ two regions 10,000 years ago as well.
               Before the development of agriculture, population sizes were
           small, and much genetic drift was expected, producing widely dif-
     _     fering gene frequencies from one area to another. Because the
           Neolithic populations that came later produced food much more
           abundantly than earlier populations, they could reach much higher
          population densities than Paleolithic populations. They would
           expand to neighboring areas and their genes would not be com-
           pletely diluted by their migration into Europe and their subsequent
           mixing with native inhabitants. But we would observe a progressive
aeee
ek
Ce
           dilution of genes emanating from the Middle East in their passage
           across Europe.
               Unlike selection, migration affects all genes equally; as a result,
ss
Fe
           we can reconstruct ancient migrations in the course of drawing geo-
           graphic maps summarizing all available gene frequency informa-            -
         _ tion. The more genes we study, the more reliable our results.
           Ammerman and I had data for only 39 genes when we first started
          in 1978. Having repeated our analysis with 95 genes now, the
           results are extremely similar, but more precise. It seems likely that
           Europe has experienced many major migrations at different times,
           the traces of which have been superimposed upon each other.
           Europe is the most studied continent from a number of perspec-
           tives, including genetics and archeology. Can we disentangle all
           these migrations?
                Principal components analysis, which we discussed earlier,
           helped us do just that. Principal components are unique quantities
           that essentially summarize most of the information contained
           within the frequencies of many genes or, in general, of many vari-
           ables. Each component may successfully isolate one from the other
           different factors influencing variation of the gene frequencies at
           geographic points, and many of these may be different migrations
           and expansions.
              In order to calculate principal components (PCs), it was first
         necessary     to create geographic maps for each gene. studied
           throughout Europe and the Middle East. We drew maps for the 39

                                             107
 genes for which we had sufficiently detailed data and then we cal- _
 culated the PCs with the help of a computer. Finally we’d draw up
_ the geographic maps for each component. The total variation was
  thus decomposed into its “components,” as the PCs are aptly called
  (the word “principal” refers to the fact that there would be many
  more components, but we have chosen the most important ones).
 We could also calculate the fraction of the total variation summa-
 rized by each component. The most important components are
 those that explain the largest fraction of the variation. The method -
 works sequentially: it first calculates a component that can repre-
 sent all the gene frequencies with just one value. This value, which
 is called the first principal component, is a sum of the gene fre-
 quencies observed at a specific point on the geographic map. But
 each frequency has been previously multiplied by a value that is dif     :
 ferent for every gene frequency, and serves as a “weight.” The
 weight of each gene frequency is calculated by a mathematical pro-
 cedure that assigns a relatively large value if the gene frequency
 is important in determining overall genetic variation, and a small
  one if it is not. One could describe a PC as a “weighted mean,” in
  which all gene frequencies are averaged but each particular fre-
  quency is given more or less weight as suggested by a precise
  method of computation.         é
      After the first PC has been calculated, it is eliminated from the
  data, and we proceed to calculate a new prineipal component from
- the variation of the gene frequencies that remain available after
  subtracting the first PC. This is the second PC, and the method
  continues to calculate all successive ones. Each PC is independent
  from all others, and uses a different set of “weights” by which each
  gene frequency is multiplied before adding them up to generate
  the value of the principal component itself.
      The total number of components possible is the number of
  genes minus one. Only the first few are really meaningful. The
  method also calculates the fraction of total genetic variation
 accounted for by each component, and this fraction decreases with
 the order of components. Hence the first principal component is
 the most important. In our first attempt, we calculated only the first

                                  108
    ‘three ee             and togetherthey explained about half of the
    total genetic variation.
         To our great astonishment, we saw that the first principal com-
     ponent of the geographic map in Europe, as illustrated in figure 6,
     perfectly matched the map plotting the arrival dates of cereals in
     Europe according to radiocarbon estimates (figure 5). Paolo
     Menozzi, collaborating with Alberto Piazza and me, performed the
ee
 oe
     plotting of the principal component maps. He never thought the
         result would be so seemingly accurate, and when he saw the maps
         his pleasure was as great as his surprise. The correlation between
         the archeological and genetic maps is obvious, and was confirmed



ee
ee
a
eo
so!* A




27;
                 )®
                e)
=eAy              5
                3
                  «
                xs
                =




                                        Years before present

                                  ] 6500-7000       ff 7500-8000        [_] 8500-9000
                                 BB 7000-7500       f s000-s500         I -9000

         Figure 5. The spread of agriculture—specifically, the arrival of wheat from the Mid-
         dle East to the various parts of Europe, from 9,500 years to 5,000 years ago.
         (Redrawn from a map prepared by Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza 1984)

                                                 109
Figure 6. The first principal component of 95 genes in Europe. Its extraordinary
similarity to figure 5 representing agricultural diffusion indicates that—by the sim-
plest interpretation—there was an expansion of farmers from the Middle East into
Europe, who, in the course of expansion, mixed with local hunter-gatherers, who
had different gene frequencies. (Figures 6 through 10 are taken, with permission,
from The History and Geography of Human Genes, by L. Cavalli-Sforza, P. Menozzi,
and A. Piazza, published by Princeton University Press in 1994.)


with independent methods by Robert Sokal and his collaborators at
the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
    So far, we have not explained the meaning of the bands of varying
density in the principal components map. In the maps of single gene
frequencies each band represents an arbitrarily chosen range of gene
frequencies, for instance, the range from 10 to 20 percent of a given
gene. But the principal components are calculated using the average
gene frequencies of many genes, weighted by coefficients calculated
by methods too complicated to explain here. What scale do we use to
represent these PC maps? The original values are centered on the
average value of each component, which is set equal to zero. They
extend from the average in a negative and positive direction, with a
scale dictated by a frequently applied statistical convention that is

                                         110
  essentially arbitrary (for readers familiar with elementary statistics,
  the components are expressed in units of standard deviation). Dis-
  cerning readers may be disappointed that I do not precisely specify
  the scale of measurement, but it is not easy to explain in just a few
_ words. I encountered the problem at its worst in 1994 when The New
  York Times published an article on this research and wanted to give
  an explanation of the scale of the principal components. The ap-
  proach they took, without consulting me, was incorrect. In a legend
  to figure 6, they wrote that one end of the scale was “less similar” and
  the other end was “more similar.” But they did not try to answer the
  question inevitably raised by this explanation: similar to what? I could
  perhaps have told them: more similar to the genetic types present at
  the source of the expansion. But that would be only an approxima-
  tion, because the extremes of the scale are difficult to define with
  precision. The central value of the scale corresponds to the mean
  genetic type of each component in the geographic region being stud-
  ied, and the two directions of a component—negative and positive— _
  express the difference from the mean relative to the two poles. In
   practice, the extreme value of one of the two poles represents the
   center of an expansion, appearing at the center of radiating bands,
   and the opposite extreme indicates the regions genetically most dif-
   ferent from the originators of the expansion.
 _     Subsequently computer simulations by Sabina Rendine et al.
  (1986) have shown that we can effectively separate independent
  expansions by this method, especially if each expansion has a substan-
  tially different geographic origin, and if local populations experience
  only partial replacement “esa foreign and genetically distinct expand-
  ing population.
     It is critical that the expanding population have a demographic
  advantage over the recipient population with which it mixes—if not
  immediately, certainly by the end of the process. Neolithic farmers
  undoubtedly had higher population densities than the Paleolithic
  populations, and for that reason the Neolithic transition dominates
  the genetic backdrop of Europe even today. Recently, in northern
  Germany, near coal mining operations around Cologne, German
  archeologists have been able to record a big peasant expansion in the

                                    111
spread of “lines” pottery, the name given to the ancient culture o 5
early Neolithic farmers in central Europe. Archeological excavations _
showed that Neolithic population densities were elevated, as one
would expect. Furthermore, our computer simulations demonstrate
that genetic gradients resulting from progressive mixing are fairly
stable over time and could have persisted without much change over ~ :
the fifty centuries which have elapsed since the end of the Neolithic.
    The use of principal components analysis may seem unduly com-
plicated to persons who dislike mathematics, or a simplistic treatment
to those who know its mathematical background, called “spectral
analysis of matrices.” But, as we tried to explain in our first paper on
this analysis, and showed with further simulations, the method is very
efficient for disentangling superimposed migrations. The multiplica-
tion of all gene frequencies by appropriate weights and their sum is
what mathematicians call “a linear analysis.” Principal components          4
                                                                            .
are statistically independent from one another, and so can isolate
independent expansions. Migration transforms gene frequencies
                                                                            :
“linearly,” and migrations arising at different times from different ori-
gins are most likely to be independent, that is, “uncorrelated.” Per-
haps this explanation seems complex, but before the method is too —
easily dismissed, one should note that, from the point of view of evo-
lutionary theory, it is clear that principal components are the most
satisfactory method for isolating independent migrations.
    We should point out that the populations that may most closely
resemble the Paleolithic and Mesolithic Europeans before the
arrival of Neolithic populations are Basques. They speak a language
completely unlike that of any other Europeans. The work of
Michael Angelo Etcheverry, Arthur Mourant, and Jacques Ruffié
on the RH gene had already suggested a proto-European origin for
the Basques on the basis of genetic evidence. Our study is in per-
fect agreement with this proposition and indicates that the Basques
are likely to have descended directly from Paleolithic and then
Mesolithic populations living in the southwest of France and north-
ern Spain before the arrival of Neolithic peoples. Like all other
ancient populations, the Basques have gradually mixed with their
new neighbors. They are not a purely Paleolithic people in this

                                   112
        ia


      ~ sense, but thanks topartial endogamy (marrying mostly within their
         ethnic group—aided in part by their difficult and unique language)
      _ they have maintained some genetic distinctiveness from the neigh-
   boring populations, which must at least partially reflect their origi-
   nal genetic composition.
p
3      Very confident support for our conclusions came more recently
eS
_
   from   research with Y chromosome markers. An unmistakably
q strong east-west diffusion from the Middle East to Europe was
r
5¥ proved in 1997 by Ornella Semino and other Pavian population
- ~ geneticists directed by Silvana Santachiara Benerecetti, using two
2
'o
       major markers. Their results initially conflicted with the work done
f
..     on mitochondrial    DNA    by Brian Sykes’s group at Oxford, but

3
RB:
       expanding the number of individuals used altered their conclu-
,4     sions. With Giuseppe Passarino of Cosenza, Peter Underhill of
       Stanford, and others in my laboratory, Semino extended the Y chro-
       mosome research to seven new markers on 1,000 Europeans.
       These unpublished results dramatically confirm the expansion of
       farmers from the Middle East, and build on conclusions drawn
:      from the second and third principal components. The results sug-
       gest postglacial expansions from glacial refugia in southern France
       and eastern Europe, and provide new information about more
       recent expansions from central and eastern Europe.




        Other Principal Components of the European Genetic Landscape

       The other components after the first, which as we have seen is con-
       nected with the expansion of agriculture from the Middle East,
       have revealed other expansions and phenomena of biological and
       historical interest.
           The sécond component (figure 7) shows a north-south cline of
       variation, suggesting a correlation with climate. Another phenomenon
       that is superficially different, the distribution of languages, is also
       related to both the genetic and the climatic gradient. The languages
       spoken throughout most of northeastern Europe belong to the Uralic

                                         113
Figure 7. The second principal component of 95 genes in Europe. There seem to
be two major streams of gene diffusion, most probably due to two expansions (one
centered in the northeast and the other in the southwest of Europe) that took place
 after the end of the last glaciation.


 family. They are very different from the languages spoken in the rest
 of the continent, which belong to the Indo-European family. Uralic
 languages are spoken mostly to the east of the Ural Mountains, but
_a number of them are found to the west. For example, the Saami
 (unfortunately most people are familiar with their other name, Lapps,
 which is derogatory) and Finnish languages belong to the western
 Uralic linguistic subfamily. The Indo-European family is composed of
 languages spoken from Spain and England in the west to Iran and
 India in the east. There are a few interruptions: in the Pyrenees where
 Basque survives; in Hungary (Hungarian is related to Finnish) and
 southeast of Finland (e.g., Estonian, Karelian); and in Turkey, where
 the language belongs to a totally different linguistic family (Altaic). We
 know that Latin was the administrative language in the ancient
 Roman province of Pannonia, which corresponds roughly to modern
 Hungary, but Pannonia was invaded by the Uralic-speaking Magyars
 at the end of the ninth century A.D. They imposed their language on
 the province, a frequent outcome of conquests.

                                         114
              Southwestern Europe was occupied first by people accustomed
          to the warmer climate. Does the second principal component of
          gene frequencies indicate genetic changes due to adaptations to the
          colder northern latitudes, as the correlation with latitude suggests,
          or due to the arrival of Uralic-speaking populations from western
          Siberia? It is possible that both explanations are correct and repre-
          sent the same phenomenon from two totally different perspectives,
          biological and linguistic.
 3.
          _ Another explanation has been recently suggested by Antonio
         Torroni, on the basis of a mitochondrial DNA study of European
         populations. He postulates that the second PC illustrates an expan-
         sion from southwestern Europe after the end of the glaciation,
         around 13,000 years ago. It is perfectly possible that this explanation
         also is correct. The expansion from the northeast has its center in the
ee
Se
ayVea    area with the darkest bands, Saami country; that from the southwest
         in the lightest area, in Basque country. Both poles of the second PC
           show a pattern rather similar to the expected genetic picture of an
        ~ expansion, and it may well be that the second PC arises from two
          expansions, starting from the two extreme comers of Europe and
         proceeding toward the middle. That from the northeast was proba-
         bly later; both involved hunter-gatherers, at least at the beginning,
         and were slow. One consideration gives some support to this idea.
         An expansion should proceed from a center toward the periphery
         and, if unimpeded in all directions, would generate a pattern resem-
         bling the circular waves generated by a stone thrown in a pond. Geo-
         graphic irregularities seldom permit this; in the case of the first PC
         we do observe, however, an expansion into a circular sector of almost
         90 degrees, resembling a fan with the pivot in the Middle East. But
         the map of the second PC seems to have one center of origin in the
         Basque region, opening like a fan toward the east and northeast; and
         another in the northeast, generating a fan toward the southwest. It is
         possible that there were two expansions exactly opposite to each
         other. The relative contributions and timings are hard to evaluate,
         but it is likely that the one starting in the Basque region is earlier.
             Some further aspects of the history of Uralic language speakers,
      ~ who live mostly in the extreme northeast of Europe and northwest

                                           115
of Asia, are of interest. They probably had sufficient time to adapt :3
to the cold by biological or cultural adaptation, or, more likely, both.   ©
The Urals would not have represented a great barrier to travel, but
nevertheless, the Saami are the only population on the western side            |
who show some genetic continuity with populations living further
east. These people, accustomed to the snow, who apparently knew
how to make and use skis at least 2,000 sees         could rapidly tra-
verse the frozen plains.
    The Saami are genetically European, but they also have affini-
ties with non-Europeans, probably as a result of their trans-Uralic
origins. Their European genetic resemblance suggests that their
Uralic origins are partly masked by admixture with North Euro-
peans, or vice versa. In any case, the European genetic element
predominates. Other European Uralic speakers (e.g., Finns and
Estonians) appear almost entirely European genetically. As to Hun-
garians, about 12 percent of their genes have a Uralic origin. Also in
maps of the second principal component, we see in the lines repre-
senting equal gene frequencies a deviation to include Hungary,
demonstrating a slight connection with northern populations, espe-
cially the Saami. The Finns, by contrast, show almost no trace of
genetic admixture with Uralic populations, but there is another
explanation for this. Finnish scientists have shown that their popu-
lation displays a very unusual array of genetic diseases: some
genetic problems, very rare or entirely unknown elsewhere, are
sometimes very frequent in Finland, and vice versa. The genetic
explanation of this observation is very simply extreme genetic drift.
It is acommon phenomenon in all populations that originate from a
small number of founders, or have suffered at some later stage a
severe reduction in population size: their pattern of genetic dis-
eases is severely altered. The reason is the abnormal statistical fluc-
tuations observed in small populations.
    The probable scenario is the following. The very small group
that gave origin to modern Finns entered the plains of Finland
2,000 years ago,-from the south or east. A Saami population already
inhabited this area, and eventually retreated to the north. Contact



                                   116
    _ of Finns and Saami was enough for the Finnish immigrants to learn
       their language, even though substantial genetic mixing did not
       occur. Especially if several small groups of settlers speaking differ-
       ent languages entered the area, they all had to learn the language,
      or the local dialect, of the only people who knew how to survive and
       get around in Finland’s maze of lakes. A similar situation is occur-
       ring in Mozambique, where a variety of local Bantu languages are
      spoken, but Portuguese, the language of their colonizers, is used for
  communication between tribes.
      The third principal component is extremely interesting. Figure
8   is a little different from those reproduced in our other recent
4     publications, because we have been able to add new data collected
_     by Dr.1.S. Nasidze from the critical region encompassing the Cau-
      casus (Piazza et al. 1995). The overall appearance of this map and
      its predecessors may at first appear very similar, but this one is more




                                                     lm
                                                      lein


                                                   se
                                                     . ah Prat




      Figure 8. The third principal component of 95 genes in Europe reveals an expan-
      sion from a region north of the Black Sea (as the archeologist M. Gimbutas
      claimed) by pastoral nomads who domesticated the horse in the steppe. According
      to Gimbutas, they were responsible for building churn tombs in the region of ori-
      gin, and for spreading Indo-European languages.



                                             117
                                                                 ae
                                                                  a)
                                                                   * 7


robust statistically. It shows an expansion originating in an area           —
north of the Caucasus and the Black and Caspian Seas, which the
archeologist Marjia Gimbutas had already proposed as the home--
land of Indo-European speakers.
    We shall discuss the evolution of languages in the next chapter.
Suffice it to say here that much discussion has centered on the geo-
graphic origins of the Indo-European languages, with suggestions
spanning from central Europe to Central Asia. Marjia Gimbutas
has suggested that the Indo-European languages spread from a
region north of the Caucasus and south of the Urals, where numer-
ous tombs called kurgan have been found. These tombs were filled
with sculptures, precious metals, bronze weapons, and the skele-         —
tons of both warriors and horses. Ecologically, the area belongs to
the Eurasiatic steppe, which extends almost without interruption
from Romania to Manchuria. Horses were common in the area, and
the archeologist David Anthony has recently shown that they were
probably domesticated in the vicinity of this Kurgan culture, where
chariots and bronze weapons were made more than 5,000 years
ago. Without written documents, it is very difficult for archeologists
to say what language was spoken in this region at the time.
   Another archeologist, Colin Renfrew, has offered a different
hypothesis: he believes Indo-European languages originated from
Anatolia in modern day Turkey. The first farmers of this area would
have spoken a proto-Indo-European language, and would have
spread it across Europe. Renfrew based his hypothesis on the belief
that agriculture was spread by farmers, not culturally, and farm-
ers would have had to bring their own language with them. This
hypothesis has received less philological support than Gimbutas’s.
But as we shall see later, the two theories are not completely
contradictory.
    The people of the Kurgan culture were pastoral nomads who
domesticated horses in the steppes where agriculture was not very
productive. The horse provided milk, meat, transport, and as the
Kurgan people would discover later, military power. But these
nomads might originally have descended from agriculturalists of
the Middle East or Anatolia, who probably arrived on the steppes

                                  118
   through Macedonia and Romania, and may have spoken a pre—proto-
 - Indo-European spoken in Anatolia at the beginning of agricultural
   development, around 9,000 to 10,000 years ago. Thus the language(s)
~ common to Anatolia 9,000 to 10,000 years ago were earlier forms of
   Indo-European that spread locally to the Balkans and to the steppe.
   The languages that developed from this early Indo-European in the
  Kurgan region were later spread by pastoral nomads to most of
  Europe, beginning 3,000 to 4,000 years later.
      The percent of the variation explained by lower principal com-
 ponents and their corresponding importance steadily diminish by
  definition. Nevertheless the fourth and fifth components are still
  statistically reliable in Europe and can be simply explained. The
  fourth (figure 9) shows an expansion from Greece toward southern
  Italy, called in Latin Magna Graecia (Greater Greece) because
  southern Italy became more important and populated than Greece
  itself. Greek expansion also included Macedonia and western
  Turkey. We know that the Aegean Islands had a long history even
  before historical Greece, and we admire the excellent art of these




  Figure 9. The fourth principal component of European genes seems to indicate the
  Greek colonization of the first millennium B.c.

                                        119
ancient islanders. Homer relates only the destruction of Troy, —
which occurred around 1300 B.c., but the city flourished long
before. Cretan civilization had a script, linear A, before 1400 B.c.
Linear A was probably not a form of Greek; the first examples of
written Greek survive in a later Cretan script similar to linear A, ~
called linear B. The Greeks began a systematic colonization of
southern Italy around 800 B.c.
    The fifth principal component (figure 10) shows a pole in the
easily identified Basque homeland. This component repeats on a
smaller scale the lower expansion in the second PC. Today, the                   h
                                                                                 ie
                                                                                 eia
                                                                                 t



Basque language and culture survive in southwestern France and
northern Spain, in the western Pyrenees. Historical information
from Roman times, place names (toponymy), and genetics all con-
firm that the Basques once inhabited a much larger territory than
today. The area in which Basque is still spoken has sharply con-
tracted, especially in France where, under pressure favoring the
French language, Basque is spoken by only about 12,000 people.




Figure 10. The fifth principal component corresponds to the area occupied by
speakers of the Basque language. (Maps of principal components in figures 6-10
taken from Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza 1994)


                                       120
         __ It’s spoken by many more people in Spain. During the last Paleo-
           _ lithic period the Basque region extended over almost the entire
         _ area where ancient cave paintings have been found. There are
     _      some cues that Basque descends from a language spoken 35,000to
            40,000 years ago, during the first occupation of France by modern
            humans, who most probably came from the southwest, but possibly
            from the east as well. The artists of these caves would have spoken a
            language of the first, preagricultural Europeans, from which mod-
            ern Basque is derived.




                         Population Expansions Outside of Europe

            We have seen that agriculture spread in many directions from the
            Middle East toward other independent centers of agricultural origin.
            The eastern expansion toward Iran and India is clearly visible in the
3          _ genetic maps of Asia. The same wave of expansion also headed toward
;‘         Arabia and North Africa. However, as in many of the regions that
Za         would later become deserts, few of the original populations have sur-
o
a
a           vived. The replacement of Neolithic populations with more modern
4
E,          ones occurred most extensively in what is now the Sahara Desert. We
g-
            find significant areas of admixture between Whites (Caucasoids) and
     Blacks in Africa: throughout most of the Sahara where Whites have
     crossed both the Suez and the Mediterranean, and in East Africa as a
     result of late Arab contact, which is well documented historically.
rae)
ee
     Ancient cave paintings in the Sahara make it clear that the earliest
            Saharan populations were Black—although possibly mixed with Cau-
           casoids—up to about 5,000 years ago. The most beautiful fresco in
           the Tassili, near a locality known as Jabbaren, shows two young attrac-
           tive women. Today they are usually called the young Peulh (or Fulani)
           after the black population that now lives in the Sahel—a semi-desert
           strip south of the Sahara. The Peulh are typically nomadic pastoral-
           ists, who live off their cattle herds as their ancestors did before them.
           The paintings found in the mountains of the Sahara also depict many
           cows, most of which had been domesticated.

                                              121
      The Berber populations nearer the Mediterranean coast were        ee
  probably Caucasoids. There is little doubt that they came from the
                                                                          bi
  Middle East, and they have occupied the region since the Neolithic
  or even earlier. Experienced sailors like other Neolithic peoples,
  they colonized the Canary Islands. When the Spaniards conquered
  these islands in the fifteenth century, they found a distinct popula-
~ tion with some blond-haired and blue-eyed people—traits that
  are still evident among some Berbers in Morocco. They spoke —
  Guanche, an Afroasiatic Berber language. By the time the Spanish
  arrived, they had lost the ability to sail.
     For the most part, the Berbers were forced into the interior or
 ‘mountain refuges by the arrival of Arabs beginning in the seventh
  century A.D. The Tuaregs, the dominant population of the Sahara
  itself, also speak a Berber language. They are genetically very simi-
  lar to the Beja, another group of desert pastoralists who live along
  the Red Sea coast of Sudan, in the extreme east of the Sahara.
     Today, a few groups continue to live in the mountains of the
  Sahara, and are generally much darker than the Berbers, the Tuaregs,
  and the Beja: the Teda live in the Tibesti mountains of Chad, the
  Daza in the Ennedi, and the Nubans in the Kordofan hills in Sudan.
  It would be most interesting to compare all these groups with
  the more recent and powerful molecular techniques, if sufficient
  material from these remote populations is available. The darker
  groups may be more direct descendants of the Saharan potters
  whose work predates the ceramic industry in the Middle East. It is
  reasonable to hypothesize that in the last 5,000 or 6,000 years,
  White populations arrived in the Sahara from the north or the east
  and either mixed with or partially replaced the area’s first inhabi-
  tants, who were black.
      The Sahara began to transform about 3,000 years ago into the
  harsh desert it is today. Horses were replaced with more drought
  tolerant camels imported from Asia, and peasant populations were
  forced south.
     We are not sure if cows were domesticated in North Africa
  before they were in the Middle East, but several lines of archeologi-
  cal and genetic evidence favor this interpretation. Early Saharan

                                      122
a 4od Sock Peaintinas show that Bovina’ were numerous. Herders who
     ts pushed south found that cows cannot survive at the periphery of
      tropical forests of West Africa and central Africa, where the tsetse fly
      transmits a bovine version of sleeping sickness. Only the savannas
      south of the Sahara would support the herds of the Saharan pastoral-
    _ ists. These herders had a characteristic body morphology: they were
      tall, thin, and had long arms. It is possible that this morphology—
      called “elongated” by the French anthropologist Jean Hiernaux—is
      an adaptation to life in an extremely hot and dry environment. People
      there often speak Nilo-Saharan (Nilotic) languages.
          The farmers who left the increasingly dry Sahara, 3,000 to 4,000
      years ago, found south of the desert conditions favorable for growing
      local domesticates like sorghum, millet, and other cereals, as well as
      cattle, sheep, and goats. In Mali and Burkina Faso, an early demo-
      graphic expansion seems to have resulted from the development
      of agriculture, but archeological information is lacking from this
      important region. It is the study of genetic variation that gives us the
      impression that a demographic expansion occurred there, and I hope
      that archeologists will take notice. Further south, however, a much
      more radical solution was needed, since northern domesticates could
      not be grown in the tropics. Completely new plants, mostly roots and
      tubers from the local forests, were domesticated. However, com-
      pletely satisfactory solutions for tropical agriculture were not found
     in Africa. Only much later, two very similar roots—both called man-
     ioc or cassava—that had been domesticated millennia before in
     the South American forest were introduced to Africa, possibly by
     missionaries in the eighteenth century, and gained immediate success
   _ throughout the African forest. They are now the most popular food
      and major source of calories in a very wide range of tropical Africa.
          Western Africa witnessed the growth and spread of several
      groups farming local plants and cereals. The strongest evidence for
      these expansions from Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso, and especially
      Nigeria and Cameroon comes from linguistics. The most dramatic
      demic expansion started from the vicinity of Cameroon about 3,000
     years ago, or even earlier, in late Neolithic times, and was helped
     along by the use of iron beginning around 500 B.c. This has been

                                         123
called the Bantu expansion after the languages spoken by its
protagonists, which comprise the most recent but also most suc-
cessful branch of the major linguistic family of Africa, called Niger-
Kordofanian. The expansion resulted in the rapid occupation of
central and southern Africa by Bantu speakers. They were about to
reach the Cape of Good Hope when the Dutch built a colony to
supply their ships headed for India—with well-known conse-
quences. As was already noticed by Jean Hiernaux, genetics clearly
show that the Bantu are relatively homogeneous and distinct from _
other West Africans—their closest relatives. They have mixed with
Nilotic speakers in East Africa, and with Khoisan speakers in the
south. Hiernaux correctly deduced that a demic expansion had
occurred. It lasted a little more than 3,000 years and was about 1.5
times more rapid than the European Neolithic expansion. Indeed,
in the second phase of their spread, these people used a slightly
more advanced technology, iron, than was available to the Neolithic
Europeans, who were still in the stone age.
     In China, we find independent but nearly simultaneous agri-
cultural developments in the north, east and south. In the northem
Xian Province, later the center of the Qin and Han Dynasties (from
about 220 B.c.), millet and pigs were cultivated with tremendous suc-
cess. In southern China, rice and buffalo were farmed. There were
two or three important agricultural centers of origin in the south. One
of them included Taiwan, which was attached to the mainland until
quite late, and would later function as the source of massive migra-
tions first toward the Philippines, then Melanesia and Polynesia.
     The two parts of China were very different during the Paleo-
lithic, and this dichotomy is still visible in the modern residents.
Genetically, northern Chinese resemble Manchurians, Koreans,
and Japanese. Southern Chinese are more like Southeast Asians.
China has been unified for more than 2,000 years, and while there
has been internal movement, it has remained genetically and cul-
turally divided. The north and south are two worlds; although
bound by a common language and political base, they have main-
tained some of their former divisions.


                                  124
   Spring the last several thousand years, the most significant
~ expansions have started in Central Asia, thanks to technological
Pdeeaiecaants in pastoral economies. Agriculture did not do well
  on the Asian steppes, but domestication of the horse afforded
  Eurasian pastoralists unprecedented advantages in migrations and
  military conquests. Many waves of migration started from the Kur-
  gan region and had a profound impact on European and Asian his-
  tory. The first expansion toward southern Asia probably occurred
  between 3000 and 2000 B.C., heading for Iran, Pakistan, and India
 via Turkmenistan. This passage appears to have contributed to the
  disappearance around 1500 B.c. of the Indus Valley civilization,
  which had produced the magnificent cities of Harappa and
  Mohenjo-Daro. At the same time as these nomadic expansions,
  there were dynasties related to the Indo-Europeans throughout the
  steppes as far as the Altai Mountains.
      Around the third century B.C., groups speaking Turkish languages
  of the Altaic family, like the Huns, began developing new weapons and
   strategies. In the next centuries they threatened empires in China, Tibet,
   India, and Central Asia, before eventually arriving in Turkey. In 1453
__ Constantinople and the Byzantine Empire fell before their armies. The
  conquests of their descendants continued into recent times, with
  expansions to Europe and North Africa. Genetic traces of their move-
  ments can sometimes be found, but they are often diluted, since the
  numbers of conquerors were always much smaller than the populations
  they conquered. In Turkey and the Balkans, the furthest point perma-
  nently settled by these Mongolian nomads, no clear genetic trace of
  their origin has been found, but genetic investigations are limited. Fur-
  ther expansions of these Eurasian nomads recorded by history are those
  of the Avars, Scythians, and all of the barbarians who put an end to the
  Roman Empire. Most of the earlier conquests are poorly known.
      Genetic analysis indicates a major expansion began from near
  the Sea of Japan—possibly even Japan itself—but it is difficult to
  date. It may have been very early. According to our archeological
  knowledge, it could have occurred 11,000 or 12,000 years ago, coin-
  ciding with or even preceding the date of ceramic development. We


                                      125
sacimn cuencdy Babe thalene              aaa               pr
from there to the Middle East. Pottery
                                     was important for thepreser-
vation of food, and it would be necessary to know more about the =<
dates of ancient ceramics in a wider area around Japan. The demo-
graphic growth determined from statistical analyses of archeological
sites in Japan indicates that a demographic maximum was not reached __
until 4,000 years ago—another possible date for the expansion the
genetic data indicate.
   Certain mutations conferring malarial resistance, often in the
heterozygous state, are concentrated along the Mediterranean
coast and the Pacific Ocean where malaria has been a serious dis-
ease. In the tropics, and even in some temperate climates, malaria
is probably the most serious human disease. Several genetic muta-
tions confer a selective advantage in malarial areas, like the thal-
assemias and sickle cell anemia. It has even been possible to track
ancient Greek, Phoenician, and Malayo-Polynesian migrations by
studying DNA markers of the thalassemia genes, as well as other
diseases conferring resistance to malaria.
    The northern Andes experienced an important population
expansion, which probably began in Mexico. One route toward the
Brazilian plain might have been sustained by the cultivation of
manioc, which was able to grow in tropical forests. We have already
seen manioc’s extraordinary success in Africa, where it replaced
cereals that had previously sustained the Bantu expansion. The
progress of agriculture was slow in northern Mexico, where deserts
delayed its spread to North America until about 2,000 years ago.
   In Australia, the great expanses of coastal forests and the inter-
nal deserts did not favor agriculture, which started prospering only
after James Cook reached it at the end of the eighteenth century. In
New Guinea, now separated from Australia by water, agriculture
could thrive especially in the internal highlands, which witnessed
agricultural developments early and over many millennia. More
recently, the coasts were also colonized, by Malayo-Polynesians;
and for most of human history New Guinea, an island smaller than
Australia, had a larger population.


                                 126
                   The Origins of Human Expansions

 It is obvious thatexpansions have punctuated the last 100,000 years
 of modern human evolution and that their genetic trace can be seen
 in principal components maps. In general, expansions are deter-
 mined by the invention and use of new technologies that stimulate
 demographic growth and eventual migration. Increased food pro-
 duction, for example, can spur demographic growth, which pushes
 new populations to migrate and to occupy and cultivate new terri-
 tory. Innovations in transportation can also aid migration. Likewise,
 military power was advantageous, or even necessary, during several
_ late episodes of expansion when populations were forced out of an
 area. But military action was rarely the principal cause for demo-
 graphic expansion and was not a dramatic source of genetic migra-
 tion. If military superiority helps a small force subjugate a larger
 population, the genetic effect is trivial, though the cultural effects
 are often profound. Today, however, we can see an amplification of
 sex differences, comparing mitochondrial DNA and the Y chromo-
 some. The genetic consequences of population expansion depend
 on the ratio of the number of migrants to the number of inhabitants
 in the occupied region.                          E            }
      Let’s take the case of primitive farmers moving into an area
 inhabited by hunter-gatherers. The latter would be living at a lower
 saturation density, and would reproduce very slowly (about one child
 every four years) resulting in near zero growth. Hunter-gatherers
 are seminomadic and must carry everything, including small children,
 when they move, and this has been recognized as a major cause for
 a low fertility rate, which is just sufficient to balance mortality. The
 Pygmies maintain a sexual taboo for three years after the birth of a
 child. Such taboos, less drastic, are also found in other African pop-
 ulations. Cultivation and animal breeding led to a population den-
 sity a thousand times greater, and also ended the nomadic life that
 had limited the number of manageable children. In more sedentary
 societies, children in large numbers are an advantage as workers,
 and caretakers of the elderly. Agricultural societies can thus grow


                                   127
very rapidly. In general, farmers believe that they are superior to a
hunter-gatherers. Marriages between the two are often permitted,
but the most common rule is that only farmer males are allowed—
and only in certain societies—to take Pygmy wives, because they are
believed to be more fertile, and are much less expensive to marry
(wives are bought from their parents in most of sub-Saharan Africa).
The reverse situation is not socially acceptable.Awife can move up,
but not so easily down, in social status (a rule called hypergamy by
anthropologists). If farmers are initially outnumbered when they
enter a new area, they reproduce more rapidly than local hunter-         |
gatherers, and quickly outgrow them. As they rapidly reach a             .
higher saturation density, they have a genetic advantage over hunter-
gatherers, since the ultimate genetic composition of a region de-
pends on the relative numbers of the various genetic types.
   Pastoral nomads figure somewhere in between sedentary farmers
and hunter-gatherers in terms of population density. They often live
in camps outside farmers’ villages or towns, but can easily multiply
and expand, having few reasons to control reproduction before set-
tling down. They frequently build military force to protect their
herds, and this often allows them to acquire control over large groups
of farmers. Aryans, the nomadic pastoralists who occupied the Indian
subcontinent, formed a society of many castes. These castes were
organized in a rigid hierarchy, and were—still are, at least in rural
India—strictly endogamous (marriage between castes was prohibi-
ted) or at most hypergamic (women were allowed to marry into a
higher caste than that of their origin). Original Aryans formed the
highest, or Brahman, caste, which provided the priests, philosophers,
and practical leaders in all Hindu societies. Power and authority
derived from social status, not numbers. Aryans spoke and spread
Indo-European languages to Afghanistan, Iran, and India. Extension
of the name Aryan to include Europeans and in particular Germans,
supposed to be the original Indo-Europeans, is a fantasy that began
in Germany and was especially dear to Nazi theorists. In Sanskrit, the
old language of Indo-Iranians, aryas means noble, lord, ruler.
   Every expansion produces different genetic gradients, as people
spreading from the area of origin mix to different degrees with ear-

                                 128
   lier settlers. We could not have seen the genetic influence of each
          separate migration without the help of principal components maps.
          In the near future, things may change. New developments of molec-
         ular genetics are making it possible to study more directly the
          migratory paths of single individuals throughout human evolution,
          allowing a more subtle dissection of expansions. But it will take
         time to accumulate the necessary body of data, especially at the
         current level of funding of research.
              One might ask if the order of principal components can be given
         a meaning, It is likely that the first components correspond to the
         oldest events, since population sizes were smaller in the past, and
         initial genetic differences between populations were maximized by
         genetic drift. Each principal component         measures    the global
         genetic variation due to the genetic gradients that it detects. The
         more pronounced the gradient, the greater the total amount of vari-
         ation explained by the component. In Europe, we can verify that
         there is a correlation between component rank and age. The frac-
         tions of variance explained by the first five components in Europe
ee
ee
Te
 ee are 28 percent, 22 percent, 11 percent, 7 percent, and 5 percent.
    The first expansion can be dated to between 9,500 and 5,500 years
         before the present (BP). The second expansion is probably more
         recent, although we have very little archeological or linguistic infor-
euror.
vw       mation about the Uralic expansion. But if it is correct that the
         second PC is also influenced by the postglacial expansion of
         Mesolithics from the Basque region, then the average dating of the
         two components may be similar to that of the agricultural expan-
         sion. There is no major difference between the fractions of variance
         corresponding to the first and second PC anyway. The origins of the
         Kurgan culture (the third PC) must be younger—perhaps 5,000 to
         5,500 years ago at earliest. The Greek migrations suggested by the
         fourth component probably date from 2,500 to 4,000 years ago. It
         thus appears that the chronological order of the expansions is
         approximately reflected in the order of the principal components.
         As for the fifth component, the Basque culture, it reveals more of a
         population contraction caused by a long period of recent expan-
         sions externalto the area, which the, Basque culture has so far

                                           129
resisted, progressively losing ground. Experience with PC analysis
shows that it is possible to observe an influence of the same phe-
nomenon on different components. Here the second would be con-
nected with an early expansion, the fifth with a later contraction
due to other populations coming from the outside. But even if there
is a correlation between the order of principal components and
time, it is clear that PC analysis is not a method of dating.




                         Genetic Chronology

Principal components can be approximately compared to archeo-
logical strata, which formed the basis for a qualitative relative dat-
ing before the discovery of radiocarbon analysis: This later method
allowed absolute dating, which depends on a physical measure-
ment—the rate of !4C’s radioactive decay. The decay of the amount
of MC relative to other types of carbon (#C and $C, which are
not radioactive and are therefore stable) is not influenced by tem-
perature or other chemical or physical forces. It is therefore a phys-
ical clock, usable only on material containing sufficient carbon. I
have mentioned that the method is flawed because one of its
basic assumptions—that the amount of atmospheric *C remained
constant in the past—is not completely true. Nevertheless, it has
been possible to compensate for this factor, using dendrochronol-
ogy (sequences of rings in ancient wood) for correcting 4C datings.
    Could we use a similar method for genetic dating? Until very
recently, genetic dating has depended on employing a calibration
curve. Geological and paleontological events that happened at
known dates and could be held responsible for biological events
recognizable in the fossil record (like the mammalian radiation and
the disappearance of dinosaurs) were used to establish a “calibra-
tion curve.” The age of the biological events, like the differentiation
of mammals or the separation of the evolutionary line into chim-
panzees and humans, was measured, for instance, by the number of



                                  130
     _ differences in their proteins, or in nucleotides of specific DNA seg-
        ments. Such differences, plotted against the dates of the corre-
      _ sponding events, form the calibration curve. In this way the date of
        the human-chimp separations was estimated at about five million
        years ago, and the separation of Africans from non-Africans gave a _
        date of 143,000 years ago using mtDNA results. This date, however,
        the most recent estimate of the birth date of the so-called “African
        Eve,” is not necessarily the date of settlement of other continents
        out of Africa, but rather that of the most recent common ancestor,
        which is likely to be earlier.                   ;
           Attempts at introducing absolute dating methods in genetic
        chronology have used mutation rates as the clock. One difficulty is
        that mutation rates are usually very poorly known, and another is
        that all methods are based on a number of other assumptions, in par-
        ticular patterns of growth rates, which are not well tested or testable.
        One recently introduced method lessens these difficulties by using
        genetic markers called microsatellites. They have an elevated muta-
        tion rate, which unlike all other mutation rates has been estimated
a
        rather accurately. A first estimate made with this method gave
4     ~ results very similar to those obtained for African Eve. We now have
4
        reasons to correct this date, because later observations have shown
"
-.




zz      the mutation process of microsatellites is more complicated than
a
:       originally assumed; taking into account the added complexities has

.       nearly halved the date.
            Previous estimates led to early dates for the expansion of modern
        humans—between 100,000 and 200,000 years ago—but did not take
        into account the unique dynamics of the expansion and the con-
        siderable population increase it caused. A number of recent inde-
        pendent genetic datings place the beginning of expansion from
        Africa close to 50,000 years ago, a date first suggested by anthropol-
        ogist Richard Klein on the basis of archeological research. Klein
        emphasized the significance of a newer, more sophisticated Aurigna-
        cian stone tool that replaced the Mousterian one used by Neander-
        tal and archaic Homo sapiens, including early anatomically modern
        humans living in Israel nearly 100,000 years ago.


                                          131
                                                                     ae
                                                                          ae
                                                                            a

   Peter Underhill and Peter Oefner of Stanford are the main i
authors of a soon-to-be-published set of Y chromosome data, which
will confirm these claims, buttress them with data from other ge-
netic systems (Li Jin et al. 1999, Luis Quintana-Murci et al. 1999),
and greatly enrich our understanding of the expansion. The first
serious development in Africa most likely occurred in the east and
south, and the first expansion probably went from East Africa to
southern Asia and Southeast Asia. From there, expansion contin-
ued south to Oceania and north to China, Japan and Siberia, and
eventually on to America. The coastal route must have been quite
important. There was an expansion from East Africa to north-
eastern Africa, and then to central Africa and West Africa. The Red
Sea and Suez were another much used passageway to Asia. Not sur-
prisingly, Central Asia has considerable genetic variation: it was set-
tled from many directions and contributed to numerous new
expansions. Europe began to be settled 40,000 years ago, probably
from many places of origin: from Morocco, Tunisia, and the Middle
East and Turkey, through the Ukraine and even across the Ural
Mountains.




                                  132
