On the other hand, the commodification of everything in our (capitalist) existence, requiring us to submit all that we do and want to
a pecuniary calculus, only disguises the fact that this material rationality is dependent on a vast system of logico-meaningful attributes
of things and relationships of people. Much of this cultural order is
indeed subconscious, a matter of habitus: the way that shoppers in the
supermarket make (rational) choices between different meats, poultry,
or fish according to such criteria as the necessity of having something
“different” than last night’s dinner—“difference” being determined
from a complex typology of main dishes and forms of food preparation; or again, the way one chooses to buy prime rib rather than
spare ribs, or a rack of lamb rather than hamburger, because tonight
happens to be a special occasion not an outdoor barbecue. It is not
nutritional utility either that associates certain cuts of beef with some
social situations and certain cuts of pork with others. It is the large
(largely unconsidered) code of motivated relationships between men
and animals prevailing among the Western natives. Nor would the
material utilities of clothing govern the differences in styles of dress
that mark the social distinctions between men and women, holidays
and ordinary days, businessmen and policemen, work and leisure,
Farwesterners and Middlewesterners, adults and teenagers, debutante
balls and discos—think of all the ways clothes signify. Granted that the
producers are always looking to invent new differentiations for their
own profits; all the more reason that they have to operate on the same
cultural wavelengths as the consumers.
In a different way but to the same effect as the material practices
of the Fijian or Trobriand Islanders, the capitalist system of pecuniary
rationality is the implementation of a larger system of cultural value.
In the West as in the Rest, rationality is an expression of the culture,
of its meaningful sysem of utilities, not the antithesis. To understand
our economy requires the same kind of anthropological sensibility we
bring to the study of others. We are one of the others.
Forget economic anthropology. We need a truly anthropological
economics.
Marshall Sahlins 2003

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

A cknowledgments

I thank especially two institutions, and the excellent staff associated
with them, for the aid and facilities provided during critical periods of
my research and writing. In 1963–64 I held a fellowship at the Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (Palo Alto), in 1967–69
an office and the run of the Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Sociale du
Collège de France (Paris). Although I had no official position in the
Laboratoire, M. Claude Lévi-Strauss, the director, received me with a
courtesy and generosity I should have difficulty reciprocating, were he
ever in turn to visit my village.
A John Simon Guggenheim fellowship during my first year in Paris
(1967–68) and a Social Science Research Council Faculty Research
Fellowship (1958–61) also contributed important support during the
gestation period of these essays.
That period has been so long and so full of beneficial intellectual
encounters that it would be impossible to list all the colleagues and
students who have, in one way or another, influenced the course of
the work. Out of long years of friendship and discussion, however,
I make three exceptions: Remo Guidieri, Elman Service, and Eric Wolf.
Their ideas and criticisms, always accompanied by encouragement,
have been of inestimable value to me and to my work.
Several of the essays have been published in whole, in part, or in
translation during the past several years. “The Original Affluent Society”
appeared in abbreviated form as “La première société d’abondance” in

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

xxvi

Acknowledgments

Les Temps Modernes (No. 268, Oct. 1968, 641–80). The first part of Chapter 4 was originally published as “The Spirit of the Gift” in Echanges et
communications (Jean Pouillon and P. Maranda, eds., The Hague: Mouton,
1969). The second part of Chapter 4 appeared as “Philosophie politique de l’Essai sur le don,” in L’Homme (vol. 8[4], 1968, 5–17). “On the
Sociology of Primitive Exchange” was published first in The Relevance
of Models for Social Anthropology (M. Banton, ed., London: Tavistock [ASA
Monographs, 1], 1965). I thank the publishers of all of the above for
permission to reproduce these articles.
“The Diplomacy of Primitive Trade,” initially published in Essays in
Economic Anthropology (June Helm, ed., Seattle: American Ethnological
Society, 1965), has been entirely revised for the present book.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

I ntroduction

I have written the several essays of this volume at various times over
the past ten years. Some were written especially for the present publication. All were conceived and are here assembled in the hope of an
anthropological economics, which is to say, in opposition to businesslike interpretations of primitive economies and societies. Inevitably
the book inscribes itself in the current anthropological controversy
between “formalist” and “substantivist” practices of economic theory.
Endemic to the science of Economics for over a century, the formalistsubstantivist debate seems nevertheless lacking in history, for nothing much seems to have changed since Karl Marx defined the fundamental issues in contraposition to Adam Smith (cf. Althusser
et al., 1966, vol. 2). Still, the latest incarnation in the form of anthropology has shifted the emphasis of discussion. If the problem in the
beginning was the “naive anthropology” of Economics, today it is
the “naive economics” of Anthropology. “Formalism versus substantivism” amounts to the following theoretical option: between the
ready-made models of orthodox Economics, especially the “microeconomics,” taken as universally valid and applicable grosso modo to the
primitive societies; and the necessity—supposing this formalist position unfounded—of developing a new analysis more appropriate to
the historical societies in question and to the intellectual history of
Anthropology. Broadly speaking, it is a choice between the perspective of Business, for the formalist method must consider the primitive

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

xxviii Introduction
economies as underdeveloped versions of our own, and a culturalist
study that as a matter of principle does honor to different societies for
what they are.
No solution is in sight, no ground for the happy academic conclusion that “the answer lies somewhere in between.” This book is
substantivist. It thus takes on a familiar structure, as provided by traditional substantive categories. The first essays concern production:
“The Original Affluent Society” and “The Domestic Mode of Production.” (The latter has been divided for convenience into two sections,
Chapters 2 and 3, but these make up one continuous argument.) The
chapters following turn to distribution and exchange: “The Spirit of
the Gift,” “On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange,” “Exchange Value
and the Diplomacy of Primitive Trade.” But as the exposition is at the
same time an opposition, this sequence harbors also a more concealed strategy of debate. The lead chapter accepts battle on formalist
terms. “The Original Affluent Society” does not challenge the common understanding of “economy” as a relation between means and
ends; it only denies that hunters find any great disparity between the
two. The following essays, however, would definitively abandon this
entrepreneurial and individualist conception of the economic object.
“Economy” becomes a category of culture rather than behavior, in a
class with politics or religion rather than rationality or prudence: not
the need-serving activities of individuals, but the material life process
of society. Then, the final chapter returns to economic orthodoxy, but
to its problems, not to its problématique. The attempt in the end is to
bring the anthropological perspective to bear on the traditional work
of microeconomics, the explanation of exchange value.
In all this, the aim of the book remains modest: merely to perpetuate the possibility of an anthropological economics by a few concrete
examples. In a recent issue of Current Anthropology, a spokesman of the
opposed position announced with no apparent regret the untimely
demise of substantive economics:
The wordage squandered in this debate does not add up to its intellectual weight. From the beginning the substantivists (as exemplified
in the justly famous works of Polanyi and others) were heroically muddled and in error. It is a tribute to the maturity of economic anthropology that we have been able to find in what the error consisted in the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Introduction

short space of six years. The paper . . . written by Cook (1966) when
he was a graduate student neatly disposes of the controversy. . . .
Social science being the sort of enterprise [!] it is, however, it is virtually impossible to down a poor, useless, or obfuscating hypothesis,
and I expect the next generation of creators of high-level confusion
will resurrect, in one guise or another, the substantive view of the
economy.
(Nash, 1967, p. 250)

How then to describe the present work, which is neither the second
coming nor otherwise bears the slightest trace of immortality? One
can only hope there has been some mistake. Perhaps, as with Mark
Twain in a similar case, the reports of the death of substantivism have
been grossly exaggerated.
In any event, I refrain from the attempt at mouth-to-mouth resuscitation in the form of methodological discussion. The recent literature
of “economic anthropology” is already overinflated with talk at this
level. And while many of the arguments seem models of good sense,
the total effect has been to confirm everyone in his original prejudice. (“He who’s convinced against his will/Is of the same opinion
still.”) Reason has proven a poor arbiter. Meanwhile the audience to
the debate is rapidly declining, out of boredom, prompting even some
of the main participants to now declare themselves ready to go to
work. That too is the spirit of this book. Officially, as a participant in
a discipline that considers itself a science, I would rest the case on
the essays themselves, and on the belief they explain matters better
than the competing theoretical mode. Such is the traditional and the
healthy procedure: let all the flowers bloom, and we shall see which
bear real fruit.
But the official position is not, I confess, my deepest conviction.
It seems to me that this tissue of metaphors on the natural sciences
dressed up as “social science,” this anthropology, has shown as little
capacity for agreement on the empirical adequacy of a theory as on its
logical sufficiency. For unlike mathematics where “truth and the interest of men oppose not each other,” as Hobbes said long ago, in social
science nothing is indisputable because social science “compareth
men and meddleth with their right and profit,” so that “as often as reason is against a man, a man is against reason.” The decisive differences

xxix

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

xxx

Introduction

between formalism and substantivism, as far as their acceptance is at
issue, if not so far as their truth, are ideological. Embodying the wisdom of native bourgeois categories, formal economics flourishes as
ideology at home and ethnocentrism abroad. As against substantivism,
it draws great strength from its profound compatibility with bourgeois society—which is not to deny, either, that the conflict with substantivism can become a confrontation of (two) ideologies.
When the early physicists and astronomers, working in the shadow
of established ecclesiastic dogmas, commended themselves to God
and Sovereign, they knew what they were doing. The present work
plays on the same contradiction: not in the illusion that the dogmas will prove flexible, but the gods just. The political-ideological
differences between formal and anthropological thought may well be
ignored in the writing, but that does not render them much less consequent to the outcome. We are told substantivism is dead. Politically,
at least for a certain part of the world, it may be so; that flower was
nipped in the bud. It is also conceivable that bourgeois economics is
doomed, scheduled by history to share the fate of the society that nurtured it. In either event, it is not for current anthropology to decide.
We are at least enough of a science to know that is the prerogative of
society, and of the academic sons of heaven who hold its mandate. In
the meantime, we cultivate our gardens, waiting to see if the gods will
shower rain or, like those of certain New Guinea tribes, just urinate
upon us.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

1
THE ORIGINAL AFFLUENT
SOCIETY
If economics is the dismal science, the study of hunting and gathering economies must be its most advanced branch. Almost universally
committed to the proposition that life was hard in the paleolithic, our
textbooks compete to convey a sense of impending doom, leaving one
to wonder not only how hunters managed to live, but whether, after
all, this was living? The specter of starvation stalks the stalker through
these pages. His technical incompetence is said to enjoin continuous
work just to survive, affording him neither respite nor surplus, hence
not even the “leisure” to “build culture.” Even so, for all his efforts,
the hunter pulls the lowest grades in thermodynamics—less energy/
capita/year than any other mode of production. And in treatises on
economic development he is condemned to play the role of bad example: the so-called “subsistence economy.”
The traditional wisdom is always refractory. One is forced to
oppose it polemically, to phrase the necessary revisions dialectically:
in fact, this was, when you come to examine it, the original affluent society. Paradoxical, that phrasing leads to another useful and
unexpected conclusion. By the common understanding, an affluent
society is one in which all the people’s material wants are easily satisfied. To assert that the hunters are affluent is to deny then that the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

2

The Original Affluent Society

human condition is an ordained tragedy, with man the prisoner at
hard labor of a perpetual disparity between his unlimited wants and
his insufficient means.
For there are two possible courses to affluence. Wants may be
“easily satisfied” either by producing much or desiring little. The
familiar conception, the Galbraithean way, makes assumptions
peculiarly appropriate to market economies: that man’s wants are
great, not to say infinite, whereas his means are limited, although
improvable: thus, the gap between means and ends can be narrowed by industrial productivity, at least to the point that “urgent
goods” become plentiful. But there is also a Zen road to affluence,
departing from premises somewhat different from our own: that
human material wants are finite and few, and technical means
unchanging but on the whole adequate. Adopting the Zen strategy,
a people can enjoy an unparalleled material plenty—with a low
standard of living.
That, I think, describes the hunters. And it helps explain some of their
more curious economic behavior: their “prodigality” for example—
the inclination to consume at once all stocks on hand, as if they had it
made. Free from market obsessions of scarcity, hunters’ economic propensities may be more consistently predicated on abundance than our
own. Destutt de Tracy, “fish-blooded bourgeois doctrinaire” though he
might have been, at least compelled Marx’s agreement on the observation that “in poor nations the people are comfortable,” whereas in rich
nations “they are generally poor.”
This is not to deny that a preagricultural economy operates under
serious constraints, but only to insist, on the evidence from modern
hunters and gatherers, that a successful accomodation is usually made.
After taking up the evidence, I shall return in the end to the real difficulties of hunting-gathering economy, none of which are correctly
specified in current formulas of paleolithic poverty.
SOURCES OF THE MISCONCEPTION
“Mere subsistence economy” “limited leisure save in exceptional
circumstances,” “incessant quest for food,” “meagre and relatively
unreliable” natural resources, “absence of an economic surplus,”

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

“maximum energy from a maximum number of people”—so runs
the fair average anthropological opinion of hunting and gathering.
The aboriginal Australians are a classic example of a people whose
economic resources are of the scantiest. In many places their habitat is
even more severe than that of the Bushmen, although this is perhaps
not quite true in the northern portion. . . . A tabulation of the foodstuffs
which the aborigines of northwest central Queensland extract from the
country they inhabit is instructive. . . . The variety in this list is impressive, but we must not be deceived into thinking that variety indicates
plenty, for the available quantities of each element in it are so slight
that only the most intense application makes survival possible.
(Herskovits, 1958, pp. 68–69)

Or again, in reference to South American hunters:
The nomadic hunters and gatherers barely met minimum subsistence needs and often fell far short of them. Their population of 1
person to 10 or 20 square miles reflects this. Constantly on the move
in search of food, they clearly lacked the leisure hours for nonsubsistence activities of any significance, and they could transport little of
what they might manufacture in spare moments. To them, adequacy
of production meant physical survival, and they rarely had surplus of
either products or time.
(Steward and Faron, 1959, p. 60; cf. Clark, 1953, p. 27 f;
Haury, 1962, p. 113; Hoebel, 1958, p. 188;
Redfield, 1953, p. 5; White, 1959)

But the traditional dismal view of the hunters’ fix is also
preanthro pological and extra-anthropological, at once historical
and referable to the larger economic context in which anthropology operates. It goes back to the time Adam Smith was writing, and
probably to a time before anyone was writing.1 Probably it was one
of the first distinctly neolithic prejudices, an ideological appreciation of the hunter’s capacity to exploit the earth’s resources most
congenial to the historic task of depriving him of the same. We must
have inherited it with the seed of Jacob, which “spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north,” to the disadvantage of Esau

3

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

4

The Original Affluent Society

who was the elder son and cunning hunter, but in a famous scene
deprived of his birthright.
Current low opinions of the hunting-gathering economy need not
be laid to neolithic ethnocentrism, however. Bourgeois ethnocentrism
will do as well. The existing business economy, at every turn an ideological trap from which anthropological economics must escape, will
promote the same dim conclusions about the hunting life.
Is it so paradoxical to contend that hunters have affluent economies, their absolute poverty notwithstanding? Modern capitalist societies, however richly endowed, dedicate themselves to the proposition
of scarcity. Inadequacy of economic means is the first principle of the
world’s wealthiest peoples. The apparent material status of the economy
seems to be no clue to its accomplishments; something has to be said
for the mode of economic organization (cf. Polanyi, 1947, 1957, 1959;
Dalton, 1961).
The market-industrial system institutes scarcity, in a manner completely unparalleled and to a degree nowhere else approximated. Where
production and distribution are arranged through the behavior of prices,
and all livelihoods depend on getting and spending, insufficiency of
material means becomes the explicit, calculable starting point of all economic activity.2 The entrepreneur is confronted with alternative investments of a finite capital, the worker (hopefully) with alternative choices
of remunerative employ, and the consumer. . . . Consumption is a double
tragedy: what begins in inadequacy will end in deprivation. Bringing
together an international division of labor, the market makes available a dazzling array of products: all these Good Things within a man’s
reach—but never all within his grasp. Worse, in this game of consumer
free choice, every acquisition is simultaneously a deprivation, for every
purchase of something is a foregoing of something else, in general only
marginally less desirable, and in some particulars more desirable, that
could have been had instead. (The point is that if you buy one automobile, say a Plymouth, you cannot also have the Ford—and I judge from
current television commercials that the deprivations entailed would be
more than just material.)3
That sentence of “life at hard labor” was passed uniquely upon us.
Scarcity is the judgment decreed by our economy—so also the axiom of
our Economics: the application of scarce means against alternative ends

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

to derive the most satisfaction possible under the circumstances. And it
is precisely from this anxious vantage that we look back upon hunters.
But if modern man, with all his technological advantages, still hasn’t
got the wherewithal, what chance has this naked savage with his puny
bow and arrow? Having equipped the hunter with bourgeois impulses
and paleolithic tools, we judge his situation hopeless in advance.4
Yet scarcity is not an intrinsic property of technical means. It is a
relation between means and ends. We should entertain the empirical
possibility that hunters are in business for their health, a finite objective, and that bow and arrow are adequate to that end.5
But still other ideas, these endemic in anthropological theory and ethnographic practice, have conspired to preclude any such understanding.
The anthropological disposition to exaggerate the economic inefficiency of hunters appears notably by way of invidious comparison
with neolithic economies. Hunters, as Lowie put it blankly, “must work
much harder in order to live than tillers and breeders” (1946, p. 13).
On this point evolutionary anthropology in particular found it congenial, even necessary theoretically, to adopt the usual tone of reproach.
Ethnologists and archaeologists had become neolithic revolutionaries,
and in their enthusiasm for the Revolution spared nothing denouncing the Old (Stone Age) Regime, including some very old scandal. It
was not the first time philosophers would relegate the earliest stage
of humanity rather to nature than to culture. (“A man who spends
his whole life following animals just to kill them to eat, or moving
from one berry patch to another, is really living just like an animal
himself”[Braidwood, 1957, p. 122].) The hunters thus downgraded,
anthropology was free to extol the Neolithic Great Leap Forward: a
main technological advance that brought about a “general availability
of leisure through release from purely food-getting pursuits” (Braidwood, 1952, p. 5; cf. Boas, 1940, p. 285).
In an influential essay on “Energy and the Evolution of Culture,” Leslie
White explained that the neolithic generated a “great advance in cultural
development . . . as a consequence of the great increase in the amount
of energy harnessed and controlled per capita per year by means of the
agricultural and pastoral arts” (1949, p. 372). White further heightened the evolutionary contrast by specifying human effort as the principal
energy source of paleolithic culture, as opposed to the domesticated plant

5

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

6

The Original Affluent Society

and animal resources of neolithic culture. This determination of the energy
sources at once permitted a precise low estimate of hunters’ thermodynamic potential—that developed by the human body: “average power
resources” of one-twentieth horsepower per capita (1949, p. 369)—
even as, by eliminating human effort from the cultural enterprise of
the neolithic, it appeared that people had been liberated by some labor-saving device (domesticated plants and animals). But White’s problematic is obviously misconceived. The principal mechanical energy
available to both paleolithic and neolithic culture is that supplied by
human beings, as transformed in both cases from plant and animal
sources, so that, with negligible exceptions (the occasional direct use of
nonhuman power), the amount of energy harnessed per capita per year
is the same in paleolithic and neolithic economies—and fairly constant
in human history until the advent of the industrial revolution.6
Another specifically anthropological source of paleolithic discontent
develops in the field itself, from the context of European observation of
existing hunters and gatherers, such as the native Australians, the Bushmen, the Ona or the Yahgan. This ethnographic context tends to distort
our understanding of the hunting-gathering economy in two ways.
First, it provides singular opportunities for naïveté. The remote and
exotic environments that have become the cultural theater of modern
hunters have an effect on Europeans most unfavorable to the latter’s
assessment of the former’s plight. Marginal as the Australian or Kalahari desert is to agriculture, or to everyday European experience, it is a
source of wonder to the untutored observer “how anybody could live
in a place like this.” The inference that the natives manage only to eke
out a bare existence is apt to be reinforced by their marvelously varied
diets (cf. Herskovits, 1958, quoted above). Ordinarily including objects
deemed repulsive and inedible by Europeans, the local cuisine lends
itself to the supposition that the people are starving to death. Such a
conclusion, of course, is more likely met in earlier than in later accounts,
and in the journals of explorers or missionaries, than in the monographs of anthropologists; but precisely because the explorers’ reports
are older and closer to the aboriginal condition, one reserves for them
a certain respect.
Such respect obviously has to be accorded with discretion. Greater
attention should be paid to a man such as Sir George Grey (1841),

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

whose expeditions in the 1830s included some of the poorer districts
of western Australia, but whose unusually close attention to the local
people obliged him to debunk his colleagues’ communications on just
this point of economic desperation. It is a mistake very commonly
made, Grey wrote, to suppose that the native Australians “have small
means of subsistence, or are at times greatly pressed for want of food.”
Many and “almost ludicrous” are the errors travellers have fallen into in
this regard: “They lament in their journals that the unfortunate Aborigines should be reduced by famine to the miserable necessity of subsisting on certain sorts of food, which they have found near their huts;
whereas, in many instances, the articles thus quoted by them are those
which the natives most prize, and are really neither deficient in flavour
nor nutritious qualities.” To render palpable “the ignorance that has
prevailed with regard to the habits and customs of this people when
in their wild state,” Grey provides one remarkable example, a citation
from his fellow explorer, Captain Sturt, who, upon encountering a
group of Aboriginals engaged in gathering large quantities of mimosa
gum, deduced that the“‘unfortunate creatures were reduced to the last
extremity, and, being unable to procure any other nourishment, had
been obliged to collect this mucilaginous.’ ” But, Sir George observes,
the gum in question is a favorite article of food in the area, and when
in season it affords the opportunity for large numbers of people to
assemble and camp together, which otherwise they are unable to do.
He concludes:
Generally speaking, the natives live well; in some districts there may
be at particular seasons of the year a deficiency of food, but if such
is the case, these tracts are, at those times, deserted. It is, however,
utterly impossible for a traveller or even for a strange native to judge
whether a district affords an abundance of food, or the contrary . . . But in
his own district a native is very differently situated; he knows exactly
what it produces, the proper time at which the several articles are
in season, and the readiest means of procuring them. According to
these circumstances he regulates his visits to different portions of his
hunting ground; and I can only say that I have always found the greatest
abundance in their huts.
(Grey, 1841, vol. 2, pp. 259–262, emphasis mine; cf.
Eyre, 1845, vol. 2, p. 244 f)7

7

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

8

The Original Affluent Society

In making this happy assessment, Sir George took special care to
exclude the lumpen-proletariat aboriginals living in and about European
towns (cf. Eyre, 1845, vol. 2, pp. 250, 254–255). The exception is
instructive. It evokes a second source of ethnographic misconceptions: the anthropology of hunters is largely an anachronistic study of
ex-savages—an inquest into the corpse of one society, Grey once said,
presided over by members of another.
The surviving food collectors, as a class, are displaced persons.
They represent the paleolithic disenfranchised, occupying marginal
haunts untypical of the mode of production: sanctuaries of an era,
places so beyond the range of main centers of cultural advance
as to be allowed some respite from the planetary march of cultural evolution, because they were characteristically poor beyond
the interest and competence of more advanced economies. Leave
aside the favorably situated food collecters, such as Northwest Coast
Indians, about whose (comparative) well-being there is no dispute.
The remaining hunters, barred from the better parts of the earth,
first by agriculture, later by industrial economies, enjoy ecological opportunities something less than the later-paleolithic average.8
Moreover, the disruption accomplished in the past two centuries of
European imperialism has been especially severe, to the extent that
many of the ethnographic notices that constitute the anthropologist’s stock in trade are adulterated culture goods. Even explorer and
missionary accounts, apart from their ethnocentric misconstructions, may be speaking of afflicted economies (cf. Service, 1962).
The hunters of eastern Canada of whom we read in the Jesuit Relations
were committed to the fur trade in the early seventeenth century.
The environments of others were selectively stripped by Europeans
before reliable report could be made of indigenous production: the
Eskimo we know no longer hunt whales, the Bushmen have been
deprived of game, the Shoshoni’s piñon has been timbered and
his hunting grounds grazed out by cattle.9 If such peoples are now
described as poverty-stricken, their resources “meagre and unreliable,” is this an indication of the aboriginal condition—or of the
colonial duress?
The enormous implications (and problems) for evolutionary interpretation raised by this global retreat have only recently begun to

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

evoke notice (Lee and Devore, 1968). The point of present importance
is this: rather than a fair test of hunters’ productive capacities, their
current circumstances pose something of a supreme test. All the more
extraordinary, then, the following reports of their performance.
“A KIND OF MATERIAL PLENTY”
Considering the poverty in which hunters and gatherers live in theory,
it comes as a surprise that Bushmen who live in the Kalahari enjoy “a
kind of material plenty,” at least in the realm of everyday useful things,
apart from food and water:
As the !Kung come into more contact with Europeans—and this is
already happening—they will feel sharply the lack of our things and
will need and want more. It makes them feel inferior to be without
clothes when they stand among strangers who are clothed. But in their
own life and with their own artifacts they were comparatively free from
material pressures. Except for food and water (important exceptions!) of
which the Nyae Nyae !Kung have a sufficiency—but barely so, judging
from the fact that all are thin though not emaciated—they all had what
they needed or could make what they needed, for every man can and
does make the things that men make and every woman the things that
women make. . . . They lived in a kind of material plenty because they
adapted the tools of their living to materials which lay in abundance
around them and which were free for anyone to take (wood, reeds,
bone for weapons and implements, fibers for cordage, grass for shelters), or to materials which were at least sufficient for the needs of the
population. . . . The !Kung could always use more ostrich egg shells for
beads to wear or trade with, but, as it is, enough are found for every
woman to have a dozen or more shells for water containers—all she
can carry—and a goodly number of bead ornaments. In their nomadic
hunting-gathering life, travelling from one source of food to another
through the seasons, always going back and forth between food and
water, they carry their young children and their belongings. With plenty
of most materials at hand to replace artifacts as required, the !Kung
have not developed means of permanent storage and have not needed
or wanted to encumber themselves with surpluses or duplicates. They

9

10

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

do not even want to carry one of everything. They borrow what they do
not own. With this ease, they have not hoarded, and the accumulation
of objects has not become associated with status.
(Marshall, 1961, pp. 243–44, emphasis mine)

Analysis of hunter-gatherer production is usefully divided into
two spheres, as Mrs. Marshall has done. Food and water are certainly
“important exceptions,” best reserved for separate and extended treatment. For the rest, the nonsubsistence sector, what is here said of the
Bushmen applies in general and in detail to hunters from the Kalahari to Labrador—or to Tièrra del Fuego, where Gusinde reports of
the Yahgan that their disinclination to own more than one copy of
utensils frequently needed is “an indication of self-confidence.” “Our
Fuegians,” he writes, “procure and make their implements with little
effort” (1961, p. 213).10
In the nonsubsistence sphere, the people’s wants are generally easily satisfied. Such “material plenty” depends partly upon the ease of
production, and that upon the simplicity of technology and democracy of property. Products are homespun: of stone, bone, wood,
skin— materials such as “lay in abundance around them.” As a rule,
neither extraction of the raw material nor its working up take strenuous effort. Access to natural resources is typically direct—“free for
anyone to take”—even as possession of the necessary tools is general
and knowledge of the required skills common. The division of labor
is likewise simple, predominantly a division of labor by sex. Add
in the liberal customs of sharing, for which hunters are properly
famous, and all the people can usually participate in the going prosperity, such as it is.
But, of course, “such as it is”: this “prosperity” depends as well
upon an objectively low standard of living. It is critical that the customary quota of consumables (as well as the number of consumers)
be culturally set at a modest point. A few people are pleased to consider a few easily-made things their good fortune: some meagre pieces
of clothing and rather fugitive housing in most climates;11 plus a few
ornaments, spare flints and sundry other items such as the “pieces of
quartz, which native doctors have extracted from their patients” (Grey,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

1841, vol. 2, p. 266); and, finally, the skin bags in which the faithful
wife carries all this, “the wealth of the Australian savage” (p. 266).
For most hunters, such affluence without abundance in the nonsubsistence sphere need not be long debated. A more interesting question
is why they are content with so few possessions—for it is with
them a policy, a “matter of principle” as Gusinde says (1961, p. 2),
and not a misfortune.
Want not, lack not. But are hunters so undemanding of material goods because they are themselves enslaved by a food quest
“demanding maximum energy from a maximum number of
people,” so that no time or effort remains for the provision of other
comforts? Some ethnographers testify to the contrary that the food
quest is so successful that half the time the people seem not to
know what to do with themselves. On the other hand, movement is
a condition of this success, more movement in some cases than
others, but always enough to rapidly depreciate the satisfactions of
property. Of the hunter it is truly said that his wealth is a burden.
In his condition of life, goods can become “grievously oppressive,”
as Gusinde observes, and the more so the longer they are carried
around. Certain food collecters do have canoes and a few have dog
sleds, but most must carry themselves all the comforts they possess,
and so only possess what they can comfortably carry themselves.
Or perhaps only what the women can carry: the men are often left
free to react to the sudden opportunity of the chase or the sudden
necessity of defense. As Owen Lattimore wrote in a not too different context, “the pure nomad is the poor nomad.” Mobility and
property are in contradiction.
That wealth quickly becomes more of an encumbrance than a good
thing is apparent even to the outsider. Laurens van der Post was caught
in the contradiction as he prepared to make farewells to his wild Bushmen friends:
This matter of presents gave us many an anxious moment. We were
humiliated by the realization of how little there was we could give to the
Bushmen. Almost everything seemed likely to make life more difficult
for them by adding to the litter and weight of their daily round. They
themselves had practically no possessions: a loin strap, a skin blanket
and a leather satchel. There was nothing that they could not assemble

11

12

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

in one minute, wrap up in their blankets and carry on their shoulders
for a journey of a thousand miles. They had no sense of possession.
(1958, p. 276)

A necessity so obvious to the casual visitor must be second nature to
the people concerned. This modesty of material requirements is institutionalized: it becomes a positive cultural fact, expressed in a variety
of economic arrangements. Lloyd Warner reports of the Murngin, for
example, that portability is a decisive value in the local scheme of
things. Small goods are in general better than big goods. In the final
analysis “the relative ease of transportation of the article” will prevail,
so far as determining its disposition, over its relative scarcity or labor
cost. For the “ultimate value,” Warner writes, “is freedom of movement.” And to this “desire to be free from the burdens and responsibilities of objects which would interfere with the society’s itinerant
existence,” Warner attributes the Murngin’s “undeveloped sense of
property,” and their “lack of interest in developing their technological
equipment” (1964, pp. 136–137).
Here then is another economic “peculiarity”—I will not say it is
general, and perhaps it is explained as well by faulty toilet training
as by a trained disinterest in material accumulation: some hunters, at
least, display a notable tendency to be sloppy about their possessions.
They have the kind of nonchalance that would be appropriate to a
people who have mastered the problems of production, even as it is
maddening to a European:
They do not know how to take care of their belongings. No one
dreams of putting them in order, folding them, drying or cleaning
them, hanging them up, or putting them in a neat pile. If they are
looking for some particular thing, they rummage carelessly through
the hodgepodge of trifles in the little baskets. Larger objects that
are piled up in a heap in the hut are dragged hither and yon with
no regard for the damage that might be done them. The European
observer has the impression that these [Yahgan] Indians place no
value whatever on their utensils and that they have completely forgotten the effort it took to make them.12 Actually, no one clings to his
few goods and chattels which, as it is, are often and easily lost, but
just as easily replaced. . . . The Indian does not even exercise care

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

when he could conveniently do so. A European is likely to shake his
head at the boundless indifference of these people who drag brandnew objects, precious clothing, fresh provisions, and valuable items
through thick mud, or abandon them to their swift destruction by
children and dogs. . . . Expensive things that are given them are treasured for a few hours, out of curiousity; after that they thoughtlessly
let everything deteriorate in the mud and wet. The less they own, the
more comfortable they can travel, and what is ruined they occasionally replace. Hence, they are completely indifferent to any material
possessions.
(Gusinde, 1961, pp. 86–87)

The hunter, one is tempted to say, is “uneconomic man.” At least as
concerns nonsubsistence goods, he is the reverse of that standard caricature immortalized in any General Principles of Economics, page one. His
wants are scarce and his means (in relation) plentiful. Consequently
he is “comparatively free of material pressures,” has “no sense of possession,” shows “an undeveloped sense of property,” is “completely
indifferent to any material pressures,” manifests a “lack of interest” in
developing his technological equipment.
In this relation of hunters to worldly goods there is a neat and
important point. From the internal perspective of the economy, it
seems wrong to say that wants are “restricted,” desires “restrained,”
or even that the notion of wealth is “limited.” Such phrasings imply
in advance an Economic Man and a struggle of the hunter against his
own worse nature, which is finally then subdued by a cultural vow
of poverty. The words imply the renunciation of an acquisitiveness
that in reality was never developed, a suppression of desires that
were never broached. Economic Man is a bourgeois construction—
as Marcel Mauss said, “not behind us, but before, like the moral
man.” It is not that hunters and gatherers have curbed their materialistic “impulses”; they simply never made an institution of them.
“Moreover, if it is a great blessing to be free from a great evil, our
[Montagnais] Savages are happy; for the two tyrants who provide
hell and torture for many of our Europeans, do not reign in their
great forests,—I mean ambition and avarice . . . as they are contented
with a mere living, not one of them gives himself to the Devil to
acquire wealth” (LeJeune, 1897, p. 231).

13

14

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

We are inclined to think of hunters and gatherers as poor because
they don’t have anything; perhaps better to think of them for that reason as free. “Their extremely limited material possessions relieve them
of all cares with regard to daily necessities and permit them to enjoy
life” (Gusinde, 1961, p. 1).
SUBSISTENCE
When Herskovits was writing his Economic Anthropology (1958), it was
common anthropological practice to take the Bushmen or the native
Australians as “a classic illustration of a people whose economic
resources are of the scantiest,” so precariously situated that “only the
most intense application makes survival possible.” Today the “classic”
understanding can be fairly reversed—on evidence largely from these
two groups. A good case can be made that hunters and gatherers work
less than we do; and, rather than a continuous travail, the food quest is
intermittent, leisure abundant, and there is a greater amount of sleep in
the daytime per capita per year than in any other condition of society.
Some of the substantiating evidence for Australia appears in early
sources, but we are fortunate especially to have now the quantitative
materials collected by the 1948 American-Australian Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land. Published in 1960, these startling data must
provoke some review of the Australian reportage going back for over
a century, and perhaps revision of an even longer period of anthropological thought. The key research was a temporal study of hunting and
gathering by McCarthy and McArthur (1960), coupled to McArthur’s
analysis of the nutritional outcome.
Figures 1.1 and 1.2 summarize the principal production studies.
These were short-run observations taken during nonceremonial periods. The record for Fish Creek (14 days) is longer as well as more
detailed than that for Hemple Bay (seven days). Only adults’ work
has been reported, so far as I can tell. The diagrams incorporate information on hunting, plant collecting, preparing foods, and repairing
weapons, as tabulated by the ethnographers. The people in both camps
were free-ranging native Australians, living outside mission or other
settlements during the period of study, although such was not necessarily their permanent or even their ordinary circumstance.13

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

Figure 1.1 Hours per Day in Food-Connected Activities: Fish Creek Group
(McCarthy and McArthur, 1960)

One must have serious reservations about drawing general or historical inferences from the Arnhem Land data alone. Not only was
the context less than pristine and the time of study too brief, but certain elements of the modern situation may have raised productivity
above aboriginal levels: metal tools, for example, or the reduction of
local pressure on food resources by depopulation. And our uncertainty
seems rather doubled than neutralized by other current circumstances
that, conversely, would lower economic efficiency: these semiindependent hunters, for instance, are probably not as skilled as their
ancestors. For the moment, let us consider the Arnhem Land conclusions as experimental, potentially credible in the measure they are
supported by other ethnographic or historic accounts.
The most obvious, immediate conclusion is that the people do not
work hard. The average length of time per person per day put into the
appropriation and preparation of food was four or five hours. Moreover, they do not work continuously. The subsistence quest was highly
intermittent. It would stop for the time being when the people had

15

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Figure 1.2 Hours per Day in Food-Connected Activities: Hemple Bay Group
(McCarthy and McArthur, 1960)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

procured enough for the time being, which left them plenty of time
to spare. Clearly in subsistence as in other sectors of production, we
have to do with an economy of specific, limited objectives. By hunting
and gathering these objectives are apt to be irregularly accomplished,
so the work pattern becomes correspondingly erratic.
In the event, a third characteristic of hunting and gathering unimagined by the received wisdom: rather than straining to the limits of
available labor and disposable resources, these Australians seem to
underuse their objective economic possibilities.
The quantity of food gathered in one day by any of these groups could
in every instance have been increased. Although the search for food
was, for the women, a job that went on day after day without relief
[but see our Figures 1.1 and 1.2], they rested quite frequently, and did
not spend all the hours of daylight searching for and preparing food.
The nature of the men’s food-gathering was more sporadic, and if
they had a good catch one day they frequently rested the next. . . .
Perhaps unconsciously they weigh the benefit of greater supplies of
food against the effort involved in collecting it, perhaps they judge
what they consider to be enough, and when that is collected they stop.
(McArthur, 1960, p. 92)

It follows, fourthly, that the economy was not physically demanding.
The investigators’ daily journal indicates that the people pace themselves; only once is a hunter described as “utterly exhausted” (McCarthy
and McArthur, 1960, pp. 150 f). Neither did the Arnhem Landers
themselves consider the task of subsistence onerous. “They certainly
did not approach it as an unpleasant job to be got over as soon as
possible, nor as a necessary evil to be postponed as long as possible”
(McArthur, 1960, p. 92).14 In this connection, and also in relation to
their underuse of economic resources, it is noteworthy that the Arnhem Land hunters seem not to have been content with a “bare existence.” Like other Australians (cf. Worsley, 1961, p. 173), they become
dissatisfied with an unvarying diet; some of their time appears to have
gone into the provision of diversity over and above mere sufficiency
(McCarthy and McArthur, 1960, p. 192).
In any case, the dietary intake of the Arnhem Land hunters was
adequate—according to the standards of the National Research

17

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

18

The Original Affluent Society

Council of America. Mean daily consumption per capita at Hemple
Bay was 2,160 calories (only a four-day period of observation), and at
Fish Creek 2,130 calories (11 days). Table 1.1 indicates the main daily
consumption of various nutrients, calculated by McArthur in percentages of the NRCA recommended dietary allowances.
Finally, what does the Arnhem Land study say about the famous
question of leisure? It seems that hunting and gathering can afford
extraordinary relief from economic cares. The Fish Creek group maintained a virtually full-time craftsman, a man 35 or 40 years old, whose
true specialty however seems to have been loafing:
He did not go out hunting at all with the men, but one day he netted fish most vigorously. He occasionally went into the bush to get
wild bees’ nests. Wilira was an expert craftsman who repaired the
spears and spear-throwers, made smoking-pipes and drone-tubes,
and hafted a stone axe (on request) in a skillful manner; apart from
these occupations he spent most of his time talking, eating and
sleeping.
(McCarthy and McArthur, 1960, p. 148)

Wilira was not altogether exceptional. Much of the time spared
by the Arnhem Land hunters was literally spare time, consumed in
rest and sleep (see Tables 1.2 and 1.3). The main alternative to work,
changing off with it in a complementary way, was sleep:
Apart from the time (mostly between definitive activities and during
cooking periods) spent in general social intercourse, chatting, gossiping and so on, some hours of the daylight were also spent resting
and sleeping. On the average, if the men were in camp, they usually
slept after lunch from an hour to an hour and a half, or sometimes
even more. Also after returning from fishing or hunting they usually
Table 1.1 Mean daily consumption as percentage of recommended allowances
(from McArthur, 1960)
Calories

Protein

Iron

Calcium

Ascorbic Acid

Hemple Bay

116

444

80

128

394

Fish Creek

104

544

33

355

47

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

had a sleep, either immediately they arrived or whilst game was
being cooked. At Hemple Bay the men slept if they returned early in
the day but not if they reached camp after 4.00 p.m. When in camp
all day they slept at odd times and always after lunch. The women,
when out collecting in the forest, appeared to rest more frequently
than the men. If in camp all day, they also slept at odd times, sometimes for long periods.
(McCarthy and McArthur, 1960, p. 193)

The failure of Arnhem Landers to “build culture” is not strictly from
want of time. It is from idle hands.
So much for the plight of hunters and gatherers in Arnhem Land.
As for the Bushmen, economically likened to Australian hunters by
Herskovits, two excellent recent reports by Richard Lee show their
condition to be indeed the same (Lee, 1968; 1969). Lee’s research
merits a special hearing not only because it concerns Bushmen, but
specifically the Dobe section of !Kung Bushmen, adjacent to the Nyae
Table 1.2 Daytime rest and sleep, Fish Creek group (data from
McCarthy and McArthur, 1960)
♂ Average

♀ Average

1

2'15"

2'45"

2

1'30"

1'0"

Day

3

Most of the day

4

Intermittent

5

Intermittent and most
of late afternoon

6

Most of the day

7

Several hours

8

2'0"

2'0"

9

50"

50"

10

Afternoon

11

Afternoon

12

Intermittent, afternoon

13

—

—

14

3'15"

3'15"

19

20

The Original Affluent Society

Table 1.3 Daytime rest and sleep, Hemple Bay group
(data from McCarthy and McArthur, 1960)
♂Average

♀ Average

1

—

45"

2

Most of the day

2'45"

3

1'0'

—

4

Intermittent

Intermittent

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Day

5

—

1'30"

6

Intermittent

Intermittent

7

Intermittent

Intermittent

Nyae about whose subsistence—in a context otherwise of “material
plenty”—Mrs. Marshall expressed important reservations. The Dobe
occupy an area of Botswana where !Kung Bushmen have been living
for at least a hundred years, but have only just begun to suffer dislocation pressures. (Metal, however, has been available to the Dobe since
1880–90.) An intensive study was made of the subsistence production of a dry season camp with a population (41 people) near the
mean of such settlements. The observations extended over four weeks
during July and August 1964, a period of transition from more to less
favorable seasons of the year, hence fairly representative, it seems, of
average subsistence difficulties.
Despite a low annual rainfall (6 to 10 inches), Lee found in the
Dobe area a “surprising abundance of vegetation.” Food resources
were “both varied and abundant,” particularly the energy-rich mangetti nut—“so abundant that millions of the nuts rotted on the ground
each year for want of picking” (all references in Lee, 1969, p. 59).15
His reports on time spent in food-getting are remarkably close to the
Arnhem Land observations. Table 1.4 summarizes Lee’s data.
The Bushman figures imply that one man’s labor in hunting and
gathering will support four or five people.Taken at face value, Bushman
food collecting is more efficient than French farming in the period up
to World War II, when more than 20 percent of the population were
engaged in feeding the rest. Confessedly, the comparison is misleading, but not as misleading as it is astonishing. In the total population
of free-ranging Bushmen contacted by Lee, 61.3 percent (152 of 248)

The Original Affluent Society

Table 1.4 Summary of Dobe Bushmen work diary (from Lee, 1969)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Week

Mean
Group
Size *

Man-Days of Man-Days
Consumption † of Work

Days of
Index of
Work/
Subsistence
Week/Adult
Effort ‡

1
25.6
(July 6–12) (23–29)

179

37

2.3

.21

2
28.3
(July 13–19) (23–37)

198

22

1.2

.11

34.3
3
(July 20–26) (29–40)

240

42

1.9

.18

4
(July 27–
Aug. 2)

35.6
(32–40)

249

77

3.2

.31

4-week
totals

30.9

866

178

2.2

.21

Adjusted
totals §

31.8

668

156

2.5

.23

Group size shown in average and range. There is considerable short-term population fluctuation in Bushmen camps.
†
Includes both children and adults, to give a combined total of days of provisioning
required/week.
‡
This index was constructed by Lee to illustrate the relation between consumption and
the work required to produce it: S = W/C, where W = number of man-days of work,
and C = man-days of consumption. Inverted, the formula would tell how many people
could be supported by a day’s work in subsistence.
§
Week 2 was excluded from the final calculations because the investigator contributed some
food to the camp on two days.
*

were effective food producers; the remainder were too young or too
old to contribute importantly. In the particular camp under scrutiny,
65 percent were “effectives.” Thus the ratio of food producers to the
general population is actually 3 : 5 or 2 : 3. But, these 65 percent of
the people “worked 36 percent of the time, and 35 percent of the
people did not work at all”! (Lee, 1969, p. 67).
For each adult worker, this comes to about two and one-half days
labor per week. (“In other words, each productive individual supported herself or himself and dependents and still had 3–½ to 5–½
days available for other activities.”) A “day’s work” was about six
hours; hence the Dobe work week is approximately 15 hours, or an
average of 2 hours 9 minutes per day. Even lower than the Arnhem
Land norms, this figure however excludes cooking and the preparation

21

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

22

The Original Affluent Society

of implements. All things considered, Bushmen subsistence labors are
probably very close to those of native Australians.
Also like the Australians, the time Bushmen do not work in subsistence they pass in leisure or leisurely activity. One detects again that
characteristic paleolithic rhythm of a day or two on, a day or two off—
the latter passed desultorily in camp. Although food collecting is the
primary productive activity, Lee writes, “the majority of the people’s
time (four to five days per week) is spent in other pursuits, such as
resting in camp or visiting other camps” (1969, p. 74):
A woman gathers on one day enough food to feed her family for
three days, and spends the rest of her time resting in camp, doing
embroidery, visiting other camps, or entertaining visitors from other
camps. For each day at home, kitchen routines, such as cooking, nut
cracking, collecting firewood, and fetching water, occupy one to three
hours of her time. This rhythm of steady work and steady leisure
is maintained throughout the year. The hunters tend to work more
frequently than the women, but their schedule is uneven. It is not
unusual for a man to hunt avidly for a week and then do no hunting
at all for two or three weeks. Since hunting is an unpredictable business and subject to magical control, hunters sometimes experience a
run of bad luck and stop hunting for a month or longer. During these
periods, visiting, entertaining, and especially dancing are the primary
activities of men.
(1968, p. 37)

The daily per capita subsistence yield for the Dobe Bushmen was
2,140 calories. However, taking into account body weight, normal
activities, and the age-sex composition of the Dobe population, Lee
estimates the people require only 1,975 calories per capita. Some of
the surplus food probably went to the dogs, who ate what the people
left over. “The conclusion can be drawn that the Bushmen do not lead
a substandard existence on the edge of starvation as has been commonly supposed” (1969, p. 73).
Taken in isolation, the Arnhem Land and Bushmen reports mount
a disconcerting if not decisive attack on the entrenched theoretical
position. Artificial in construction, the former study in particular is
reasonably considered equivocal. But the testimony of the Arnhem

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

Land expedition is echoed at many points by observations made
elsewhere in Australia, as well as elsewhere in the hunting-gathering
world. Much of the Australian evidence goes back to the nineteenth
century, some of it to quite acute observers careful to make exception
of the aboriginal come into relation with Europeans, for “his food
supply is restricted, and . . . he is in many cases warned off from
the waterholes which are the centers of his best hunting grounds”
(Spencer and Gillen, 1899, p. 50).
The case is altogether clear for the well-watered areas of southeastern Australia. There the Aboriginals were favored with a supply
of fish so abundant and easily procured that one squatter on the
Victorian scene of the 1840s had to wonder “how that sage people managed to pass their time before my party came and taught
them to smoke” (Curr, 1965, p. 109). Smoking at least solved the
economic problem—nothing to do: “That accomplishment fairly
acquired . . . matters went on flowingly, their leisure hours being
divided between putting the pipe to its legitimate purpose and
begging my tobacco.” Somewhat more seriously, the old squatter
did attempt an estimate of the amount of time spent in hunting
and gathering by the people of the then Port Phillip’s District. The
women were away from the camp on gathering expeditions about
six hours a day, “half of that time being loitered away in the shade or
by the fire”; the men left for the hunt shortly after the women quit
camp and returned around the same time (p. 118). Curr found the
food thus acquired of “indifferent quality” although “readily procured,” the six hours a day “abundantly sufficing” for that purpose;
indeed the country “could have supported twice the number of
Blacks we found in it” (p. 120). Very similar comments were made
by another old-timer, Clement Hodgkinson, writing of an analogous
environment in northeastern New South Wales. A few minutes fishing would provide enough to feed “the whole tribe” (Hodgkinson,
1845, p. 223; cf. Hiatt, 1965, pp. 103–104). “Indeed, throughout all
the country along the eastern coast, the blacks have never suffered
so much from scarcity of food as many commiserating writers have
supposed” (Hodgkinson, 1845, p. 227).
But the people who occupied these more fertile sections of
Australia, notably in the southeast, have not been incorporated in

23

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

24

The Original Affluent Society

today’s stereotype of an Aborigine. They were wiped out early.16 The
European’s relation to such “Blackfellows” was one of conflict over
the continent’s riches; little time or inclination was spared from the
process of destruction for the luxury of contemplation. In the event,
ethnographic consciousness would only inherit the slim pickings:
mainly interior groups, mainly desert people, mainly the Arunta.
Not that the Arunta are all that bad off—ordinarily, “his life is by no
means a miserable or a very hard one” (Spencer and Gillen, 1899,
p. 7).17 But the Central tribes should not be considered, in point
of numbers or ecological adaptation, typical of native Australians
(cf. Meggitt, 1964). The following tableau of the indigenous economy provided by John Edward Eyre, who had traversed the south
coast and penetrated the Flinders range as well as sojourned in the
richer Murray district, has the right to be acknowledged at least as
representative:
Throughout the greater portion of New Holland, where there do not
happen to be European settlers, and invariably when fresh water can
be permanently procured upon the surface, the native experiences no
difficulty whatever in procuring food in abundance all the year round.
It is true that the character of his diet varies with the changing seasons, and the formation of the country he inhabits; but it rarely happens that any season of the year, or any description of country does
not yield him both animal and vegetable food . . . Of these [chief ] articles [of food], many are not only procurable in abundance, but in such
vast quantities at the proper seasons, as to afford for a considerable
length of time an ample means of subsistence to many hundreds of
natives congregated at one place. . . . On many parts of the coast, and
in the larger inland rivers, fish are obtained of a very fine description,
and in great abundance. At Lake Victoria . . . I have seen six hundred
natives encamped together, all of whom were living at the time upon
fish procured from the lake, with the addition, perhaps, of the leaves
of the mesembryanthemum. When I went amongst them I never perceived any scarcity in their camps. . . . At Moorunde, when the Murray
annually inundates the flats, fresh-water cray-fish make their way to
the surface of the ground . . . in such vast numbers that I have seen
four hundred natives live upon them for weeks together, whilst the
numbers spoiled or thrown away would have sustained four hundred

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

more. . . . An unlimited supply of fish is also procurable at the Murray
about the beginning of December. . . The number [of fish] procured . . .
in a few hours is incredible. . . . Another very favourite article of food,
and equally abundant at a particular season of the year, in the eastern
portion of the continent, is a species of moth which the natives procure from the cavities and hollows of the mountains in certain localities. . . . The tops, leaves, and stalks of a kind of cress, gathered at the
proper season of the year . . . furnish a favourite, and inexhaustible
supply of food for an unlimited number of natives. . . . There are many
other articles of food among the natives, equally abundant and valuable as those I have enumerated.
(Eyre, 1845, vol. 2, pp. 250–254)

Both Eyre and Sir George Grey, whose sanguine view of the indigenous economy we have already noted (“I have always found the
greatest abundance in their huts”), left specific assessments, in hours
per day, of the Australians’ subsistence labors. (This in Grey’s case
would include inhabitants of quite undesirable parts of western Australia.) The testimony of these gentlemen and explorers accords very
closely with the Arnhem Land averages obtained by McCarthy and
McArthur. “In all ordinary seasons,” wrote Grey (that is, when the
people are not confined to their huts by bad weather), “they can
obtain, in two or three hours a sufficient supply of food for the day, but
their usual custom is to roam indolently from spot to spot, lazily
collecting it as they wander along” (1841, vol. 2, p. 263; emphasis
mine). Similarly, Eyre states: “In almost every part of the continent
which I have visited, where the presence of Europeans, or their stock,
has not limited, or destroyed their original means of subsistence,
I have found that the natives could usually, in three or four hours, procure
as much food as would last for the day, and that without fatigue or
labour” (1845, pp. 254–255; emphasis mine).
The same discontinuity of subsistence of labor reported by McArthur
and McCarthy, the pattern of alternating search and sleep, is repeated,
furthermore, in early and late observations from all over the continent (Eyre, 1845, vol. 2, pp. 253–254; Bulmer, in Smyth, 1878, vol. 1,
p. 142; Mathew, 1910, p. 84; Spencer and Gillen, 1899, p. 32; Hiatt,
1965, pp. 103–104). Basedow took it as the general custom of the
Aboriginal: “When his affairs are working harmoniously, game secured,

25

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

26

The Original Affluent Society

and water available, the aboriginal makes his life as easy as possible; and
he might to the outsider even appear lazy” (1925, p. 116).18
Meanwhile, back in Africa the Hadza have been long enjoying a
comparable ease, with a burden of subsistence occupations no more
strenuous in hours per day than the Bushmen or the Australian Aboriginals (Woodburn, 1968). Living in an area of “exceptional abundance”
of animals and regular supplies of vegetables (the vicinity of Lake
Eyasi), Hadza men seem much more concerned with games of chance
than with chances of game. During the long dry season especially,
they pass the greater part of days on end in gambling, perhaps only
to lose the metal-tipped arrows they need for big game hunting at
other times. In any case, many men are “quite unprepared or unable to
hunt big game even when they possess the necessary arrows.” Only a
small minority, Woodburn writes, are active hunters of large animals,
and if women are generally more assiduous at their vegetable collecting, still it is at a leisurely pace and without prolonged labor (cf. p.
51; Woodburn, 1966). Despite this nonchalance, and an only limited
economic cooperation, Hadza “nonetheless obtain sufficient food
without undue effort.” Woodburn offers this “very rough approximation” of subsistence-labor requirements: “Over the year as a whole
probably an average of less than two hours a day is spent obtaining
food” (Woodburn, 1968, p. 54).
Interesting that the Hadza, tutored by life and not by anthropology,
reject the neolithic revolution in order to keep their leisure. Although
surrounded by cultivators, they have until recently refused to take up
agriculture themselves, “mainly on the grounds that this would involve
too much hard work.”19 In this they are like the Bushmen, who respond
to the neolithic question with another: “Why should we plant, when
there are so many mongomongo nuts in the world?” (Lee, 1968, p. 33).
Woodburn moreover did form the impression, although as yet unsubstantiated, that Hadza actually expend less energy, and probably less
time, in obtaining subsistence than do neighboring cultivators of East
Africa (1968, p. 54).20 To change continents but not contents, the fitful
economic commitment of the South American hunter, too, could seem
to the European outsider an incurable “natural disposition”:
. . . the Yamana are not capable of continuous, daily hard labor, much
to the chagrin of European farmers and employers for whom they

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

often work. Their work is more a matter of fits and starts, and in these
occasional efforts they can develop considerable energy for a certain time. After that, however, they show a desire for an incalculably
long rest period during which they lie about doing nothing, without
showing great fatigue. . . . It is obvious that repeated irregularities of
this kind make the European employer despair, but the Indian cannot
help it. It is his natural disposition.
(Gusinde, 1961, p. 27)21

The hunter’s attitude towards farming introduces us, lastly, to a few
particulars of the way they relate to the food quest. Once again we
venture here into the internal realm of the economy, a realm sometimes subjective and always difficult to understand; where, moreover,
hunters seem deliberately inclined to overtax our comprehension by
customs so odd as to invite the extreme interpretation that either these
people are fools or they really have nothing to worry about. The former would be a true logical deduction from the hunter’s nonchalance,
on the premise that his economic condition is truly exigent. On the
other hand, if a livelihood is usually easily procured, if one can usually expect to succeed, then the people’s seeming imprudence can no
longer appear as such. Speaking to unique developments of the market
economy, to its institutionalization of scarcity, Karl Polanyi said that
our “animal dependence upon food has been bared and the naked
fear of starvation permitted to run loose. Our humiliating enslavement to the material, which all human culture is designed to mitigate,
was deliberately made more rigorous” (1947, p. 115). But our problems are not theirs, the hunters and gatherers. Rather, a pristine affluence colors their economic arrangements, a trust in the abundance
of nature’s resources rather than despair at the inadequacy of human
means. My point is that otherwise curious heathen devices become
understandable by the people’s confidence, a confidence which is the
reasonable human attribute of a generally successful economy.22
Consider the hunter’s chronic movements from camp to camp.
This nomadism, often taken by us as a sign of a certain harassment, is
undertaken by them with a certain abandon. The Aboriginals of Victoria, Smyth recounts, are as a rule “lazy travellers. They have no motive
to induce them to hasten their movements. It is generally late in the morning
before they start on their journey, and there are many interruptions by

27

28

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

the way” (1878, vol. 1, p. 125; emphasis mine). The good Pere Biard
in his Relation of 1616, after a glowing description of the foods available in their season to the Micmac (“Never had Solomon his mansion
better regulated and provided with food”), goes on in the same tone:
In order to thoroughly enjoy this, their lot, our foresters start off to
their different places with as much pleasure as if they were going on
a stroll or an excursion; they do this easily through the skillful use
and great convenience of canoes . . . so rapidly sculled that, without
any effort, in good weather you can make thirty or forty leagues a day;
nevertheless we scarcely see these Savages posting along at this rate,
for their days are all nothing but pastime. They are never in a hurry.
Quite different from us, who can never do anything without hurry
and worry. . . .
(Biard, 1897, pp. 84–85)

Certainly, hunters quit camp because food resources have given out
in the vicinity. But to see in this nomadism merely a flight from starvation only perceives the half of it; one ignores the possibility that the
people’s expectations of greener pastures elsewhere are not usually
disappointed. Consequently their wanderings, rather than anxious,
take on all the qualities of a picnic outing on the Thames.
A more serious issue is presented by the frequent and exasperated
observation of a certain “lack of foresight” among hunters and gatherers. Oriented forever in the present, without “the slightest thought of,
or care for, what the morrow may bring” (Spencer and Gillen, 1899,
p. 53), the hunter seems unwilling to husband supplies, incapable of a
planned response to the doom surely awaiting him. He adopts instead
a studied unconcern, which expresses itself in two complementary
economic inclinations.
The first, prodigality: the propensity to eat right through all the food
in the camp, even during objectively difficult times, “as if,” LeJeune
said of the Montagnais, “the game they were to hunt was shut up in
a stable.” Basedow wrote of native Australians, their motto “might be
interpreted in words to the effect that while there is plenty for today
never care about tomorrow. On this account an Aboriginal is inclined
to make one feast of his supplies, in preference to a modest meal now

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

and another by and by” (1925, p. 116). LeJeune even saw his Montagnais carry such extravagance to the edge of disaster:
In the famine through which we passed, if my host took two, three,
or four Beavers, immediately, whether it was day or night, they had a
feast for all neighboring Savages. And if those people had captured
something, they had one also at the same time; so that, on emerging from one feast, you went to another, and sometimes even to a
third and a fourth. I told them that they did not manage well, and
that it would be better to reserve these feasts for future days, and in
doing this they would not be so pressed with hunger. They laughed
at me. “Tomorrow” (they said) “we shall make another feast with
what we shall capture.” Yes, but more often they capture only cold
and wind.
(LeJeune, 1887, pp. 281–283)

Sympathetic writers have tried to rationalize the apparent impracticality. Perhaps the people have been carried beyond reason by hunger:
they are apt to gorge themselves on a kill because they have gone so
long without meat—and for all they know they are likely to soon
do so again. Or perhaps in making one feast of his supplies a man is
responding to binding social obligations, to important imperatives of
sharing. LeJeune’s experience would confirm either view, but it also
suggests a third. Or rather, the Montagnais have their own explanation.
They are not worried by what the morrow may bring because as far
as they are concerned it will bring more of the same: “another feast.”
Whatever the value of other interpretations, such self-confidence must
be brought to bear on the supposed prodigality of hunters. More, it
must have some objective basis, for if hunters and gatherers really
favored gluttony over economic good sense, they would never have
lived to become the prophets of this new religion.
A second and complementary inclination is merely prodigality’s
negative side: the failure to put by food surpluses, to develop food
storage. For many hunters and gatherers, it appears, food storage cannot be proved technically impossible, nor is it certain that the people are unaware of the possibility (cf. Woodburn, 1968, p. 53). One
must investigate instead what in the situation precludes the attempt.

29

30

The Original Affluent Society

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Gusinde asked this question, and for the Yahgan found the answer in
the selfsame justifiable optimism. Storage would be “superfluous,”
because throughout the entire year and with almost limitless generosity the sea puts all kinds of animals at the disposal of the man who
hunts and the woman who gathers. Storm or accident will deprive a
family of these things for no more than a few days. Generally no one
need reckon with the danger of hunger, and everyone almost anywhere
finds an abundance of what he needs. Why then should anyone worry
about food for the future! . . . Basically our Fuegians know that they
need not fear for the future, hence they do not pile up supplies. Year
in and year out they can look forward to the next day, free of care. . . .
(Gusinde, 1961, pp. 336, 339)

Gusinde’s explanation is probably good as far as it goes, but probably incomplete. A more complex and subtle economic calculus seems
in play—realized however by a social arithmetic exceedingly simple. The advantages of food storage should be considered against the
diminishing returns to collection within the compass of a confined
locale. An uncontrollable tendency to lower the local carrying capacity
is for hunters au fond des choses: a basic condition of their production and
main cause of their movement. The potential drawback of storage is
exactly that it engages the contradiction between wealth and mobility.
It would anchor the camp to an area soon depleted of natural food
supplies. Thus immobilized by their accumulated stocks, the people
may suffer by comparison with a little hunting and gathering elsewhere, where nature has, so to speak, done considerable storage of her
own—of foods possibly more desirable in diversity as well as amount
than men can put by. But this fine calculation—in any event probably
symbolically impossible (cf. Codere,1968)—would be worked out in
a much simpler binary opposition, set in social terms such as “love”
and “hate.” For as Richard Lee observes (1969, p. 75), the technically
neutral activity of food accumulation or storage is morally something
else again, “hoarding.” The efficient hunter who would accumulate
supplies succeeds at the cost of his own esteem, or else he gives them
away at the cost of his (superfluous) effort. As it works out, an attempt
to stock up food may only reduce the overall output of a hunting
band, for the have-nots will content themselves with staying in camp

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

and living off the wherewithal amassed by the more prudent. Food
storage, then, may be technically feasible, yet economically undesirable, and socially unachievable.
If food storage remains limited among hunters, their economic
confidence, born of the ordinary times when all the people’s wants
are easily satisfied, becomes a permanent condition, carrying them
laughing through periods that would try even a Jesuit’s soul and worry
him so that—as the Indians warn—he could become sick:
I saw them, in their hardships and in their labors, suffer with cheerfulness. . . . I found myself, with them, threatened with great suffering; they said to me, “We shall be sometimes two days, sometimes
three, without eating, for lack of food; take courage, Chihiné, let thy
soul be strong to endure suffering and hardship; keep thyself from
being sad, otherwise thou wilt be sick; see how we do not cease to
laugh, although we have little to eat.”
(LeJeune, 1897, p. 283; cf. Needham, 1954, p. 230)

RETHINKING HUNTERS AND GATHERERS
Constantly under pressure of want, and yet, by travelling, easily
able to supply their wants, their lives lack neither excitement or
pleasure.
(Smyth, 1878, vol. 1, p. 123)

Clearly, the hunting-gathering economy has to be revaluated, both as
to its true accomplishments and its true limitations. The procedural
fault of the received wisdom was to read from the material circumstances to the economic structure, deducing the absolute difficulty
of such a life from its absolute poverty. But always the cultural design
improvises dialectics on its relationship to nature. Without escaping the ecological constraints, culture would negate them, so that
at once the system shows the impress of natural conditions and the
originality of a social response—in their poverty, abundance.
What are the real handicaps of the hunting-gathering praxis? Not
“low productivity of labor,” if existing examples mean anything. But
the economy is seriously afflicted by the imminence of diminishing returns.

31

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

32

The Original Affluent Society

Beginning in subsistence and spreading from there to every sector, an
initial success seems only to develop the probability that further efforts
will yield smaller benefits. This describes the typical curve of foodgetting within a particular locale. A modest number of people usually
sooner than later reduce the food resources within convenient range
of camp. Thereafter, they may stay on only by absorbing an increase in
real costs or a decline in real returns: rise in costs if the people choose
to search farther and farther afield; decline in returns if they are satisfied to live on the shorter supplies or inferior foods in easier reach. The
solution, of course, is to go somewhere else. Thus the first and decisive
contingency of hunting-gathering: it requires movement to maintain
production on advantageous terms.
But this movement, more or less frequent in different circumstances, more or less distant, merely transposes to other spheres of
production the same diminishing returns of which it is born. The
manufacture of tools, clothing, utensils, or ornaments, however easily
done, becomes senseless when these begin to be more of a burden
than a comfort. Utility falls quickly at the margin of portability. The
construction of substantial houses likewise becomes absurd if they
must soon be abandoned. Hence the hunter’s very ascetic conceptions
of material welfare: an interest only in minimal equipment, if that; a
valuation of smaller things over bigger; a disinterest in acquiring two
or more of most goods; and the like. Ecological pressure assumes a
rare form of concreteness when it has to be shouldered. If the gross
product is trimmed down in comparison with other economies, it is
not the hunter’s productivity that is at fault, but his mobility.
Almost the same thing can be said of the demographic constraints of
hunting-gathering. The same policy of débarassment is in play on the level
of people, describable in similar terms and ascribable to similar causes.
The terms are, cold-bloodedly: diminishing returns at the margin of
portability, minimum necessary equipment, elimination of duplicates,
and so forth—that is to say, infanticide, senilicide, sexual continence
for the duration of the nursing period, etc., practices for which many
food-collecting peoples are well known. The presumption that such
devices are due to an inability to support more people is probably
true—if “support” is understood in the sense of carrying them rather
than feeding them. The people eliminated, as hunters sometimes sadly

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

tell, are precisely those who cannot effectively transport themselves,
who would hinder the movement of family and camp. Hunters may
be obliged to handle people and goods in parallel ways, the draconic
population policy an expression of the same ecology as the ascetic
economy. More, these tactics of demographic restraint again form part
of a larger policy for counteracting diminishing returns in subsistence.
A local group becomes vulnerable to diminishing returns—so to a
greater velocity of movement, or else to fission—in proportion to its
size (other things equal). Insofar as the people would keep the advantage in local production, and maintain a certain physical and social
stability, their Malthusian practices are just cruelly consistent. Modern
hunters and gatherers, working their notably inferior environments,
pass most of the year in very small groups widely spaced out. But
rather than the sign of underproduction, the wages of poverty, this
demographic pattern is better understood as the cost of living well.
Hunting and gathering has all the strengths of its weaknesses. Periodic movement and restraint in wealth and population are at once
imperatives of the economic practice and creative adaptations, the
kinds of necessities of which virtues are made. Precisely in such a
framework, affluence becomes possible. Mobility and moderation put
hunters’ ends within range of their technical means. An undeveloped
mode of production is thus rendered highly effective. The hunter’s life
is not as difficult as it looks from the outside. In some ways the economy reflects dire ecology, but it is also a complete inversion.
Reports on hunters and gatherers of the ethnological present—
specifically on those in marginal environments—suggest a mean of
three to five hours per adult worker per day in food production.
Hunters keep banker’s hours, notably less than modern industrial
workers (unionized), who would surely settle for a 21–35 hour
week. An interesting comparison is also posed by recent studies of
labor costs among agriculturalists of neolithic type. For example,
the average adult Hanunoo, man or woman, spends 1,200 hours per
year in swidden cultivation (Conklin, 1957, p. 151); which is to say,
a mean of three hours twenty minutes per day. Yet this figure does
not include food gathering, animal raising, cooking and other direct
subsistence efforts of these Philippine tribesmen. Comparable data
are beginning to appear in reports on other primitive agriculturalists

33

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

34

The Original Affluent Society

from many parts of the world. The conclusion is put conservatively
when put negatively: hunters and gatherers need not work longer
getting food than do primitive cultivators. Extrapolating from ethnography to prehistory, one may say as much for the neolithic as
John Stuart Mill said of all labor-saving devices, that never was one
invented that saved anyone a minute’s labor. The neolithic saw no
particular improvement over the paleolithic in the amount of time
required per capita for the production of subsistence; probably, with
the advent of agriculture, people had to work harder.
There is nothing either to the convention that hunters and gatherers
can enjoy little leisure from tasks of sheer survival. By this, the evolutionary inadequacies of the paleolithic are customarily explained,
while for the provision of leisure the neolithic is roundly congratulated. But the traditional formulas might be truer if reversed: the
amount of work (per capita) increases with the evolution of culture,
and the amount of leisure decreases. Hunters’ subsistence labors are
characteristically intermittent, a day on and a day off, and modern
hunters at least tend to employ their time off in such activities as daytime sleep. In the tropical habitats occupied by many of these existing
hunters, plant collecting is more reliable than hunting itself. Therefore, the women, who do the collecting, work rather more regularly
than the men, and provide the greater part of the food supply. Man’s
work is often done. On the other hand, it is likely to be highly erratic,
unpredictably required; if men lack leisure, it is then in the Enlightenment sense rather than the literal. When Condorcet attributed the
hunter’s unprogressive condition to want of “the leisure in which he
can indulge in thought and enrich his understanding with new combinations of ideas,” he also recognized that the economy was a “necessary cycle of extreme activity and total idleness.” Apparently what the
hunter needed was the assured leisure of an aristocratic philosophe.
Hunters and gatherers maintain a sanguine view of their economic
state despite the hardships they sometimes know. It may be that they
sometimes know hardships because of the sanguine views they maintain of their economic state. Perhaps their confidence only encourages
prodigality to the extent the camp falls casualty to the first untoward
circumstance. In alleging this is an affluent economy, therefore, I do
not deny that certain hunters have moments of difficulty. Some do find
it “almost inconceivable” for a man to die of hunger, or even to fail

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

to satisfy his hunger for more than a day or two (Woodburn, 1968,
p. 52). But others, especially certain very peripheral hunters spread
out in small groups across an environment of extremes, are exposed
periodically to the kind of inclemency that interdicts travel or access
to game. They suffer—although perhaps only fractionally, the shortage
affecting particular immobilized families rather than the society as a
whole (cf. Gusinde, 1961, pp. 306–307).
Still, granting this vulnerability, and allowing the most poorly situated modern hunters into comparison, it would be difficult to prove
that privation is distinctly characteristic of the hunter-gatherers. Food
shortage is not the indicative property of this mode of production as
opposed to others; it does not mark off hunters and gatherers as a class
or a general evolutionary stage. Lowie asks:
But what of the herders on a simple plane whose maintenance is
periodically jeopardized by plagues—who, like some Lapp bands
of the nineteenth century were obliged to fall back on fishing? What of
the primitive peasants who clear and till without compensation
of the soil, exhaust one plot and pass on to the next, and are threatened with famine at every drought? Are they any more in control of
misfortune caused by natural conditions than the hunter-gatherer?
(1938, p. 286)

Above all, what about the world today? One-third to one-half of
humanity are said to go to bed hungry every night. In the Old Stone
Age the fraction must have been much smaller. This is the era of hunger unprecedented. Now, in the time of the greatest technical power,
is starvation an institution. Reverse another venerable formula: the
amount of hunger increases relatively and absolutely with the evolution of culture.
This paradox is my whole point. Hunters and gatherers have by
force of circumstances an objectively low standard of living. But taken
as their objective, and given their adequate means of production, all
the people’s material wants usually can be easily satisfied. The evolution of economy has known, then, two contradictory movements:
enriching but at the same time impoverishing, appropriating in relation to nature but expropriating in relation to man. The progressive
aspect is, of course, technological. It has been celebrated in many

35

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

36

The Original Affluent Society

ways: as an increase in the amount of need-serving goods and services, an increase in the amount of energy harnessed to the service of
culture, an increase in productivity, an increase in division of labor,
and increased freedom from environmental control. Taken in a certain
sense, the last is especially useful for understanding the earliest stages
of technical advance. Agriculture not only raised society above the distribution of natural food resources, it allowed neolithic communities
to maintain high degrees of social order where the requirements of
human existence were absent from the natural order. Enough food
could be harvested in some seasons to sustain the people while no
food would grow at all; the consequent stability of social life was critical for its material enlargement. Culture went on then from triumph
to triumph, in a kind of progressive contravention of the biological
law of the minimum, until it proved it could support human life in
outer space—where even gravity and oxygen were naturally lacking.
Other men were dying of hunger in the market places of Asia. It
has been an evolution of structures as well as technologies, and in
that respect like the mythical road where for every step the traveller
advances his destination recedes by two. The structures have been political as well as economic, of power as well as property. They developed
first within societies, increasingly now between societies. No doubt
these structures have been functional, necessary organizations of the
technical development, but within the communities they have thus
helped to enrich they would discriminate in the distribution of wealth
and differentiate in the style of life. The world’s most primitive people
have few possessions, but they are not poor. Poverty is not a certain small
amount of goods, nor is it just a relation between means and ends;
above all it is a relation between people. Poverty is a social status. As
such it is the invention of civilization. It has grown with civilization, at
once as an invidious distinction between classes and more importantly
as a tributary relation—that can render agrarian peasants more susceptible to natural catastrophes than any winter camp of Alaskan Eskimo.
All the preceding discussion takes the liberty of reading modern
hunters historically, as an evolutionary base line. This liberty should
not be lightly granted. Are marginal hunters such as the Bushmen
of the Kalahari any more representative of the paleolithic condition
than the Indians of California or the Northwest Coast? Perhaps not.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Original Affluent Society

Perhaps also Bushmen of the Kalahari are not even representative of
marginal hunters. The great majority of surviving hunter-gatherers
lead a life curiously decapitated and extremely lazy by comparison
with the other few. The other few are very different. The Murngin,
for example: “The first impression that any stranger must receive in
a fully functioning group in Eastern Arnhem Land is of industry. . .
And he must be impressed with the fact that with the exception of
very young children . . . there is no idleness” (Thomson, 1949a,
pp. 33–34).There is nothing to indicate that the problems of livelihood
are more difficult for these people than for other hunters (cf. Thomson, 1949b). The incentives of their unusual industry lie elsewhere: in
“an elaborate and exacting ceremonial life,” specifically in an elaborate ceremonial exchange cycle that bestows prestige on craftsmanship
and trade (Thomson, 1949a, pp. 26, 28, 34 f, 87 passim). Most other
hunters have no such concerns. Their existence is comparatively colorless, fixed singularly on eating with gusto and digesting at leisure.
The cultural orientation is not Dionysian or Apollonian, but “gastric,”
as Julian Steward said of the Shoshoni. Then again it may be Dionysian, that is, Bacchanalian: “Eating among the Savages is like drinking among the drunkards of Europe. Those dry and ever-thirsty souls
would willingly end their lives in a tub of malmsey, and the Savages
in a pot full of meat; those over there talk only of drinking, and these
here only of eating” (LeJeune, 1897, p. 249).
It is as if the superstructures of these societies had been eroded,
leaving only the bare subsistence rock, and since production itself is
readily accomplished, the people have plenty of time to perch there
and talk about it. I must raise the possibility that the ethnography of
hunters and gatherers is largely a record of incomplete cultures. Fragile cycles of ritual and exchange may have disappeared without trace,
lost in the earliest stages of colonialism, when the intergroup relations
they mediated were attacked and confounded. If so, the “original”
affluent society will have to be rethought again for its originality, and
the evolutionary schemes once more revised. Still this much history
can always be rescued from existing hunters: the “economic problem”
is easily solvable by paleolithic techniques. But then, it was not until
culture neared the height of its material achievements that it erected a
shrine to the Unattainable: Infinite Needs.

37

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

2
