THE SPIRIT OF THE GIFT
Marcel Mauss’s famous Essay on the Gift becomes his own gift to the
ages. Apparently completely lucid, with no secrets even for the novice, it remains a source of an unending ponderation for the anthropologist du métier, compelled as if by the hau of the thing to come
back to it again and again, perhaps to discover some new and unsuspected value, perhaps to enter into a dialogue which seems to impute
some meaning of the reader’s but in fact only renders the due of the
original. This chapter is an idiosyncratic venture of the latter kind,
unjustified moreover by any special study of the Maori or of the philosophers (Hobbes and Rousseau especially) invoked along the way.
Yet in thinking the particular thesis of the Maori hau and the general
theme of social contract reiterated throughout the Essay, one appreciates in another light certain fundamental qualities of primitive
economy and polity, mention of which may forgive the following
overextended commentary.
“EXPLICATION DE TEXTE”
The master concept of the Essai sur le don is the indigenous Maori idea
hau, introduced by Mauss as “the spirit of things and in particular of

The Spirit of the Gift

the forest and the game it contains . . .” (1966, p. 158). The Maori
before any other archaic society, and the idea of hau above all similar
notions, responded to the central question of the Essay, the only one
Mauss proposed to examine “à fond”: “ What is the principle of right and
interest which, in societies of primitive or archaic type, requires that the gift received must
be repaid? What force is there in the thing given which compels the recipient to make
a return?” (p. 148). The hau is that force. Not only is it the spirit of the
foyer, but of the donor of the gift; so that even as it seeks to return to
its origin unless replaced, it gives the donor a mystic and dangerous
hold over the recipient.
Logically, the hau explains only why gifts are repaid. It does not of
itself address the other imperatives into which Mauss decomposed
the process of reciprocity: the obligation to give in the first place,
and the obligation to receive. Yet by comparison with the obligation to reciprocate, these aspects Mauss treated only summarily, and
even then in ways not always detached from the hau: “This rigorous
combination of symmetrical and opposed rights and duties ceases
to appear contradictory if one realizes that it consists above all of a
melange of spiritual bonds between things which are in some degree
souls, and individuals and groups which interact in some degree as
things” (p. 163).
Meanwhile, the Maori hau is raised to the status of a general explanation: the prototypical principle of reciprocity in Melanesia, Polynesia, and the American northwest coast, the binding quality of the
Roman traditio, the key to gifts of cattle in Hindu India—“What you
are, I am; become on this day of your essence, in giving you I give
myself” (p. 248).
Everything depends then on the “texte capitale” collected by
Elsdon Best (1909) from the Maori sage, Tamati Ranapiri of the
­Ngati-Raukawa tribe. The great role played by the hau in the Essay
on the Gift—and the repute it has enjoyed since in anthropological
economics—stems almost entirely from this passage. Here Ranapiri
explained the hau of taonga, that is, goods of the higher spheres of
exchange, valuables. I append Best’s translation of the Maori text
(which he also published in the original), as well as Mauss’s rendering in French.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

1

135

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

136

The Spirit of the Gift

Best, 1909, p. 439

Mauss, 1966, pp. 158–159

I will now speak of the hau, and
the ceremony of whangai hau.
That hau is not the hau (wind)
that blows—not at all. I will
carefully explain to you. Suppose that you possess a certain article, and you give that
article to me, without price. We
make no bargain over it. Now,
I give that article to a third person, who, after some time has
elapsed, decides to make some
return for it, and so he makes
me a present of some article.
Now, that article that he gives
me is the hau of the article I first
received from you and then
gave to him. The goods that
I received for that item I must
hand over to you. It would not
be right for me to keep such
goods for myself, whether they
be desirable items or otherwise.
I must hand them over to you,
because they are a hau of the
article you gave me. Were I to
keep such an equivalent for
myself, then some serious evil
would befall me, even death.
Such is the hau, the hau of personal property, or the forest
hau. Enough on these points.

Je vais vous parler du hau.. . . Le
hau n’est pas le vent qui souffle.
Pas du tout. Supposez que vous
possédez un article détermine
(taonga) et que vous me donnez
cet article; vous me le donnez
sans prix fixe. Nous ne faisons
pas de marché à ce propos. Or, je
donne cet article à une troisième
personne qui, après qu’un certain temps s’est écoulé, décide
de rendre quelque chose en paiement (utu), il me fait présent de
quelque chose (taonga). Or, ce
taonga qui’il me donne est l’esprit (hau) du taonga que j’ai reçu
de vous et que je lui ai donnés à
lui. Les taonga que j’ai reçus pour
ces taonga (venus de vous) il
faut que je vous les rende. Il ne
serait pas juste (tika) de ma part
de garder ces taonga pour moi,
qu’ils soient désirables (rawe),
ou désagréables (kino). Je dois
vous les donner car ils sont un
hau du taonga que vous m’avez
donné. Si je conservais ce deuxième taonga pour moi, il pourrait
m’en venir du mal, sérieusement,
même la mort. Tel est le hau, le
hau de la propriété personnelle, le
hau des taonga, le hau de la forêt.
Kati ena. (Assez sur ce sujet.)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

Mauss complained about Best’s abbreviation of a certain portion of the
original Maori. To make sure that we would miss nothing of this critical
document, and in the hope further meanings might be gleaned from it,
I asked Professor Bruce Biggs, distinguished student of the Maori, to prepare a new interlinear translation, leaving the term “hau,” however, in the
original. To this request he responded most kindly and promptly with
the following version, undertaken without consulting Best’s translation:2
Na, mo te hau o te ngaaherehere. Taua mea te hau, ehara i te mea
Now, concerning the hau of the forest. This hau is not the hau
ko te hau e pupuhi nei. Kaaore. Maaku e aata whaka maarama ki a koe.
that blows (the wind). No.   I will explain it carefully to you.
Na, he taonga toou ka hoomai e koe mooku. Kaaore aa taaua whakaritenga
Now, you have something valuable which you give to me. We have no
uto mo too taonga. Na, ka hoatu hoki e ahau mo teetehi atu tangata, aa,
agreement about payment. Now, I give it to someone else, and,
ka roa peaa te waa, aa, ka mahara taua tangata kei a ia raa taug taonga
a long time passes, and that man thinks he has the valuable,
kia hoomai he utu ki a au, aa, ka hoomai e ia. Na, ko taua taonga
he should give some repayment to me, and so he does so. Now, that
i hoomai nei ki a au, ko te hau teenaa o te taonga i hoomai ra ki a au
valuable which was given to me, that is the hau of the valuable which was
i mua.   Ko taua taonga me hoatu e ahau ki a koe. E kore
given to me before. I must give it to you.   It would not
rawa e tika kia kaiponutia e ahau mooku; ahakoa taonga pai rawa, taonga
be correct for me to keep it for myself, whether it be something very good,
kino raanei, me tae rawa taua taonga i a au ki a koe. No te mea he hau
or bad, that valuable must be given to you from me. Because that
valuable
no te taonga teenaa taonga na. Ki te mea kai kaiponutia e ahau taua
taonga
is a hau of the other valuable. If I should hang onto that valuable

137

138

The Spirit of the Gift

mooku, ka mate ahau.   Koina te hau, hau taonga
for myself, I will become mate.   So that is the hau—hau
of valuables,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

hau ngaaherehere. Kaata eenaa.
hau of the forest. So much for that.

Concerning the text as Best recorded it, Mauss commented that—
despite marks of that “esprit théologique et juridique encore imprécis”
characteristic of Maori—“it offers but one obscurity: the intervention
of a third person.” But even this difficulty he forthwith clarified with
a light gloss:
But in order to rightly understand this Maori jurist, it suffices to say:
“Taonga and all strictly personal property have a hau, a spiritual power.
You give me a taonga, I give it to a third party, the latter gives me
another in return, because he is forced to do so by the hau of my present; and I am obliged to give you this thing, for I must give back to you
what is in reality the product of the hau of your taonga.
(1966, p. 159)

Embodying the person of its giver and the hau of its forest, the gift
itself, on Mauss’s reading, obliges repayment. The receiver is beholden
by the spirit of the donor; the hau of a taonga seeks always to return to its
homeland, inexorably, even after being transferred hand to hand through
a series of transactions. Upon repaying, the original recipient assumes
power in turn over the first donor; hence, “la circulation obligatoire des
richesses, tributs et dons” in Samoa and New Zealand. In sum:
. . . it is clear that in Maori custom, the bond of law, bond by way of
things, is a bond of souls, because the thing itself has a soul, is soul.
From this it follows that to present something to someone is to present something of oneself. . . . It is clear that in this system of ideas it
is necessary to return unto another what is in reality part of his nature
and substance; for, to accept something from someone is to accept
something of his spiritual essence, of his soul; the retention of this
thing would be dangerous and mortal, not simply because it would
be illicit, but also because this thing which comes from a person,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

not only morally but physically and spiritually—this essence, this
food, these goods, movable or immovable, these women or these
offspring, these rites or these communions—give a magical and religious hold over you. Finally, this thing given is not inert. Animate,
often personified, it seeks to return to what Hertz called its “foyer
d’origine”or to produce for the clan and the earth from which it came
some equivalent to take its place.
(op. cit., p. 161)

THE COMMENTARIES OF LÉVI-STRAUSS, FIRTH AND JOHANSEN
Mauss’s interpretation of the hau has been attacked by three scholars
of authority, two of them experts on the Maori and one an expert on
Mauss. Their critiques are surely learned, but none I think arrives at the
true meaning of the Ranapiri text or of the hau.
Lévi-Strauss debates principles. He does not presume to criticize Mauss
on Maori ethnography. He does, however, question the reliance on an
indigenous rationalization: “Are we not faced here with one of those
instances (not altogether rare) in which the ethnologist allows himself
to be mystified by the native?” (Lévi-Strauss, 1966, p. 38). The hau is not
the reason for exchange, only what one people happen to believe is the
reason, the way they represent to themselves an unconscious necessity
whose reason lies elsewhere. And behind Mauss’s fixation on the hau,
Lévi-Strauss perceived a general conceptual error that regretably arrested
his illustrious predecessor short of the full structuralist comprehension
of exchange that the Essay on the Gift had itself so brilliantly prefigured:
“like Moses leading his people to a promised land of which he would
never contemplate the splendor” (p. 37). For Mauss had been the first in
the history of ethnology to go beyond the empirical to a deeper reality,
to abandon the sensible and discrete for the system of relations; in a
unique manner he had perceived the operation of reciprocity across its
diverse and multiple modalities. But, alas, Mauss could not completely
escape from positivism. He continued to understand exchange in the way
it is presented to experience—fragmented, that is to say, into the separate
acts of giving, receiving, and repaying. Considering it thus in pieces,
instead of as a unified and integral principle, he could do nothing better
than to try to glue it back again with this “mystic cement,” the hau.

139

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

140

The Spirit of the Gift

Firth likewise has his own views on reciprocity, and in making them
he scores Mauss repeatedly on points of Maori ethnography (1959a, pp.
418–421). Mauss, according to Firth, simply misunderstood the hau,
which is a difficult and amorphous concept, but in any event a more
passive spiritual principle than Mauss believed. The Ranapiri text in fact
gives no evidence that the hau passionately strives to return to its source.
Nor did the Maori generally rely on the hau acting by itself to punish
economic delinquency. Normally in the event of a failure to reciprocate, and invariably for theft, the established procedure of retribution
or restitution was witchcraft (makutu): witchcraft initiated by the person
who had been bilked, usually involving the services of a “priest” (tohunga), if operating through the vehicle of the goods detained.3 Furthermore, adds Firth, Mauss confused types of hau that in the Maori view
are quite distinct—the hau of persons, that of lands and forests, and
that of taonga—and on the strength of this confusion he formulated a
serious error. Mauss simply had no warrant to gloss the hau of the taonga
as the hau of the person who gives it. The whole idea that the exchange
of gifts is an exchange of persons is sequitur to a basic misinterpretation.
Ranapiri had merely said that the good given by the third person to the
second was the hau of the thing received by the second from the first.4
The hau of persons was not at issue. In supposing it was, Mauss put his
own intellectual refinements on Maori mysticism.5 In other words, and
Lévi-Strauss notwithstanding, it was not a native rationalization after all;
it was a kind of French one. But as the Maori proverb says, “the troubles
of other lands are their own” (Best, 1922, p. 30).
Firth for his part prefers secular to spiritual explanations of reciprocity. He would emphasize certain other sanctions of repayment,
sanctions noted by Mauss in the course of the Essay:
The fear of punishment sent through the hau of goods is indeed a
supernatural sanction, and a valuable one, for enforcing repayment
of a gift. But to attribute the scrupulousness in settling one’s obligations to a belief in an active, detached fragment of personality
of the donor, charged with nostalgia and vengeful impulses, is an
entirely different matter. It is an abstraction which receives no support from native evidence. The main emphasis of the fulfillment of
obligation lies, as the work of Mauss himself has suggested, in the

The Spirit of the Gift

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

social sanctions—the desire to continue useful economic relations,
the maintenance of prestige and power—which do not require any
hypothesis of recondite beliefs to explain.
(1959a, p. 421)6

The latest to apply for entrance to the Maori “house of learning,” J.
Prytz Johansen (1954), makes certain clear advances over his predecessors in the reading of the Ranapiri text. He at least is the first to doubt that
the old Maori had anything particularly spiritual in mind when he spoke
of the hau of a gift. Unfortunately, Johansen’s discussion is even more
labyrinthal than Tamati Ranapiri’s, and once having reached the point he
seems to let go, searches a mythical rather than a logical explanation of
the famous exchange à trois, and ends finally on a note of scholarly despair.
After rendering due tribute and support to Firth’s critique of Mauss,
Johansen observes that the word hau has a very wide semantic field.
Probably several homonyms are involved. For the series of meanings
usually understood as “life principle” or something of the sort, Johansen prefers as a general definition, “a part of life (for example, an object)
which is used ritually in order to influence the whole,” the thing serving as hau varying according to the ritual context. He then makes a
point that hitherto had escaped everyone’s notice—including, I think,
Best’s. Tamati Ranapiri’s discourse on gifts was by way of introduction
to and explanation of a certain ceremony, a sacrificial repayment to the
forest for the game birds taken by Maori fowlers.7 Thus the informant’s
purpose in this expositing passage was merely to establish the principle of reciprocity, and “hau” there merely signified “countergift”—“the
Maori in question undoubtedly thought that hau means countergift,
simply what is otherwise called utu”(Johansen, 1954, p. 118).
We shall see momentarily that the notion of “equivalent return”
(utu) is inadequate for the hau in question; moreover, the issues posed
by Ranapiri transcend reciprocity as such. In any event, Johansen, upon
taking up again the three-party transaction, dissipated the advance he
had made. Unaccountably, he credited the received understanding that
the original donor performs magic on the second party through the
goods the latter received from the third, goods that become hau in this
context. But since the explication is “not obvious,” Johansen found
himself compelled to invoke a special unknown tradition, “to the

141

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

142

The Spirit of the Gift

effect that when three persons exchanged gifts and the intermediary
party failed, the counter-gift which had stopped with him might be
hau, i.e., might be used to bewitch him.” He then finished gloomily:
“However a certain uncertainty is involved in all these considerations
and it seems doubtful whether we shall ever attain to actual certainty
as regards the meaning of the hau” (ibid., p. 118).
The True Meaning of The Hau of Valuables

I am not a linguist, a student of primitive religions, an expert on the
Maori, or even a Talmudic scholar. The “certainty” I see in the disputed
text of Tamati Ranapiri is therefore suggested with due reservations.
Still, to adopt the current structuralist incantation, “everything happens as if” the Maori was trying to explain a religious concept by
an economic principle, which Mauss promptly understood the other
way around and thereupon proceeded to develop the economic principle by the religious concept. The hau in question really means something on the order of “return on” or “product of,” and the principle
expressed in the text on taonga is that any such yield on a gift ought to
be handed over to the original donor.
The disputed text absolutely should be restored to its position as an
explanatory gloss to the description of a sacrifical rite.8 Tamata Ranapiri
was trying to make Best understand by this example of gift exchange—
example so ordinary that anybody (or any Maori) ought to be able
to grasp it immediately—why certain game birds are ceremoniously
returned to the hau of the forest, to the source of their abundance. In
other words, he adduced a transaction among men parallel to the ritual
transaction he was about to relate, such that the former would serve as
paradigm for the latter. As a matter of fact, the secular transaction does
not prove directly comprehensible to us, and the best way to understand
it is to work backwards from the exchange logic of the ceremony.
This logic, as presented by Tamati Ranapiri, is perfectly straightforward. It is necessary only to observe the sage’s use of “mauri” as the
physical embodiment of the forest hau, the power of increase—a mode
of conceiving the mauri that is not at all idiosyncratic, to judge from
other writings of Best. The mauri, housing the hau, is placed in the forest by the priests (tohunga) to make game birds abound. Here then is

The Spirit of the Gift

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

the passage that followed that on the gift exchange—in the intention
of the informant, as night follows day:9
I will explain something to you about the forest hau. The mauri was
placed or implanted in the forest by the tohunga [priests]. It is the
mauri that causes birds to be abundant in the forest, that they may
be slain and taken by man. These birds are the property of, or belong
to, the mauri, the tohunga, and the forest: that is to say, they are
an equivalent for that important item, the mauri. Hence it is said
that offerings should be made to the hau of the forest. The tohunga (priests, adepts) eat the offering because the mauri is theirs: it
was they who located it in the forest, who caused it to be. That is
why some of the birds cooked at the sacred fire are set apart to be
eaten by the priests only, in order that the hau of the forest-products,
and the mauri, may return again to the forest—that is, to the mauri.
Enough of these matters.
(Best, 1909, p. 439)

In other words, and essentially: the mauri that holds the increasepower (hau) is placed in the forest by the priests (tohunga); the mauri
causes game birds to abound; accordingly, some of the captured birds
should be ceremoniously returned to the priests who placed the mauri;
the consumption of these birds by the priests in effect restores the
fertility (hau) of the forest (hence the name of the ceremony, whangai
hau, “nourishing hau”).10 Immediately then, the ceremonial transaction
presents a familiar appearance: a three-party game, with the priests in
the position of an initiating donor to whom should be rendered the
returns on an original gift.The cycle of exchange is shown in Figure 4.1.
Now, in the light of this transaction, reconsider the text, just preceding, on gifts among men. Everything becomes transparent. The secular

Figure 4.1

143

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

144

The Spirit of the Gift

exchange of taonga is only slightly different in form from the ceremonial
offering of birds, while in principle it is exactly the same— thus the
didactic value of its position in Ranapiri’s discourse. A gives a gift to B
who transforms it into something else in an exchange with C, but since
the taonga given by C to B is the product (hau) of A’s original gift, this
benefit ought to be surrendered to A. The cycle is shown in Figure 4.2.
The meaning of hau one disengages from the exchange of taonga
is as secular as the exchange itself. If the second gift is the hau of the
first, then the hau of a good is its yield, just as the hau of a forest is
its productiveness. Actually, to suppose Tamati Ranapiri meant to say
the gift has a spirit which forces repayment seems to slight the old
gentleman’s obvious intelligence. To illustrate such a spirit needs only
a game of two persons: you give something to me; your spirit (hau)
in that thing obliges me to reciprocate. Simple enough. The introduction of a third party could only unduly complicate and obscure the
point. But if the point is neither spiritual nor reciprocity as such, if it
is rather that one man’s gift should not be another man’s capital, and
therefore the fruits of a gift ought to be passed back to the original
holder, then the introduction of a third party is necessary. It is necessary precisely to show a turnover: the gift has had issue; the recipient
has used it to advantage. Ranapiri was careful to prepare this notion
of advantage beforehand by stipulating11 the absence of equivalence in
the first instance, as if A had given B a free gift. He implies the same,
moreover, in stressing the delay between the reception of the gift by
the third person and the repayment—“a long time passes, and that
man thinks that he has the valuable, he should give some repayment to
me.” As Firth observes, delayed repayments among Maori are customarily larger than the initial gift (1959a, p. 422); indeed, it is a general
rule of Maori gift exchange that, “the payment must if possible be

Figure 4.2

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

somewhat in excess of what the principle of equivalence demanded”
(ibid., p. 423). Finally, observe just where the term hau enters into the
discussion. Not with the initial transfer from the first to the second
party, as well it could if it were the spirit in the gift, but upon the
exchange between the second and third parties, as logically it would if
it were the yield on the gift.12 The term “profit” is economically and
historically inappropriate to the Maori, but it would have been a better
translation than “spirit” for the hau in question.
Best provides one other example of exchange in which hau figures.
Significantly, the little scene is again a transaction à trois:
I was having a flax shoulder-cape made by a native woman at Ruatahuna. One of the troopers wished to buy it from the weaver, but she
firmly refused, lest the horrors of hau whitia descend upon her. The
term hau whitia means “averted hau.”
(1900–1901, p. 198)

Only slightly different from the model elaborated by Tamati Ranapiri, this anecdote offers no particular difficulty. Having commissioned
the cape, Best had the prior claim on it. Had the weaver accepted the
trooper’s offer, she would have turned this thing to her own advantage,
leaving Best with nothing. She appropriates the product of Best’s cape;
she becomes subject to the evils of a gain unrightfully turned aside, “the
horrors of hau whitia.”13 Otherwise said, she is guilty of eating hau—kai
hau—for in the introduction to this incident Best had explained,
Should I dispose of some article belonging to another person and not
hand over to him any return or payment I may have received for that
article, that is a hau whitia and my act is a kai hau, and death awaits,
for the dread terrors of makutu [witchcraft] will be turned upon me.
(1900–1901, pp. 197–98)14

So as Firth observed, the hau (even if it were a spirit) does not
cause harm on its own initiative; the distinct procedure of witchcraft
(makutu) has to be set in motion. It is not even implied by this incident
that such witchcraft would work through the passive medium of hau,
since Best, who was potentially the deceived party, had apparently put
nothing tangible into circulation. Taken together, the different texts

145

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

146

The Spirit of the Gift

on the hau of gifts suggest something else entirely: not that the goods
withheld are dangerous, but that withholding goods is immoral—and
therefore dangerous in the sense the deceiver is open to justifiable
attack. “It would not be correct to keep it for myself,” said Ranapiri, “I
will become mate (ill, or die).”
We have to deal with a society in which freedom to gain at others’
expense is not envisioned by the relations and forms of exchange.
Therein lies the moral of the old Maori’s economic fable. The issue he
posed went beyond reciprocity: not merely that gifts must be suitably
returned, but that returns rightfully should be given back. This interpretation it is possible to sustain by a judicious selection among the
many meanings of hau entered in H. Williams’s (1921) Maori dictionary. Hau is a verb meaning to “exceed, be in excess,” as exemplified in
the phrase kei te hau te wharika nei (“this mat is longer than necessary”);
likewise, hau is the substantive, “excess, parts, fraction over any complete measurement.” Hau is also “property, spoils.” Then there is haumi,
a derivative meaning to “join,” to “lengthen by addition,” to “receive
or lay aside”; it is also, as a noun, “the piece of wood by which the
body of a canoe is lengthened.” The following is the true meaning of
Tamati Ranapiri’s famous and enigmatic discourse on the hau of taonga:
I will explain it carefully to you. Now, you have something valuable
which you give to me. We have no agreement about payment. Now,
I give it to someone else, and, a long time passes, and that man thinks
he has the valuable, he should give some repayment to me, and so he
does so. Now, that valuable which was given to me, that is the product
of [hau] the valuable which was given to me [by you] before. I must give
it to you. It would not be right for me to keep it for myself, whether it be
something good, or bad, that valuable must be given to you from me.
Because that valuable is a return on [hau] the other valuable. If I should
hang onto that valuable for myself, I will become ill [or die].
Aside on The Maori Sorcerer’s Apprentice

But this understanding of the hau of things still risks criticism on its
own grounds—of omission, of failure to consider the total context.
Both passages, on gifts and on sacrifice, are parts of a yet larger whole,

The Spirit of the Gift

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

preceeded by still another disquisition on mauri as taken by Best from
the lips of Ranapiri (1909, pp. 440–441). True, there may be good
reason for leaving this particular prelude aside. Highly obscure, esoteric, concerned mainly with the nature and teaching of death-dealing
spells, it seems to have no great bearing on exchange:
The mauri is a spell which is recited over a certain object, of stone,
or of wood, or something else approved of by the tohunga [priest] as
a “clinging place,” a “holding-fast-place,” a “dwelling-place” for the
mauri. Such an object is subjected to the “cause-to-be-split” ritual,
and left in a hidden part of the forest to lie there. The mauri is not tapuless. Also it is not the case that all of the forest is as tapu as the part
where the mauri lies. Concerning the causing-to-be-split, it is a shattering. If a man is taught by a priest certain spells, say witchcraft spells,
or spells for placing mauri, and the other Maori spells, and he learns
them, then the priest says to that man, “Now, there, ‘cause-to-be-split’
your spells!” That is, be-spell the stone so that it is shattered, the man
so that he dies, or whatever. If the stone is smashed, or the man dies,
the spells of that pupil have become very mana. If the stone does not
burst (shatter), or the man die, which has been “caused-to-be-split,”
his spells are not mana. They will return and kill him, the pupil. If the
priest is very old and near to death, that priest will say, to his pupil
to “cause-to-be-split” his spells against him, that is, the priest. The
priest dies, so his spells are “split” (shattered) which he taught, and
are mana. Then the pupil lives, and, in due time, he will want to place
a mauri. Now, he is able to place (it) in the forest, or in the water, or on
the post of the eel-weir which is called pou-reinga. It would not be good
for the spells of that pupil to remain within him, to be not split, that
is shattered forth, and, it is the shattering forth, which is the same as
shatter the stone. If the stone shatters completely, that is good. That
is the “causing-to-split.”
(Bigg’s translation)

No question that the previous examination of gift and ceremonial
exchange leaves us merely unprepared to understand the profondeurs
of this section. Yet the text again speaks of an exchange, which even
superficial study will recognize as formally analogous to the transactions of taonga and “nourishing hau.” The spell passed by priest to

147

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

148

The Spirit of the Gift

student returns to the former enhanced in value and by way of a third
party. It may very well be that the three sections of the Ranapiri text
are variations on the same theme, unified not only in content but by a
triple replication of the same transactional structure.15
The case is strengthened by a precious datum, again explicated by
Firth (1959a, pp. 272–273), apparently from materials supplied
by Best (1925a, pp. 1101–1104). Comparing Maori custom with common Melanesian practice in regard to the transmission of magic, Firth
was struck by the virtual absence among Maori of any obligation to
repay the teacher. In the Maori view, such recompense would degrade
the spell, even defile and render it null—with a single exception. The
Maori teacher of the most tapu black magic was repaid—by a victim!
The apprentice would have to kill a near relative, an act of sacrifice to
the gods that empowered the spell even as it restored the gift (Best,
1925a, p. 1063). Or perhaps, as the tohunga grew old the death-dealing
knowledge would be directed back upon him—proving, incidentally,
that scholarly cults are the same all over. Best’s description of these
customs has exactly the transactional cadence of the passage on gifts,
beginning on the same note of nonreturn:
The old men of Tuhoe and Awa explain it this way: The priest teacher
was not paid for his services. If he were, then the arts of magic, etc.,
acquired by the pupil would not be effectual. He would not be able to
slay a person by means of magical spells. But, if you are taught by me,
then I will tell you what to do in order to reveal your powers. I will tell
you the price that you must pay for your initiation, as—“The equivalent for your knowledge acquired, the disclosing of your powers, must
be your own father,” or your mother, or some other near relative. Then
such powers will be effective. The teacher mentions the price the pupil
must pay. He selects a near relative of the pupil as the greatest sacrifice he can pay for his acquirements. A near relative, possibly his own
mother, is brought before him, that he may slay her by means of his
magical powers. In some cases the teacher would direct his pupil to
so slay him, the teacher. Ere long he would be dead. . . . “The payment
made by the pupil was the loss of a near relative. As to a payment in
goods—what would be the good of that. Hai aha!”
(Best, 1925a, p. 1103)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

Figure 4.3

This detail in hand, the morphological resemblance between all
three parts of the Ranapiri text becomes unmistakable. In the transmission of tapu magic, as in the exchange of valuables or the sacrifice
of birds, a direct return on the initial gift is excluded. In each instance,
reciprocation passes by way of a third party. This mediation in every
case brings issue to the original gift: by the transfer from the second
party to the third, some value or effect is added to the thing given by
the first party to the second. And one way or another, the first recipient (middle term) is menaced by destruction (mate) if the cycle is not
completed. Concretely in the text on magic: the tohunga gives the spell
to the apprentice; the apprentice turns it upon the victim, so enhancing it if he is successful—“the spells of that pupil have become very
mana ”—or dying himself if he fails; the victim belongs to the tohunga as
compensation for his teaching; alternatively, the apprentice returns his
now powerful spell to the aged tohunga, that is, he kills him. The cycle
is shown in Figure 4.3.
The Larger Significance of Hau

Returning now to the hau, it is clear we cannot leave the term merely
with secular connotations. If the hau of valuables in circulation means
the yield thereby accrued, a concrete product of a concrete good, still
there is a hau of the forest, and of man, and these do have spiritual

149

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

150

The Spirit of the Gift

quality. What kind of spiritual quality? Many of Best’s remarks on
the subject suggest that the hau-as-spirit is not unrelated to the
hau-as-material-returns. Taking the two together, one is able to reach
a larger understanding of that mysterious hau.
Immediately it is clear that hau is not a spirit in the common animistic sense. Best is explicit about this. The hau of a man is a quite different thing from his wairua, or sentient spirit—the “soul” of ordinary
anthropological usage. I cite from one of Best’s most comprehensive
discussions of wairua:
In the term wairua (soul) we have the Maori term for what anthropologists style the soul, that is the spirit that quits the body at death, and
proceeds to the spirit world, or hovers about its former home here on
earth. The word wairua denotes a shadow, any unsubstantial image;
occasionally it is applied to a reflection, thus it was adopted as a
name for the animating spirit of man. . . . The wairua can leave the
sheltering body during life; it does so when a person dreams of seeing distant places or people. . . . The wairua is held to be a sentient
spirit; it leaves the body during sleep, and warns its physical basis
of impending dangers, of ominous signs, by means of the visions
we term dreams. It was taught by high-grade native priests that all
things possess a wairua, even what we term inanimate objects, as
trees and stones.
(Best, 1924, vol. 1, pp. 299–301)16

Hau, on the other hand, belongs more to the realm of animatism
than animism. As such it is bound up with mauri, in fact, in the writings of the ethnographic experts, it is virtually impossible to distinguish one from the other. Firth despairs of definitively separating the
two on the basis of Best’s overlapping and often corresponding definitions—“the blurred outline of the distinction drawn between hau
and mauri by our most eminent ethnographic authority allows one
to conclude that these concepts in their immaterial sense are almost
synonymous” (Firth, 1959a, p. 281). As Firth notices, certain contrasts
sometimes appear. In reference to man, the mauri is the more active
principle, “the activity that moves within us.” In relation to land or
the forest, “mauri” is frequently used for the tangible representation
of an incorporeal hau. Yet is is clear that “mauri” too may refer to a

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

purely spiritual quality of land, and, on the other hand, the hau of a
person may have concrete form—for example, hair, nail clippings, and
the like used in witchcraft. It is not for me to unscramble these linguistic and religious mysteries, so characteristic of that Maori “esprit
théologique et juridique encore imprécis.” Rather, I would emphasize
a more apparent and gross contrast between hau and mauri, on one side,
and wairua on the other, a contrast that also seems to clarify the learned
words of Tamati Ranapiri.
Hau and mauri as spiritual qualities are uniquely associated with
fecundity. Best often spoke of both as the “vital principle.” It is evident
from many of his observations that fertility and productivity were the
essential attributes of this “vitality.” For example (the italics in the following statements are mine):
The hau of land is its vitality, fertility and so forth, and also a quality
which we can only, I think, express by the word prestige.
(Best, 1900–1901, p. 193)
The ahi taitai is a sacred fire at which rites are performed that have for
their purpose the protection of the life principle and fruitfulness of man,
the land, forests, birds, etc. It is said to be the mauri or hau of the home.
(p. 194)
. . . when Hape went off on his expedition to the south, he took with
him the hau of the kumara [sweet potato], or, as some say, he took
the mauri of the same. The visible form of this mauri was the stalk of
a kumara plant, it represented the hau, that is to say, the vitality and
fertility of the kumara.
(p. 196; cf. Best, 1925b, pp. 106–107)
The forest mauri has already received our attention. We have shown
that its function was to protect the productiveness of the forest.
(p. 6)
Material mauri were utilized in connection with agriculture; they were
placed in the field where crops were planted, and it was a firm belief
that they had a highly beneficial effect on the growing crops.
(1922, p. 38)

151

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

152

The Spirit of the Gift

Now, the hau and mauri pertain not only to man, but also to animals,
land, forests and even to a village home. Thus the hau or vitality, or
productiveness, of a forest has to be very carefully protected by means
of certain very peculiar rites . . . For fecundity cannot exist without the
essential hau.
(1909, p. 436)
Everything animate and inanimate possesses this life principle
(mauri): without it naught could flourish.
(1924, vol. 1, p. 306)

So, as we had in fact already suspected, the hau of the forest is its
fecundity, as the hau of a gift is its material yield. Just as in the mundane
context of exchange hau is the return on a good, so as a spiritual quality
hau is the principle of fertility. In the one equally as in the other, the benefits taken by man ought to be returned to their source, that it may be
maintained as a source. Such was the total wisdom of Tamati Ranapiri.
“Everything happens as if” the Maori people knew a broad concept, a general principle of productiveness, hau. It was a category that
made no distinctions, of itself belonging neither to the domain we call
“spiritual” nor that of the “material,” yet applicable to either. Speaking
of valuables, the Maori could conceive hau as the concrete product of
exchange. Speaking of the forest, hau was what made the game birds
abound, a force unseen but clearly appreciated by the Maori. But would
the Maori in any case need to so distinguish the “spiritual” and the
“material”? Does not the apparent “imprecision” of the term hau perfectly accord with a society in which “economic,” “social,” “political”
and “religious” are indiscriminately organized by the same relations and
intermixed in the same activities? And if so, are we not obliged once
more to reverse ourselves on Mauss’s interpretation? Concerning
the spiritual specifics of the hau, he was very likely mistaken. But in
another sense, more profound, he was right. “Everything happens as
if” hau were a total concept. Kaati eenaa.
POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY OF THE ESSAY ON THE GIFT
For the war of every man against every man, Mauss substitutes the
exchange of everything between everybody. The hau, spirit of the donor

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

in the gift, was not the ultimate explanation of reciprocity, only a special
proposition set in the context of an historic conception. Here was a new
version of the dialogue between chaos and covenant, transposed from
the explication of political society to the reconciliation of segmentary
society. The Essai sur le don is a kind of social contract for the primitives.
Like famous philosophical predecessors, Mauss debates from an
original condition of disorder, in some sense given and pristine, but
then overcome dialectically. As against war, exchange. The transfer of
things that are in some degree persons and of persons in some degree
treated as things, such is the consent at the base of organized society.
The gift is alliance, solidarity, communion—in brief, peace, the great
virtue that earlier philosophers, Hobbes notably, had discovered in
the State. But the originality and the verity of Mauss was exactly that
he refused the discourse in political terms. The first consent is not to
authority, or even to unity. It would be too literal an interpretation of
the older contract theory to discover its verification in nascent institutions of chieftainship. The primitive analogue of social contract is not
the State, but the gift.
The gift is the primitive way of achieving the peace that in civil society is secured by the State. Where in the traditional view the contract
was a form of political exchange, Mauss saw exchange as a form of
political contract. The famous “total prestation” is a “total contract,”
described to just this effect in the Manuel d’Ethnographie:
We shall differentiate contracts into those of total prestation and
contracts in which the prestation is only partial. The former already
appear in Australia; they are found in a large part of the Polynesian
world . . . and in North America. For two clans, total prestation is
manifest by the fact that to be in a condition of perpetual contract,
everyone owes everything to all the others of his clan and to all those
of the opposed clan. The permanent and collective character of such
a contract makes it a veritable traite, with the necessary display of
wealth vis-a-vis the other party. The prestation is extended to everything, to everyone, at all times. . . .
(1967, p. 188)

But as gift exchange, the contract would have a completely new
political realization, unforeseen and unimagined in the received

153

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

154

The Spirit of the Gift

philosophy and constituting neither society nor State. For Rousseau,
Locke, Spinoza, Hobbes, the social contract had been first of all a pact
of society. It was an agreement of incorporation: to form a community
out of previously separate and antagonistic parts, a superperson of the
individual persons, that would exercise the power subtracted from
each in the benefit of all. But then, a certain political formation had to
be stipulated. The purpose of the unification was to put an end to the
strife born of private justice. Consequently, even if the covenant was
not as such a contract of government, between ruler and ruled, as in
medieval and earlier versions, and whatever the differences between
the sages over the locus of sovereignty, all had to imply by the contract
of society the institution of State. That is to say, all had to insist on
the alienation by agreement of one right in particular: private force.
This was the essential clause, despite that the philosophers went on to
debate its comprehensiveness: the surrender of private force in favor
of a Public Power.
The gift, however, would not organize society in a corporate sense,
only in a segmentary sense. Reciprocity is a “between” relation. It does
not dissolve the separate parties within a higher unity, but on the contrary, in correlating their opposition, perpetuates it. Neither does the
gift specify a third party standing over and above the separate interests
of those who contract. Most important, it does not withdraw their
force, for the gift affects only will and not right. Thus the condition of
peace as understood by Mauss—and as in fact it exists in the primitive
societies—has to differ politically from that envisioned by the classic
contract, which is always a structure of submission, and sometimes of
terror. Except for the honor accorded to generosity, the gift is no sacrifice of equality and never of liberty. The groups allied by exchange
each retain their strength, if not the inclination to use it.
Although I opened with Hobbes (and it is especially in comparison
with Leviathan17 that I would discuss The Gift), it is clear that in sentiment Mauss is much closer to Rousseau. By its segmentary morphology, Mauss’s primitive society rather returns to the third stage of the
Discourse on Inequality than to the radical individualism of a Hobbesian
state of nature (cf. Cazaneuvc, 1968). And as Mauss and Rousseau had
similarly seen the oppositions as social, so equally their resolutions
would be sociable. That is, for Mauss, an exchange that “extends to

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

everything, to everyone, to all time.” What is more, if in giving one
gives himself (hau), then everyone spiritually becomes a member of
everyone else. In other words, the gift approaches even in its enigmas
that celebrated contract in which, “Chacun de nous met en commun
sa personne et toute sa puissance sous la suprême direction de la volonté générale; et nous recevons en corps chaque membre comme partie
indivisible du tout.”
But if Mauss is a spiritual descendant of Rousseau, as a political
philosopher he is akin to Hobbes. Not to claim a close historic relation
with the Englishman, of course, but only to detect a strong convergence in the analysis: a basic agreement on the natural political state
as a generalized distribution of force, on the possibility of escaping
from this condition by the aid of reason, and on the advantages realized thereby in cultural progress. The comparison with Hobbes seems
to best bring out the almost concealed scheme of The Gift. Still, the
exercise would have little interest were it not that this “problématique” precisely at the point it makes juncture with Hobbes arrives at
a fundamental discovery of the primitive polity, and where it differs
from Hobbes it makes a fundamental advance in understanding social
evolution.
Political Aspects of The Gift and Leviathan

In the perspective of Mauss, as it was for Hobbes, the understructure
of society is war. This in a special sense, which is sociological.
The “war of every man against every man,” spectacular phrase, conceals an ambiguity; or at least in its insistence on the nature of man
it ignores an equally striking structure of society. The state of nature
described by Hobbes was also a political order. True that Hobbes was
preoccupied with the human thirst for power and disposition to violence, but he wrote too of an allocation of force among men and of
their liberty to employ it. The transition in Leviathan from the psychology of man to the pristine condition seems therefore at the same time
continuous and disjunctive. The state of nature was sequitur to human
nature, but it also announced a new level of reality that as polity was
not even describable in the terms of psychology. This war of each
against all is not just the disposition to use force but the right to do so,

155

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

156

The Spirit of the Gift

not merely certain inclinations but certain relations of power, not simply
a passion for supremacy but a sociology of dominance, not only the
instinct of competition but the legitimacy of the confrontation. The
state of nature is already a kind of society.18
What kind? According to Hobbes, it is a society without a sovereign,
without “a common Power to keep them all in awe.” Said positively,
a society in which the right to give battle is retained by the people in
severalty. But this must be underlined: it is the right which endures,
not the battle. The emphasis is Hobbes’s own, in a very important
passage that carried the war of nature beyond human violence to the
level of structure, where rather than fighting it appears as a period of
time, during which there is no assurance to contrary, and the will to
contend is sufficiently known:
For warre, consisteth not in Battell onely, or the act of fighting; but in
a tract of time, wherein the Will to contend by Battell is sufficiently
known: and therefore the notion of Time, is to be considered in the
nature of Warre; as it is in the nature of Weather. For as the nature
of Foule weather, lyeth not in a shower or two of rain; but in an inclination thereto of many dayes together; So the nature of Warre, consisteth not in actual fighting; but in the known disposition thereto,
during all the time there is no assurance to the contrary. All other
time is peace.
(Part I, Chapter 13)

Happily, Hobbes frequently used the archaic spelling, “Warre,”
which gives us the opportunity of taking it to mean something else,
a determinate political form. To repeat, the critical characteristic of
Warre is free recourse to force: everyone reserves that option in pursuit of his greater gain or glory, and in defense of his person and
possessions. Unless and until this partite strength was rendered to a
collective authority, Hobbes argued, there would never be assurance
of peace; and though Mauss discovered that assurance in the gift, both
agreed that the primitive order is an absence of law; which is the same
as saying that everyone can take the law into his own hands, so that
man and society stand in continuous danger of a violent end.
Of course, Hobbes did not seriously consider the state of nature as
ever a general empirical fact, an authentic historic stage—although

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

there are some people who “live to this day in that brutish manner,”
as the savages of many places in America, ignorant of all government
beyond the lustful concord of the small family. But if not historical, in
what sense was the state of nature intended?
In the sense of Galilean logic, it is sometimes said: a thinking away
of the distorting factors in a complex appearance to the ideal course
of a body moving without resistance. The analogy is close, but insofar
as it slights the tension and the stratification of the complex appearance, it perhaps does not do justice, neither to Hobbes nor to the
parallel in Mauss. This “Warre” does exist, if it is only that people
“lock their doors behind” and princes are in “constant jealousy.” Yet
though it exists, it has to be imagined because all appearance is designed
to repress it, to overlay and deny it as an insupportable menace. So it is
imagined in a way that seems more like psychoanalysis than physics:
by probing for a hidden substructure that in outward behavior is disguised and transfigured into its opposite. In that event, the deduction
of the pristine state is not a direct extension of experimental approximations, still consistent with the empirical even as it is projected
beyond the observable. The real is here counterposed to the empirical,
and we are forced to understand the appearance of things as the negation rather than the expression of their truer character.
In just this manner, it seems to me, Mauss posited his general theory
of the gift on a certain nature of primitive society, nature not always
evident—but that exactly because it is contradicted by the gift. It was,
moreover, a society of the same nature: Warre. The primitive order is a
contrived agreement to deny its inherent fragility, its division at base
into groups of distinct interest and matched strength, clanic groups
“like the savage people in many places of America,” that can join only
in conflict or else must withdraw to avoid it. Of course, Mauss did not
begin from Hobbesian principles of psychology. His view of human
nature is certainly more nuanced than that “perpetuall and restless
desire of Power after power, that ceaseth only in Death.”19 But his view
of social nature was an anarchy of group poised against group with a
will to contend by battle that is sufficiently known, and a disposition
thereto during all that time there is no assurance to the contrary. In
the context of this argument, the hau is only a dependent proposition.
That supposed adoption by the ethnologist of a native rationalization

157

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

158

The Spirit of the Gift

is itself, by the scheme of The Gift, the rationalization of a deeper necessity to reciprocate whose reason lies elsewhere: in threat of war. The
compulsion to reciprocate built into the hau responds to the repulsion
of groups built into the society. The force of attraction in things thus
dominates the attractions of force among men.
Less spectacular and sustained than the argument from hau, that
from Warre nevertheless reappears persistently in The Gift. For Warre is
contained in the premises, constructed by Mauss in the very definition
of “total prestation”: those exchanges, “undertaken in seemingly voluntary guise . . . but in essence strictly obligatory, on pain of private or open
warfare” (1966, p. 151; emphasis mine). Similarly: “To refuse to give or
to fail to invite is, like refusing to accept, equivalent to a declaration of
war; it is to refuse alliance and communion” (pp. 162–163).
Perhaps it strains the point to insist on Mauss’s appreciation of the
potlatch as a sort of sublimated warfare. Let us pass on to the concluding paragraphs of the essay, where the opposition between Warre and
exchange is developed with progressive amplitude and clarity, first in
the metaphor of the Pine Mountain Corroboree, finally in a general
statement that begins . . .
All the societies we have described above, except our own European,
are segmentary societies. Even the Indo-Europeans, the Romans
before the Twelve Tables, the Germanic societies until very late—up
to the Edda—Irish society until the time of its principal literature,
all were still based on clans, or at the least great families, more or
less undivided internally and isolated from one another externally.
All these societies are or were far removed from our own degree of
unification, as well as from that unity with which they are endowed by
inadequate historical study.
(1966, p. 277)

From this organization, a time of exaggerated fear and hostility,
appears an equally exaggerated generosity:
When, during tribal feasts and ceremonies of rival clans and of families that intermarry or initiate reciprocally, groups visit each other;
even when, among more advanced societies—with a developed law

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

of “hospitality”—the law of friendship and contracts with the gods
have come to assure the “peace” of the “market” and the towns; for
a very long period of time and in a considerable number of societies,
men confront each other in a curious frame of mind, of exaggerated
fear and hostility and of generosity equally exaggerated, which is
however mad in no one’s eyes but our own.
(p. 277)

So the people “come to terms” (traiter), happy phrase whose double
meaning of peace and exchange perfectly epitomizes the primitive
contract:
In all the societies that have immediately preceeded ours and that
still surround us, and even in numerous usages of our own popular
morality, there is no middle way: either complete trust or complete
mistrust. One lays down one’s arms, renounces magics and gives
everything away from casual hospitality to one’s daughters and goods.
It is in conditions of this kind that men put aside their self-concern
and learnt to engage in giving and returning. But then they had no
choice. Two groups of men that meet can only withdraw—or in case
of mistrust or defiance, battle—or else come to terms.
(p. 277)

By the end of the essay, Mauss had left far behind the mystic forests
of Polynesia. The obscure forces of hau were forgotten for a different
explanation of reciprocity, consequent on the more general theory,
and the opposite of all mystery and particularity: Reason. The gift is
Reason. It is the triumph of human rationality over the folly of war—
It is by opposing reason to emotion, by setting up the will for peace
against rash follies of this kind, that peoples succeed in substituting
alliance, gift and commerce for war, isolation and stagnation.
(p. 278)

I stress not only this“reason,” but the “isolation” and “stagnation.”
Composing society, the gift was the liberation of culture. Oscillating
permanently between confrontation and dispersion, the segmentary

159

160

The Spirit of the Gift

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

society is otherwise brutish and static. But the gift is progress. That is
its supreme advantage—and Mauss’s final appeal:
Societies have progressed in the measure that they themselves, their
subgroups and finally their individuals have been able to stabilize
their relations, to give, receive, and to repay. In order to trade it was
necessary first to lay down the spear. It is then that one succeeded in
exchanging goods and persons, not only between clan and clan, but
between tribe and tribe, nation and nation, and, above all, between
individuals. It is only consequently that people became capable of
mutually creating and satisfying their interests, and finally of defending them without recourse to arms. It is thus that clans, tribes, peoples have learned—and it is thus that tomorrow in our world called
civilized the classes, nations, and also individuals must learn—how
to oppose without massacring one another, and how to give without
sacrificing one to another.
(pp. 278–279)

The “incommodities” of the Hobbesian state of nature had been
likewise a lack of progress. And society was similarly condemned to
stagnation. Here Hobbes brilliantly anticipated a later ethnology. Without the State (commonwealth) he is saying, lacking special institutions of integration and control, culture must remain primitive and
uncomplicated—just as, in the biological realm, the organism had
to remain relatively undifferentiated until the appearance of a central
nervous system. In some degree, Hobbes even went beyond modern
ethnology, which still only in an unconscious way, and without serious attempt to justify its decision, is content to see in the formation
of the state the great evolutionary divide between “primitive” and
“civilized,” while in the meantime subjecting that famous passage of
Hobbes’s where it is explained just why the criterion is good, to nasty,
brutish and short burlesques. Hobbes at least gave a functional justification of the evolutionary distinction, and an indication that qualitative change would alter the quantity:
The incommodities of such a Warre. Whatsoever therefore is consequent
to a time of Warre, where every man is Enemy to every man; the same is
consequent to the time, wherein men live without other security, than
what their own strength, and their own invention shall furnish them

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

withall. In such condition, there is no place for industry; because the
fruit thereof is uncertain: and consequently no Culture of the Earth, no
Navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported by Sea;
no commodious Building; no Instruments of moving, and removing
such things as require much force; no Knowledge of the face of the
Earth; no account of Time, no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and which
is worst of all, continuall feare, and danger of violent death; And the
life of man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish and short.
(Part I, Chapter 13)

But to pursue the resemblance to Mauss, from this insecurity and
poverty man seeks to escape: for reasons largely of emotion, according
to Hobbes, but by means strictly of reason. Menaced by material deprivation and haunted by fear of violent death, men would incline to reason,
which “suggesteth certain convenient Articles of Peace, upon which
men may be drawn to agreement.” Thus Hobbes’s well-known Laws
of Nature, which are counsels of reason in the interest of preservation,
and of which the first and fundamental is “to seek Peace, and follow it.”
And because the condition of Man, (as hath been declared in the
precedent Chapter) is a condition of Warre of every one against everyone; in which case every one is governed by his own Reason; and
there is nothing he can make use of, that may not be a help unto him,
in preserving his life against his enemyes; It followeth, that in such a
condition, every man has a Right to every thing; even to one another’s body, And therefore, as long as this naturall Right of every man
to every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man, (how
strong or wise soever he be,) of living out the time, which Nature
ordinarily alloweth men to live. And consequently it is a precept, or
generall rule of Reason, That every man, ought to endeavour Peace,
as farre as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it,
that he may seek, and use, all helps, and advantages of Warre. The first
branch of which Rule, containeth the first, and Fundamentall Law of
Nature; which is, to seek Peace, and follow it.
(Part I, Chapter 14)

That Hobbes had even foreseen the peace of the gift is too strong
a claim. But this first law of nature was followed by eighteen others,
all in effect designed to realize the injunction that men seek peace,

161

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

162

The Spirit of the Gift

and the second through fifth in particular founded on the same principle of reconciliation of which the gift is merely the most tangible
­expression—founded also, that is to say, on reciprocity. So in structure the argument unites with Mauss’s. To this point, at least, Hobbes
understands the suppression of Warre neither through the victory of
one nor by the submission of all, but in a mutual surrender. (The ethical
importance is obvious, and Mauss would duly emphasize it, but
theoretically too the point is in opposition to the cult of power and
organization that was to mark a later evolutionism—and to which
Hobbes went on to contribute.)
On the deeper analogy of reciprocity, one may thus juxtapose to gift
exchange Hobbes’s second law of nature, “That a man be willing, when others
are so too, as farre-forth, as for Peace, and defence of himselfe he shall think it necessary,
to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with as much liberty against other
men, as he would allow other men against himselfe”; and the third law, “That men
performe their Covenants made”; and again, the fifth, “That every man strive to
accomodate himselfe to the rest.” But of all these apposite precepts, the fourth
law of nature touches nearest the gift:
The fourth law of nature, gratitude. As Justice dependeth on Antecedent Covenant; so does GRATITUDE depend on Antecedent Grace,
that is to say, Antecedent Free-gift: and is the fourth Law of Nature;
which may be conceived in this Forme, That a man which receiveth
Benefit from another of meer Grace, Endeavour that he which giveth
it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good will. For no
man giveth, but with intention of Good to himselfe; because Gift is
Voluntary; and of all Voluntary Acts, the Object is to every man his
own Good; of which if men see they shall be frustrated, there will be
no beginning of benevolence, or trust; nor consequently of mutuall
help; nor of reconciliation of one man to another; and therefore they
are to remain still in the condition of War; which is contrary to the
first and Fundamentall Law of Nature, which commandeth men to
Seek Peace.
(Part I, Chapter 15)

Thus the close correspondance between the two philosophers:
including, if not exactly the gift, at least a similar appreciation of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

reciprocity as the primitive mode of peace; and also, if this more
marked in Hobbes than in Mauss, a common respect for the rationality of the undertaking. Furthermore, the convergence continues with a
negative parallel. Neither Mauss nor Hobbes could trust in the efficacy
of reason alone. Both concede, Hobbes the more explicitly, that reason
against the force of an imprinted rivalry is insufficient to guarantee
the contract. Because, says Hobbes, the laws of nature, even if they
be reason itself, are contrary to our natural passions, and men cannot be expected unfailingly to obey unless they are generally coerced
to do so. On the other hand, to honor the laws of nature without
the assurance that others do likewise is unreasonable; for then the
good become prey, and the strong arrogant. Men, says Hobbes, are not
bees. Men are driven constantly to compete for honor and dignity, out
of which arises hate, envy and finally, war. And “covenants without
the sword, are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at all.”
Hobbes consequently is led to this paradox: that the laws of nature
cannot succeed outside the frame of a contrived organization, outside
the commonwealth. Natural law is established only by artificial Power,
and Reason enfranchised only by Authority.
I stress again the political character of Hobbes’s argument. The
commonwealth put an end to the state of nature but not to the nature
of man. Men agreed to surrender their right to force (except in selfdefense), and to put all their strength at the disposal of a sovereign,
who would bear their person and save their lives. In this conception of state formation, Hobbes once more rings very modern. What
more fundamental sense has since been made of the state than that
it is a differentiation of the generalized primitive order: structurally,
the separation of a public authority out of the society at large; functionally; the special reservation to that authority of coercive force
(monopoly control of force)?
The only way to erect such a Common Power, as may be able to
defend them from the invasion of Forraigners, and the injuries of
one another, and thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by
their owne industry, and by the fruités of the Earth, they may nourish
themselves and live contentedly; is, to conferre all their power and
strength upon one Man, or upon one Assembly of men, that may

163

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

164

The Spirit of the Gift

reduce all their Wills, by plurality of voices, unto one Will: which is as
much as to say, to appoint one Man, or Assembly of men, to beare
their Person; and every one to owne, and acknowledge himselfe to be
the Author of whatsoever that he that so beareth their Person, shall
Act, or cause to be Acted, in those things which conem the Common
Peace and safetie; and therein to submit their Wills, every one to his
Will, and their Judgements, to his Judgement.
(Part II, Chapter 17)

But Mauss’s resolution of Warre also had historic merit: it corrected just this simplified progression from chaos to commonwealth,
savagery to civilization, that had been the work of classical contract
theory.20 Here in the primitive world Mauss displayed a whole array
of intermediate forms, not only of a certain stability, but that did not
make coercion the price of order. Still, Mauss too was not confident
that reason alone had been responsible. Or perhaps it was just an
afterthought, upon looking back over the peace of the gift, that he
saw in it the signs of an original wisdom. For the rationality of the
gift contradicted everthing he had said before on the subject of hau.
Hobbes’s paradox was to realize the natural (reason) in the artifical;
for Mauss, reason took the form of the irrational. Exchange is the triumph of reason, but lacking the embodied spirit of the donor (hau),
the gift is not requited.
A few last words about the fate of The Gift. Since Mauss, and in part
by way of rapprochment with modern economics, anthropology
has become more consistently rational in its treatment of exchange.
Reciprocity is contract pure and mainly secular, sanctioned perhaps by a mixture of considerations of which a carefully calculated
self-interest is not the least (cf. Firth, 1967). Mauss seems in this
regard much more like Marx in the first chapter of Capital: if it can
be said without disrespect, more animistic. One quarter of corn is
exchangeable for X hundredweight iron. What is it in these things,
so obviously different, that yet is equal? Precisely, the question was,
for Marx, what in these things brings them into agreement?—and
not what is it about these parties to the exchange? Similarly, for
Mauss; “What force is there in the thing given that makes the beneficiary reciprocate?” And the same kind of answer, from “intrinsic” properties: here the hau, if there the socially necessary labor

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

time. Yet “animistic” is manifestly an improper characterization of
the thought involved. If Mauss, like Marx, concentrated singularly
on the anthropomorphic qualities of the things exchanged, rather
than the (thinglike?) qualities of the people, it was because each
saw in the transactions respectively at issue a determinate form and
epoch of alienation: mystic alienation of the donor in primitive reciprocity, alienation of human social labor in commodity production
(cf. Godelier, 1966, p. 143). They thus share the supreme merit,
unknown to most “Economic Anthropology,” of taking exchange as
it is historically presented, not as a natural category explicable by a
certain eternal disposition of humanity.
In the total prestations between clan and clan, said Mauss, things
are related in some degree as persons and persons in some degree as
things. More than irrational, it exaggerates only slightly to say that the
process approaches clinical definitions of neurosis: persons are treated
as objects; people confuse themselves with the external world. But
even beyond the desire to affirm the rationality of exchange, a large
section of Anglo-American anthropology has seemed instinctively
repelled by the commercialization of persons apparently implied in
the Maussian formula.
Nothing could be farther apart than the initial Anglo-Saxon and
French responses to this generalized idea of prestation. Here was Mauss
decrying the inhumanity of modem abstract distinctions between real
and personal law, calling for a return to the archaic relation between
men and things, while the Anglo-Saxons could only congratulate the
ancestors for having finally liberated men from a debasing confusion
with material objects. And especially for thus liberating women. For
when Lévi-Strauss parleyed the “total prestation” into a grand system
of marital exchanges, an interesting number of British and American
ethnologists recoiled at once from the idea, refusing for their part to
“treat women as commodities.”
Without wanting to decide the issue, not at least in these terms, I do
wonder whether the Anglo-American reaction of distrust was ethnocentric. It seems to presume an eternal separation of the economic,
having to do with getting and spending, and besides always a little
off-color, from the social sphere of moral relationships. For if it is
decided in advance that the world in general is differentiated as is ours

165

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

166

The Spirit of the Gift

in particular, economic relations being one thing and social (kinship)
another, then to speak of groups exchanging women does appear an
immoral extension of business to marriage and a slander of all those
engaged in the traffic. Still, the conclusion forgets the great lesson of
“total prestation,” both for the study of primitive economics and of
marriage.
The primitive order is generalized. A clear differentiation of
spheres into social and economic does not there appear. As for marriage, it is not that commercial operations are applied to social relations, but the two were never completely separated in the first place.
We must think here in the same way we do now about classificatory kinship: not that the term for “father” is “extended” to father’s
brother, phrasing that smuggles in the priority of the nuclear family,
but rather that we are in the presence of a broad kinship category
that knows no such genealogical distinctions. And as for economics,
we are similarly in the presence of a generalized organization for
which the supposition that kinship is “exogenous” betrays any hope
of understanding.
I mention a final positive contribution of The Gift, related to this
point but more specific. At the end of the essay, Mauss in effect recapitulated his thesis by two Melanesian examples of tenuous relations
between villages and peoples: of how, menaced always by deterioration into war, primitive groups are nevertheless reconciled by festival and exchange. This theme too was later amplified by Lévi-Strauss.
“There is a link,” he wrote, “a continuity, between hostile relations
and the provision of reciprocal prestations. Exchanges are peacefully
resolved wars and wars are the result of unsuccessful transactions”
(1969, p. 67; cf. 1943, p. 136). But this implication of The Gift is,
I think, even broader than external relations and transactions. In posing the internal fragility of the segmentary societies, their constituted decomposition, The Gift transposes the classic alternatives of
war and trade from the periphery to the very center of social life,
and from the occasional episode to the continuous presence. This is
the supreme importance of Mauss’s return to nature, from which it
follows that primitive society is at war with Warre, and that all their
dealings are treaties of peace. All the exchanges, that is to say, must
bear in their material design some political burden of reconciliation.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

The Spirit of the Gift

Or, as the Bushman said, “The worse thing is not giving presents. If
people do not like each other but one gives a gift and the other must
accept, this brings a peace between them. We give what we have. That
is the way we live together” (Marshall, 1961, p. 245).
And from this comes in turn all the basic principles of an economics
properly anthropological, including the one in particular at the heart
of succeeding chapters: that every exchange, as it embodies some
coefficient of sociability, cannot be understood in its material terms
apart from its social terms.

167

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

5
