EXCHANGE VALUE AND THE
DIPLOMACY OF PRIMITIVE
TRADE
Anthropological economics can respectably claim one theory of value
on its own, fashioned from empirical encounters in its own province
of primitive and peasant economies. Here, in many of the societies,
have been discovered “spheres of exchange” which stipulate for different categories of goods differential standing in a moral hierarchy of
virtu. This is anything but a theory of exchange value. The diverse values put on things depend specifically on barriers to their interchange,
on the inconvertibility of goods from different spheres; and as for the
transactions (“conveyances”) within any one sphere, no determinants
of the rates have yet been specified (cf. Firth, 1965; Bohannan and
Dalton, 1962; Salisbury, 1962). So ours is a theory of value in nonexchange, or of nonexchange value, which may be as appropriate to
an economy not run on sound business principles as it is paradoxical
from a market standpoint. Still it is plain that anthropological economics will have to complete its theory of value with a theory of exchange
value, or else abandon the field at this juncture to the forces of business as usual: supply, demand, and equilibrium price.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

260

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

This essay constitutes a reconnaissance with a view toward defending the terrain as anthropological territory. But it will be in every
sense a venture in “Stone Age Economics”—and rather of the earlier
phase than the later. Its intellectual weapons are the crudest choppers,
capable only of indelicate blows at the objective, and likely soon to
crumble against refactory empirical materials.1
For the facts are difficult. True they are often disconcerting from the
orthodox vantage of supply and demand and generally remain so even
if, in the absence of price-fixing markets, one agrees to meanings of
“supply” and “demand” more relevant than the current technical definitions (that is, the quantities that would be made available and taken
up over a series of prices). The same facts, however, are just as perturbing to anthropological convictions, such as those that begin from the
prevalence in the primitive economies of “reciprocity,” whatever that
means. Indeed, the facts are perturbing precisely because we rarely
bother to say what it does mean, as a rate of exchange.
But then, a “reciprocity” that comprehends precise material rates
is rarely encountered. The characteristic fact of primitive exchange is
indeterminancy of the rates. In different transactions, similar goods
move against each other in different proportions—especially so in the
ensemble of ordinary transactions, the everyday gift giving and mutual
aid, and in the internal economy of kinship groups and communities.
The goods may be deemed comparable to all intents by the people
involved, and the variation in rates occur within the same general
time period, place, and set of economic conditions. In other words,
the usual stipulations of market imperfection seem not to blame.
Nor is the variability of reciprocity attributable to that supreme
imperfection, higgle-haggle, where an interconnection between different deals is lacking and competition reduced to its ultimate term of
an oriental confrontation between buyer and seller. Although it would
account theoretically for the indeterminancy, bargaining is too marginal a strategy in the primitive world to bear the burden of a general explanation. To most primitive peoples it is completely unknown;
among the rest, it is mostly an episodic relation with strangers.
(If I may be allowed here an impertinent aside, in no way justified by
an impressive personal ignorance of Economics, the ready supposition
of extreme circumstances, amounting to the theoretical null or limiting

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

case, seems nevertheless characteristic of attempts to apply the formal
business apparatus to primitive economies: demand with the substitution potential and elasticity of a market for food in a beleaguered
city, the supply sensitivity of a fish market in the late afternoon—not
to mention the appreciation of mother’s milk as “enterprise capital”
[Goodfellow, 1939] or the tautological dispensation of failures to take
the main chance by invocation of a local preference for social over
material values. It is as if primitive peoples somehow manage to construct a systematic economy under those theoretically marginal conditions where, in the formal model, system fails.)
In truth, the primitive economies seem to defy systematization. It is
practically impossible to deduce standard going rates from any corpus
of transactions as ethnographically recorded (cf. Driberg, 1962, p. 94;
Harding, 1967; Pospisil, 1963; Price, 1962, p. 25; Sahlins, 1962). The
ethnographer may conclude that the people put no fixed values on
their goods. And even if a table of equivalences is elicited—by whatever dubious means—actual exchanges often depart radically from
these standards, tending however to approximate them most in socially
peripheral dealings, as between members of different communities or
tribes, while swinging wildly up and down in a broad internal sector
where considerations of kinship distance, rank, and relative affluence
are effectively in play. This last qualification is important: the material
balance of reciprocity is subject to the social sector. Our analysis of
exchange value thus begins where the last chapter, on “the sociology
of primitive exchange,” left off.
The discussion in Chapter 5 argued at length the social organization
of material terms. To recapitulate very briefly: from one vantage, the
tribal plan presents itself as a series of concentric spheres, beginning in
the close-knit inner circles of homestead and hamlet, extending thence
to wider and more diffuse zones of regional and tribal solidarity, to
fade into the outer darkness of an intertribal arena. This is at once a
social and moral design of the tribal universe, specifying norms of
conduct for each sphere as are appropriate to the degree of common
interest. Exchange too is moral conduct and is so regulated. Hence,
reciprocity is generalized in the innermost sectors: the return of a gift
only indefinitely prescribed, the time and amount of reciprocation left
contingent on the future needs of the original donor and abilities of

261

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

262

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

the recipient; so the flow of goods may be unbalanced, or even oneway, for a very long period. But on leaving these internal spheres and
uncertain repayments, one discovers a sector of social relations so tenuous they can only be sustained by an exchange at once more immediate
and balanced. In the interest of a long-term trade, and under the social
protection of such devices as “trade partnership,” this zone may even
extend to intertribal relations. Beyond the internal economy of variable
reciprocity is a sphere, of greater or less expanse, marked by some correlation between the customary and de facto rates of equivalence. Here,
then, is the area of greatest promise to research on exchange rates.
In the same way as the origin of money has traditionally been sought
in external markets, and for many of the same reasons, the quest for a
primitive theory of value turns to exterior spheres of transaction. Not
only is balanced dealing there enjoined, but the exchange circuits of
the internal economy tend to disintegrate and combine, as the immorality of “conversion” is rendered irrelevant by social distance. Goods
that were separated from each other inside the community are here
brought into equivalence. Attention especially should be directed to
transactions between trade friends and trade kinsmen, for these relationships stipulate economic equity and going rates. Accordingly, the
inquiry that follows shall concentrate upon partnership trade, and, out
of practical considerations, upon a few empirical cases only, chosen
however from areas of the Pacific famous for an indigenous commerce.
THREE SYSTEMS OF TRADE
We shall examine three areal exchange networks, constituting besides
three different structural and ecological forms: the Vitiaz Straits and
Huon Gulf systems of New Guinea, and the intertribal trade chain
of northern Queensland, Australia. In each case a certain play of
supply/demand is detectable in the rates of exchange.Yet the existence
of this supply/demand influence renders the trade even less comprehensible than would its absence. For the kind of market competition
that alone in economic theory gives supply and demand such power
over exchange value is completely absent from the trade in question.
The essentials of the Queensland network are exhibited in Figure 6.1
(constructed after the brief description provided by Sharp, 1952). In

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Figure 6.1 Queensland Trade Chain (after Sharpy 1952)

structure it is a simple chain of trade, band linked to band along a
line running approximately 400 miles south from the Cape York coast.
Each group is limited to contacts with its immediate neighbors, thus
only indirectly related to bands further along the line. The trade itself
proceeds in the form of gift exchange between elders standing as classificatory brothers. Working out of Yir-Yoront, Sharp could give few
details of the axe-spear exchange running the length of the chain, but
the information is sufficient to document the effect of supply/demand
on the terms of transaction. This by the simple principle that if, in an
areal network, the exchange rate of a good (A) in terms of another (B)
rises in proportion to distance from the source of A, it is reasonable to
suppose that the relative value of A is increasing pari passu with “real”
costs and scarcities, that is, with declining supply, and probably also
with increasing demand. The differences in spear-axe exchange ratios

263

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

264

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

along the Queensland chain would reflect the double play of this principle. At Yir-Yiront, near the northern source of spears, 12 of them must
be given for a single axe; about 150 miles south, that much closer to
the source of axes, the rate falls to one to one; in the extreme south the
terms (apparently) become one spear for “several” axes. A point then
for supply and demand, and apparently for orthodox Economic Theory.
The trade system of the Vitiaz Straits arrives at the same effect but by
different organizational means (Figure 6.2). Articulated from the center
by the voyages of Siassi Islanders, the Vitiaz network is but one of several similar circles established in Melanesia under the aegis of Fhoeneican-like middlemen. In their own areas, the Langalanga of Malaita, the
Tami Islanders, the Arawe of New Britain, the Manus of the Admiralties
and the Bilibili of New Guinea ply a similar trade. This mercantile adaptation merits a short comment.
The trading groups are themselves marginally if centrally situated,
often perched precariously on stilt-house platforms in the middle of
some lagoon, without a mow of arable land to call their own or any
other resources save what the sea affords them—lacking even wood
for their canoes or fibers for their fishnets. Their technical means of
production and exchange are imported, let alone their main stocks in
trade. Yet the traders are typically the richest people of their area. The
Siassi occupy about one three-hundredths of the land in the Umboi
subdistrict (which includes the large island of that name), but they
make up approximately one quarter of the population (Harding, 1967,
p. 119).2 This prosperity is the dividend of trade, amassed from a number of surrounding villages and islands, themselves better endowed by
nature but tempted to commerce with the Siassi for reasons ranging
from material to marital utility. The Siassi regularly exchanged fish for
root crops with adjacent villages of Umboi Island; they were the sole
suppliers of pottery for many people of the Vitiaz region, transhipping
it from the few places of manufacture in northern New Guinea. In the
same way they controlled the distribution of obsidian from its place
of origin in northern New Britain. But at least equally important, the
Siassi constituted for their trade partners a rare or exclusive source
of bridewealth and prestige goods—such items as curved pigs’ tusks,
dogs’ teeth, and wooden bowls. A man in neighboring areas of New
Guinea, New Britain, or Umboi could not take a wife without some

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Figure 6.2 Middleman Gains of Siassi Traders (from Harding, 1967)

trade beforehand, direct or indirect, with the Siassi. The total consequence of Siassi enterprise, then, is a trade system of specific ecological form: a circle of communities linked by the voyages of a centrally
located group, itself naturally impoverished but enjoying on balance
an inward flow of wealth from the richer circumference.

265

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

266

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

This ecological pattern depends upon, is the precipitate of, certain
arrangements on the plane of exchange. Although the domains of
different trading peoples sometimes overlap, a group such as Siassi
fairly monopolizes carrying within its own sphere. There the “competition” is dramatically imperfect: the several and far-flung villages
of the circumference are without direct intercourse with one another.
(The Manus went so far as to prevent other peoples of their orbit from
owning or operating seagoing canoes [cf. Mead, 1961, p. 210].) Capitalizing on the lack of communication between distant communities,
and with an eye always toward enhancing the rates of exchange, the
Siassi during traditional times were pleased to spread fantastic tales
about the origins of goods they transmitted:
. . . cooking pots are distributed from three widely-separated locations on the mainland [New Guinea]. No pottery in manufactured
in the archipelago [that is, Umboi, nearby islands, and western New
Britain], and people there who receive pots via the Siassis (and earlier
the Tamis) previously were not even aware that clay-pots were manmade products. Rather, they were regarded as exotic products of the
sea. Whether the non-pottery peoples originated this belief is uncertain. The Siassis, however, elaborated and helped to sustain such
beliefs, as everyone since has learned. Their story was that the pots
are the shells of deep-water mussels. The Sios [of New Guinea] make
a specialty of diving for these mussels and, after eating the flesh, sell
the empty “shells” to the Siassi. The deception, if it added to their
value, was justified by the vital part that pots have in overseas trade.
(Harding, 1967, pp. 139–140)

By my understanding (based on a brief visit) the Siassi in these tales
were exaggerating more directly the effort of production than the scarcity of the pots, on the local principle that “big-fella work” is worth
“big-fella pay.” The most advanced mercantile guile was imbricated in
a most innocent labor theory of value. It is only consistent that the customary partnership of the Vitiaz network, a kind of trade-friendship
(pren, N-M), is several degrees removed in sociability from the
trade-kinship of the Queensland system. True, the exchanges between
Siassi and their partners followed standard rates. But, secure in their
middlemen position and indispensable to their “friends,” towards

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

whom they were not profoundly compelled to be considerate, the Siassi
in the context of these rates were charging what the traffic would bear.
Exchange values not only varied locally with supply/demand—judging
again by the difference in terms according to distance from origin
(Harding, 1967, p. 42 passim)—but monopolistic sharp practice may
have afforded discriminatory gains. As the transactional sequences
show (Figure 6.2), the Siassi, by voyaging here and there, could in
principle turn a dozen coconuts into a pig, or that one pig again into
five. An extraordinary tour of primitive passe-passe— and another apparent victory for the businesslike interpretation of indigenous trade.3
The same confidence in the received economic wisdom is not as
readily afforded by the Huon Gulf system, for here goods of specialized local manufacture are transacted at uniform rates throughout the
network (Hogbin, 1951). Nevertheless, a simple analysis will show
that supply and demand are once more at work.
The semicircular coastal network of the Gulf again unites ethnically
heterogeneous communities (Figure 6.3). Trade, however, is effected
through reciprocal voyaging: people of a given village visit and in turn are
visited by partners from several other places, both up and down the coast,
although usually from the nearer rather than the more distant vicinity.
The trade partners are kinsmen, their families linked by previous intermarriage; their commerce accordingly is a sociable gift exchange, balanced at traditional rates. Certain of these rates are indicated in Table 6.1.
Like other New Guinea trade networks, the Huon system was
not entirely closed. Each coastal village had truck with peoples of
its own immediate hinterland. Moreover the Tami Islanders, themselves long-distance voyagers, connected the Huon on the north with
the Siassi sphere; in traditional times the Tami disseminated within the
Gulf obsidian that had originated in New Britain. (Potters in the southern villages likewise exported their craft further south, although little
is known about this trade.) A question is thus presented: Why isolate
the Huon Gulf as a distinct “system”? There is a double justification.
First, on the material plane the several villages apparently comprise
an organic community, retaining within their own sphere the great
majority of locally produced goods. Secondly, on the organizational
level, this kinship trade of a determinate form, and evidently also the
uniform series of exchange rates, seem to be restricted to the Gulf.4

267

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

268

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Figure 6.3 Huon Gulf Trade Network (from Hogbin, 1951)

For those inclined to belittle the practical (or “economic”) significance of primitive trade, the Huon Gulf network affords a salutory
antidote. Certain villages would not have been able to exist as constituted in the absence of trade. In the meridional reaches of the Gulf,
cultivation encounters natural difficulties, and sago and taro have to
be obtained from the Buakap and Busama districts (see Figure 6.3 and
Table 6.1). “Without trade, indeed, the southern peoples [the pottery makers] could not long survive in their present environment”
(Hogbin, 1951, p. 94). Likewise, the soil available to the Tami Islanders of the northeast is inadequate: “Much of [their] food has to be
imported” (p. 82). In the event, food exports from fertile areas such
as Busama comprise an important fraction of local production: taro
“upwards of five tons monthly” is sent out of the community, principally to four southern villages; whereas Busama themselves consume
28 tons monthly (direct human subsistence). By the ample dietary
standards prevailing at Busama (p. 69) the taro exported could feed
another community of 84 people. (The average village population
along the Gulf is 200–300; Busama, with more than 600 people, is

Table 6.1 Customary equivalents in trade, Huon Gulf trade network (data from
Hogbin, 1951, pp. 81–95)
I. Busama
For

Busama gives

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

1 large pot

=   c. 150 pounds taro or 60 pounds sago

24–30 large pots

=   1 small canoe

1 small pot

=   c. 50 pounds taro or 20 pounds sago

1 mat

=   1 small pot

3 mats

=   1 large pot (or 2 shillings) *

4 purses

=   1 small pot (or 1 shilling for 2)

1 basket

=   2 large bowls (or one pound)

1 bowl (usual size)

=   10–12 shillings (more for larger bowls)

For

II. North Coast Villages
North Coast villages give

1 large pot

=   4 string bags or 3 mats (or 6–8 shillings)

1 small pot

=   1 mat (or 2 shillings)

4 purses

=   1 mat (or 1 shilling for 2)

1 basket

=   10 mats (or one pound)

1 carved bowl

=   food, unknown quantity
III. Labu

For

Labu gives

2 large pots

=   1 woven basket (or 6–8 shillings)

1 small pot

=   4 purses (or 2 shillings)

1 string bag

=   3 purses (or 2 shillings)

1 carved bowl

=  10–12 shillings

For

IV. Pottery Villages
Pottery villages gives

150 pounds taro or 60 pounds
sago

=   1 large pot

50 pounds taro or 20 pounds
sago

=   1 small pot

4 string bags

=   1 large pot

1 mat

=   1 small pot

3 mats

=   1 large pot

4 purses

=   1 small pot

1 basket

=   2 large pots

1 carved bowl

=  8 shillings

1 small canoe

=  24–30 pots

Except in exchange for bowls, money was rarely used in the trade at the time of study.

*

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

270

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

exceptionally large.) Globally, then, the Huon Gulf presents an ecological pattern precisely the opposite of the Vitiaz Straits: the peripheral
communities are here naturally poor, the center rich, and there is on
balance a strategic flow of wealth from the latter to the former.
Allowing certain surmises, the dimensions of this flow can be read
from the exchange ratios of central to peripheral goods. Busama taro,
for example, is traded against southern pottery at a rate of 50 pounds
of taro to one small pot or 150 pounds to one large pot. Based on a
modest personal acquaintance with the general area, I judge this rate
very favorable to pots in terms of necessary labor time. Hogbin seems
to hold the same opinion (p. 85). In this connection, Douglas Oliver
observed of southern Bougainville, where one “medium-sized” pot is
valued at the same shell money rate as 51 pounds of taro, that the latter
“represents an incomparably larger amount of labor” (1949, p. 94).
In terms of effort, the equations of the Busama-pottery village trade
appear to be unbalanced. By the rates prevailing, the poorer communities are appropriating to their own existence the intensified labor of
the richer.
Nevertheless, this exploitation is veiled by a disingenuous equation of
labor values. Although it appears to fool no one, the deception does give
a semblance of equity to the exchange. The potters exaggerate the (labor)
value of their product, while the Busama complain merely of its use value:
Although etiquette prevents argument, I was interested to observe
when accompanying some Busama on a trading journey southwards
how the Buso [pottery] villagers kept exaggerating the labour involved
in pot making. “We toil all day long at it from sunrise to sunset,”
one man told us over and over again. “Extracting the clay is worse
than gold mining. How my back aches! There’s always the chance,
too, that in the end the pot will develop a crack.” The members of
our [Busama] party murmured polite agreement but subsequently
brought the conversation round to the inferior quality of present-day
pots. They confined themselves to generalitites, accusing no one in
particular, but it was apparent that here was an attempt at retaliation.
(Hogbin, 1951, p. 85)

Rates of exchange are, as noted, fairly uniform throughout the Gulf.
In any of the villages, for instance, where mats, “purses” and/or pots

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

are customarily exchanged, one mat–four purses–one small pot. These
rates hold regardless of distance from the point of production: a small
pot is valued at one mat either in the southern villages where pottery
is made or on the north coast where mats are made. The direct implication, that centrally situated middlemen take no gains in the turnover
of peripheral goods, is affirmed by Hogbin. There are no “profits” to
Busama in transferring southern pots to the north or northern mats
to the south (Hogbin, 1951, p. 83).
The simple principle posed to detect supply-demand influences
in the Vitiaz and Queensland systems, where exchange values varied
directly by distance from the site of production, is therefore not applicable to the Huon Gulf. But then the shape of the Huon “market” is
different. Technically it is less imperfect. Potentially at least, a given
community has more than one supplier of a given good, so that those
tempted to exact special gains run the risk of being bypassed. Hence
the Busama rationalization of their failure to take middlemen tolls:
“Each community needs the products of all the rest, and the natives
freely admit their willingness to sacrifice economic gain to keep within
the exchange ring” (p. 83). All this does preclude the possibility of
supply/demand effects on exchange rates. The possibility is transposed
rather to the higher level of the network as a whole. It becomes a
question of whether the relative value of one good in terms of another
reflects the respective aggregate supply/demand throughout the Gulf.
A remarkable exception to uniform rates, amounting it would seem
to a violation of the most elementary principles of good business
and common sense, suggests this is exactly the case. The Busama pay
10–12 shillings for Tami Islander bowls and exchange them in the
southern villages for pots worth eight shillings.5 In explanation
the Busama say of the southern potters: “They live in such hungry
country. Besides we want pots for use for ourselves and to exchange
for mats and things” (Hogbin, 1951, p. 92). Now, the explanation in
terms of pots contains an interesting implication in terms of the taro
which the Busama themselves produce. The Busama clearly suffer penalties in their southern trade because of the limited demand for taro
throughout the Gulf, especially on the part of the northern villages,
where a variety of craft goods are produced. The “market” for taro is

271

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

272

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

effectively restricted to the southern potters. (In Hogbin’s exchange
table [Table 6.1] taro is noted only in the southern trade; reference
to taro disappears from the description of northern trade.) But if
Busama taro has little exchangeability, the pots manufactured exclusively in the south are everywhere in demand. More than an item of
consumption, these pots become for Busama a capital item of trade,
without which they would be cut off to the north, so for which they
are willing to pay dearly in labor costs. Thus the classic business forces
are in play in this sense: the relative value of Busama taro in terms of
southern pots represents the respective demands for these goods in the
Huon Gulf as a whole.6
The point may be made in a more abstract way. Suppose three villages, A and B and C, each the producer of a special good, x, y, and z
respectively, are linked in a chain of trade such that A exchanges with B
and B again with C. Consider then the exchange of x against y between
villages A and B:

Villages:
Goods:

A
x

B
y

C
z

Assuming none of these products superabundant, the quantity of y
surrendered by B to obtain x will depend in part on the demand for
y as compared to x in village C. If in village C the demand for x is much
greater than demand for y, then B, with a view toward the eventual
acquisition of z, is willing to pay more dearly in y to obtain x from A.
Conversely, if in C the demand for y greatly outweighs x, then B will
tend to hold back y in the exchange with village A. Thus the rate on
the exchange of local products between any two villages would summarize the demands of all villages in the system.
I open a long parenthesis. Although the analysis is justifiably broken
off at this point, with the understanding that Huon Gulf exchange
values respond to ordinary market forces, one is tempted nevertheless
to press the issue further, into a domain at once more speculative and
more real, wherein is discovered not only a certain confirmation of
the thesis but insights into the ecology, the structural limits and the
history of such a system.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

In the key example that unlocked the above analysis, the Busama
were content to absorb a net loss on Tami bowls, hoping that way
to encourage the flow of pottery from the south. As it was but one
exchange in an interdependent sequence, the transaction proved
unintelligible in itself. The three-village model facilitated understanding, but still it could not adequately represent all the constraints finally materialized in the sale of the bowl. For behind this
transaction lay a whole series of preliminary exchanges by which
Tami bowls were carried from place to place around the Gulf, effecting in the process a large preliminary redistribution of local specialities. It is in the hope of specifying this redistribution, and the
material pressures developing therefrom, that further speculation is
hazarded.
A four-village model is now required. To ease the re-entry into
reality, we can retain the original three (A, B, and C), while identifying B as Busama and A then as the potters, and adding a fourth
village, T, to represent Tami with its specialized product, t (bowls).
Suppose, too, although it is not exactly the case, that the export goods
of each community are liberally demanded by all the others; and that,
more nearly true, each community exchanges only with the village
or villages directly contiguous. The objective of the exercise will be
to pass Tami bowls (t) from one end of the sequence to the other,
determining thus the total distribution of specialized products that
would result.
In the hope of explaining better that notable sale of Tami bowls by
Busama to the potters (A), the exchanges first will be played out à trois
between villages B (Busama), C, and T (Tami). By the initial moves
then, T and C exchange their respective items, t and z, and villages B
and C theirs, y and z. Leaving aside the question of quantities traded,
the types of goods would, after this first round, assume the following
distribution:

273

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

274

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

The second round, designed to carry an amount of t, bowls, to
community B (and of y to T) already presents certain difficulties—
not insurmountable yet symptomatic of the pressures accumulating
within the system, and of its destiny. Under the given conditions,
however, there is little choice. Village C is unlikely to accept z from B
in exchange for t, since C already produces z; hence, B can only again
offer y to C to acquire t, at that probably but part of the t in C’s possession. In the same way T passes more t to C to obtain y. This done,
the three-village chain is completed: goods from one terminus (A still
excluded) appear at the other.

Completed—but perhaps also finished. At this juncture, B (usama)
finds herself in an embarrassing relation to the global distribution of
specialities and imports, her possibilities of further trade drastically
reduced. B (usama) has nothing to put into circulation that villages
down the line, C and T, do not already have, and have probably in
quantities proportional to their proximity to B. Hence the strategic
importance of village A, the potters, to Busama. Busama’s continued
participation in the exchange network hinges now on escaping from
it, on opening a trade with A, which is also to say that the continuity
of the trade system as a whole depends on its expansion. And in this
strategic overture, the pottery of A must present itself to B not only
as a use value but as the only good enjoying exchangeability for the
goods of C. . . T. The transaction between B and A masses and brings to
bear against the pottery of A the weight of all the other goods already
in the system. Hence the exchange rates unfavorable to the goods of B
(usama) and the losses taken in labor “costs.”
May one read from an abstract model to an unknown history? Composed in the beginning of a few communities, a trade system of the
Huon type would soon know a strong inclination to expand, diversifying its products in circulation by extending its range in space. Peripheral communities in particular, their bargaining position undermined

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

during the initial stages of trade, are impelled to search further afield
for novel items-in-trade. The network propogates itself at its extremities by a simple extension of reciprocity, coupling in new and, it is
reasonably argued, by preference exotic communities, those that can
supply exotic goods.
(The hypothesis may for other reasons be attractive to students of
Melanesian society. Confronted by extensive trade chains such as the
kula, anthropologists have been inclined at once to laud the complexity of the “areal integration” and wonder how it could possibly have
come about. The merit of the dynamic outlined is that it makes a simple segmentary accretion of trade—of which Melanesian communities are perfectly capable—also an organic complication.)
But an expansion so organized must eventually determine its own
limits. The incorporation of outside communities is achieved only at a
considerable expense to villages at the frontiers of the original system.
Transmitting the demand already occasioned by the internal redistribution of local specialities, these peripheral villages develop outside
contacts on terms greatly disadvantageous to themselves in labor costs.
The process of expansion thereby defines an ecological perimeter. It
can continue passably enough through regions of high productivity, but once having breached a marginal ecological zone its further
advance becomes unfeasible. Communities of the marginal zone may
be only too happy to enter the system on the favorable terms offered
them, but they are themselves in no position to support the costs of
further expansion. Not that they, become now the peripheral outposts
of the network, cannot entertain any trade beyond. Only that the trade
system as organized, as an interrelated flow of goods governed by uniform procedures and rates, here discovers a natural boundary. Goods
that pass beyond this limit must do so under other forms and rates of
exchange; they pass into another system.7
Deduction thus rejoins reality. The ecological structure of the Huon
system is exactly as stipulated theoretically: relatively rich villages in
the central positions, relatively poor villages at the extremes, and
by the terms of trade a current of value and strategic goods moving
from central to marginal locations. End of parenthesis.
Summarizing to this juncture, in the three Oceanic trade systems under review, exchange values are responsive to supply and

275

276

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

demand—at least insofar as supply and demand are inferable from the
real distribution of the goods in circulation. Business as usual.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

RATE VARIATIONS OVER TIME
Furthermore, the evidence so far reviewed, in the main spatially
derived, can be supplemented by observations taken over time at specific Melanesian trade sites. Temporal variations of exchange value
follow the same iron laws—with one reservation: the rates tend to
remain stable in the short run, unaffected by even important changes
in supply and demand, although they do adjust in the long run.
Seasonal fluctuations of supply, for example, generally leave the
terms of trade untouched. Salisbury suggests of the Tolai (New Britain) inland-coastal exchange that it could not otherwise be managed:
The net movement of tabu [shell money] from inland to coast, and viceversa, is small. This conflicts with the impression one gets at different
seasons, that all coastals are buying taro and not earning any tabu, or
that inlanders are buying up all the fish for ceremonials and not selling
much taro. If prices were fixed by current supply-demand ratios, they
could vary widely and unpredictably. It is in just such a context that a
trade in fixed equivalences is highly desirable, with the “traditional”
prices being those that provide an equal balance over the long term.
(Salisbury, 1966, p. 117 n)

Over a quite long term, however, “traditional” Tolai equivalencies
do vary. Exchange rates for food in 1880 were only 50–70 percent
of the 1961 rates. Apart from some overall growth in shell-money
stocks, the dynamics of this change are not altogether clear. But elsewhere in Melanesia, long-term revisions in exchange value have clearly
ensued from the increased supplies of goods (and even shell monies)
pumped into local trade systems by Europeans. An observation from
Kapauku illustrates both tendencies here at issue, the short-run sluggishness8 of customary rates—although Kapauku are not famous for
their fair trading—and a long-run sensitivity:
In general, however, the fluctuation of price because of temporary
imbalance of the supply-demand level is rather infrequent . . . [But]

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

a steady increase of supply may bring about a steady decline of the
actual price. The permanence of this state has an effect upon the customary price which tends to be identified with the actual payments.
Thus, before 1945, when iron axes had to be brought from the coastal
people, the customary price was l0Km for an axe. The coming of
the white man and the resulting increase and direct supply of axes,
reduced the old price to half the former amount. The process is still
going on and the actual price in 1956 tended to fall below the customary price of 5Km per axe.
(Pospisil, 1958, pp. 122–123; cf. Dubbeldam, 1964)

By 1959 an axe could be had for only two units of native currency (2Km) (Pospisil, 1963, p. 310). Still, the Kapauku example
is extraordinary, since the economy includes a large sector of bargained exchange where going rates may vary radically from transaction to transaction, as well as develop long-term trends capable
of communication to the balanced reciprocity sector (cf. Pospisil,
1963, pp. 310–311).
The case is simpler in the Australian New Guinea Highlands,
where the bulk of trade is carried at standardized rates and between
special partners. Here currency values have dropped substantially
since Europeans put large quantities of shell money into circulation
(Gitlow, 1947, p. 72; Meggitt, 1957–58, p. 189; Salisbury, 1962,
pp. 116–117). The same process has been observed outside Melanesia: the variations in exchange value of horses in the intertribal trade
of the American Plains, due to changes in supply conditions (Ewers,
1955, pp. 217 f).
No doubt examples of such sensitivity to supply and demand could
be multiplied. Yet more examples would only make matters more
unintelligible—by any prevailing theory of exchange value. This theoretical embarrassment is noteworthy and critical, and although I may
not resolve it I would count the essay a success to have raised it. Nothing really is explained by remarking that exchange value in primitive
trade corresponds to supply/demand. For the competitive mechanisms by which supply and demand are understood to determine
price in the market place do not exist in primitive trade. It becomes far
more mysterious that exchange ratios should respond to supply and
demand than that they remain unaffected.

277

278

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

THE SOCIAL ORGANIZATION OF PRIMITIVE
AND MARKET TRADE
Supply and demand are operative in the self-regulating market, pushing prices toward equilibrium, by virtue of a two-sided competition
between sellers over buyers, and between buyers over sellers. This
double competition, symmetrical and inverse, is the social organization of formal market theory. Without it, supply and demand cannot
be realized in price—so it is always present also, if only implicitly,
in textbooks on microeconomics. In the theoretically perfect case, all
deals are interconnected. All parties in question have access to each
other as well as full knowledge of the market, such that buyers are in
a position to compete among themselves by paying more (if necessary and possible), sellers by asking less. In the event of an oversupply
relative to the quantity in demand at a given price, sellers contest for
the limited patronage by reducing prices; then, certain sellers withdraw because they are unable to support the reduction, even as more
buyers find the terms attractive, until a price is reached that clears the
market. In the opposite circumstance, buyers bid up prices until
the quantity available meets the quantity demanded. The “demand
crowd” clearly has no solidarity inter se and as against the supply crowd,
or vice versa. It is the exact opposite of trade between communities of
different tribes, where internal relations of kinship and amity would
stand against the competition required by the business model— particularly in the context of an economic confrontation with outsiders. Caveat emptor, perhaps; but tribal sociability and homebred morality
constitute an unlikely arena for economic infighting—for no man can
have honor and profit in his own camp.
The alienated intersections of supply curves and demand curves in
the economists’ diagrams presuppose a certain structure of competition. Very different are the procedures of primitive trade. Anyone cannot just get into the act, enter the lists against people of his own side
in quest of the exotic goods offered by visiting strangers. Once under
way, usually in fact beforehand, trade is an exclusive relation with
a specific outside party. The traffic is canalized in parallel and insulated transactions between particular pairs.9 Where trade is handled
through pamerships, exactly who exchanges with whom is prescribed

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

in advance: social relations, not prices, connect up “buyers” and “sellers.” Lacking a trade contact, a man may not be able to get what he
wants at any price.10 There is no evidence anywhere, so far as I know,
of competitive bidding among members of a trading party for the
custom of each other’s partners; there is only the occasional observation that it is expressly forbidden.11 Haggling likewise, where it is
practiced, is a discrete relation between individuals, not a free-for-all.
The nearest documented approach to open-market trading appears to
be, on one hand, a kind of auctioning, involving competition within
the demand party only, as testified in certain Eskimo and Australian
materials (Spencer, 1959, p. 206; Aiston, 1936–37, pp. 376–377);12
on the other hand, Pospisil adduces a single example of a Kapauku
competing with other sellers by lowering his price on a pig for a prospective buyer—but, interestingly enough, the man tried to come to
this agreement in secret (1958, p. 123). The double and interrelated
competition intrinsic to the business model, competition by which
the forces of supply and demand are understood to regulate price, is
generally not apparent in the conduct of primitive exchange, and only
exceptionally is it half-approximated.
There is always the possibility of implicit rate competition among
buyers and among sellers. I can only say I have not succeeded in construing it from existing descriptions.13 Nor would it seem wise to be
cynical about the moral force of customary exchange rates, one of the
few guarantees of equity and continuity in a context pregnant with
hostility. More important, where customary rates prevail, and especially where trade is by partnership, there are alternative strategies to
competitive undercutting which avoid the material disadvantage of
lowering selling rates or raising offers: one alternative is to acquire
more partners for trade on the usual terms; another, to be examined
later in more detail, is to overpay one’s partner for the time being,
obliging him thus to reciprocate within a reasonable period on pain
of losing dignity or partnership, so completing the transaction at normal rates. No question that there may be competition for volume of
external trade. Internal prestige systems often hinge on it. But it does
not develop as price manipulation, product differentiation, or the like.
The standard maneuver is to increase the number of outside partners,
or else to step up trade with existing partners.

279

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

280

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

There are no markets properly so-called in these Melanesian societies. Very likely there are none in any of the archaic societies. Bohannan
and Dalton (1962) were wrong to speak of a “market principle,” even
peripheral, in this context. They were misled on two counts by transactions such as the gimwali, the bargaining of Trobriand nonpartnership
trade. For one, they read the market from a type of competition not
essential to it, an overt conflict between buyer and seller.14 Secondly,
they read the market from a type of transaction taken alone, impersonal and competitive, without reference to the global organization
of these exchanges. The mistake should serve to underline Polyani’s
sometimes insistence (1959) that transactions be understood as types
of integration, not simply as types (tout court). “Reciprocity,” “redistribution,” and market exchange were in the master’s treatment not mere
forms of economic transaction but modes of economic organization.
The determinate forms of transaction found in markets, such as sale
and (occasionally) bargaining, are encountered also in a number of
primitive instances. But lacking a symmetrical and inverse competition among buyers and among sellers, these exchanges are not integrated as market systems. Unless and until Trobriand haggling was
so integrated (not traditionally the case) it would afford no indication of a market principle or of a peripheral market. Markets properly
so-called, competitive and price fixing, are universally absent from
primitive society.
But then, if the trade is not classically constituted to absorb supplydemand pressure by price changes, the sensitivity we have observed in
Melanesian exchange values remains an intriguing mystery.
A PRIMITIVE THEORY OF EXCHANGE VALUE
I propose no definitive solution to the mystery. Once the inadequacy
of formal economic theory is realized, and the complete unsophistication of anthropological economics thereby discovered, it is absurd to
hope for more than partial and underdeveloped explanations. But I do
have one such primitive theory of value. As in the good Economics
tradition, it has an air of the “never-never”; yet it is consistent with
the observed conduct of certain trade, and it does suggest reasons
for the responsiveness of customary values to supply/demand. The

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

idea is addressed exclusively to partnership trade. The essence of it is
that rates are set by social tact, notably by the diplomacy of economic
good measure appropriate to a confrontation between comparative
strangers. In a series of reciprocal exchanges the alternating appearance of this overbalance, first on the part of one partner then the other,
would with hardly less certainty than open price competition establish
an equilibrium rate. At the same time, the guiding principle of “generosity” should give the agreed rate some semblance of the equilibrium,
i.e., of supply/demand.
It has to be understood that trade between primitive communities
or tribes is a most delicate, potentially a most explosive, undertaking.
Anthropological accounts document the risks of trading ventures in
foreign territory, the uneasiness and suspiciousness, the facility of a
translation from trading goods to trading blows. “There is a link,” as
Lévi-Strauss writes, “a continuity, between hostile relations and the
provision of reciprocal prestations. Exchanges are peacefully resolved
wars, and wars are the result of unsuccessful transactions” (1969,
p. 67).15 If primitive society succeeds by the gift and by the clan in
reducing the state of Warre to an internal truce (see Chapter 4), it
is only to displace outward, onto the relations between clans and
tribes, the full burden of such a state. In the external sector the circumstances are radically Hobbesian, not only lacking that “common
Power to keep them all in awe” but without even that common kinship that might incline them all to peace. In trade, moreover, the
context of the confrontation is the acquisition of utilities; and
the goods, as we have seen, may very well be urgent. When people meet who owe each other nothing yet presume to gain from
each other something, peace of trade is the great uncertainty. In the
absence of external guarantees, as of a Sovereign Power, peace must
be otherwise secured: by extension of sociable relations to foreigners—thus, the trade-friendship or trade-kinship—and, most significantly, by the terms of exchange itself. The economic ratio is a diplomatic
maneuver. “It requires a good deal of tact on the part of everyone
concerned,” as Radcliffe-Brown wrote of Andamanese interband
exchange, “to avoid the unpleasantness that may arise if a man thinks
that he has not received things as valuable as he has given. . . .”

281

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

282

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

(1948, p. 42). The people must come to terms. The rate of exchange
takes on functions of a peace treaty.
Intergroup exchange does not simply answer to the “moral purpose” of making friends. But whatever the intent and however utilitarian, it will not do to make enemies. Every transaction, as we already
know, is necessarily a social strategy: it has a coefficient of sociability
demonstrated in its manner, and in its rates by the implied willingness
to live and let live, the disposition to give full measure in return. As it
happens, the safe and sane procedure is not just measure-for-measure,
a reciprocity precisely balanced. The most tactful strategy is economic
good measure, a generous return relative to what has been received, of
which there can be no complaints. One remarks in these intergroup
encounters a tendency to overreciprocate:
The object of the exchange [between people of different Andamanese
bands] was to produce a friendly feeling between the two persons
concerned, and unless it did this it failed of its purpose. It gave great
scope for the exercise of tact and courtesy. No one was free to refuse a
present that was offered to him. Each man and woman tried to out-do
the others in generosity. There was a sort of amiable rivalry as to who
could give away the greatest number of valuable presents.
(Radcliffe-Brown, 1948, p. 84; emphasis mine.)

The economic diplomacy of trade is “something extra” in return.
Often it is “something for the road”: the host outdoes his visiting
friend, who made the initial presentation, a “solicitory gift” in token
of friendship and the hope of safe conduct, and of course in the expectation of reciprocity. Over the long run accounts may balance, or rather
one good turn begets another, but for the time being it is critical that
some unrequited good measure has been thrown in. Literally a margin
of safety, the exceeding generosity avoids at no great cost “the unpleasantness that may arise if a man thinks he has not received things as
valuable as he has given,” which is to say the unpleasantness that could
be occasioned by cutting too fine. At the same time, the beneficiary of
this generosity has been put under obligation: he is “one down”; so
the donor has every right to expect equal good treatment the next time
around, when he becomes the stranger and guest of his trade partner.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

On the widest view, as Alvin Gouldner has divined, these slight unbalances sustain the relation (Gouldner, 1960, p. 175).
The procedure of transitory unbalance, bringing generous returns
from the home party to solicitory gifts, is not unique to the Andamans
but in Melanesia rather common. It is the appropriate form between
trade kinsmen of the Huon Gulf:
Kinship ties and bargaining are considered to be incompatible, and
all goods are handed over as free gifts offered from motives of sentiment. Discussion of value is avoided, and the donor does the best
he can to convey the impression that no thought of a counter gift has
entered his head. . . . Most of the visitors . . . go home with items at
least as valuable as those with which they came. Indeed, the closer
the kinship bond, the greater the host’s generosity is, and some of
them return a good deal richer. A careful count is kept, however, and
the score is afterwards made even.
(Hogbin, 1951, p. 84)

Or again, the Massim Kula:
The offering of the pari, of landing gifts by the visitors, returned by
the talo’i, or farewell gifts from the hosts fall into the class . . . of
presents more or less equivalent. . . . The local man will as a rule
[Malinowski seems to mean by this phrase “invariably”] contribute a
bigger present, for the talo’i always exceeds the pari in quantity and
value, and small presents are also given to the visitors during their
stay. Of course, if in the pari there were included gifts of high value,
like a stone blade or a good lime spoon, such solicitary gifts would
always be returned in strictly equivalent form. The rest would be liberally exceeded in value.
(Malinowski, 1922, p. 362)16

Suppose, then, this procedure of reciprocal good measure, as is
actually characteristic of the Huon Gulf trade. A series of transactions in which the partners alternately manifest a certain generosity
must stipulate by inference a ratio of equivalence between the goods
exchanged. One arrives in due course at a fairly precise agreement on
exchange values.

283

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

284

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Table 6.2 presents a simple demonstration: two goods, axes and
spheres, exchanged between two partners, X and Y, over a series of
reciprocal visits beginning with X’s visit and initial gift to Y. After the
first round, the two axes given by Y are understood generous in return
for the three spears brought by X. At the end of the second round, in
which Y first compounded X’s indebtedness by two axes and was then
himself indebted by X’s gift of six spears, the implication is that nine
spears exceed four axes in value. It follows at this juncture that seven to
eight spears equals four axes, or taking into account the indivisibilities,
a rate of 2 : 1 prevails. There is of course no necessity to continually
escalate gifts. At the end of the second series, Y is down the equivalent
of about one spear. Should X bring one to three spears the next time
and Y reciprocate one to three (or better, two or three) axes, a fair
average balance is maintained. Note also that the rate is something
each party mechanically agrees upon, insofar as each understands the
current balance of credit and indebtedness, and if any serious misunderstanding does arise the partnership breaks down—which likewise
stipulates the rate at which trade must proceed.
Considering the comparisons (perhaps invidious) of trade returns
likely to be made with fellows of one’s own side, these understandings of equivalence stand a chance of becoming common
understandings. Comparison of trade returns are the nearest thing

Table 6.2 Determination of exchange value through reciprocal good measure

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

to implicit internal competition I am able to construe. Presumably,
information thus gained might be applied next time against one’s
trade partner of the other community. There seems to be very little evidence on this point, however, or on just how precise is the
available information of compatriots’ dealings—in some instances
transactions with outside partners are conducted privately and
rather furtively (Harding, 1967).
The example before us is specifically a simple model case, supposing reciprocal visiting and a standard presentation procedure. It is
conceivable that different trade arrangements have some other calculus of exchange value. If, for instance, X of the simple model was a
trader-voyager, always on the visiting side, and if the same etiquette of
generosity held, the actual ratio would probably favor X’s spears more,
insofar as Y would be repeatedly obliged to be magnaminous. Indeed,
if X consistently presented three spears, and Y consistently returned
two axes, the same ratio could be maintained for four rounds without
X being down after his initial gift, even though a rate of approximately
2 : 1 is calculable midway through the second round (Table 6.3).
Table 6.3 Rate determination: one-way visiting

285

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

286

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

A 3 : 2 customary rate could in that event develop. Either way there are
obvious advantages to the voyaging group—though they must bear all
the transport, so that the gains over the rate for reciprocal visiting will
parallel “supply-cost” differences.
This second example is only one of many possible permutations of
exchange rate determination. Even in one-way voyaging, the etiquette
of presentation and counterpresentation may be more complicated
than that supposed (for example, Barton, 1910). I bring the example
forward merely to suggest the possibility that different formalities of
exchange generate different exchange rates.
No matter how complex the strategy of reciprocity by which an
equilibrium is finally determined, and however subtle our analysis, it
remains to be known exactly what has been determined economically.
How can it be that a rate fixed by reciprocal generosity expresses the
current average supply and demand? Everything depends on the meaning and practice of that capital principle, “generosity.” But the meaning
is ethnographically uncertain, and therein lies the major weakness of
our theory. Only these few facts, not celebrated either for their repetition in the documents, are known: that those who bring a certain
good to the exchange are related to it primarily in terms of labor value,
the real effort required to produce it, while those to whom the good
is tendered appreciate it primarily as a use value. That much we know
from incidents to the Huon Gulf and Siassi trade, wherein the labor of
manufacture was exaggerated by the suppliers but the product thereof
depreciated by the takers—both sides in hopes of influencing terms of
trade in their own favor (see above). From this steadfast devotion to the
main chance, one has to work back by a kind of inverted logic to the
possible meaning of “generosity.” Supposing the necessity of reciprocal good measure, it would follow that each party has to consider, in
addition to the virtues of the goods he receives, the relative utility to
the other party of the goods he gives, and in addition to the labor he
has expended himself, the work also of the other. “Generosity” has to
bring use value into relation with use value, and labor with labor.
If so, “generosity” will bring to bear on the rate of exchange some
of the same forces, operating in the same direction, as affect price
in the marketplace. In principle, goods of higher real cost will evoke
higher returns. In principle too, if goods of greater utility oblige the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

recipient to greater generosity, it is as much as saying that price is
disposed to increase with demand.17 Thus compensating efforts to the
producer and utilities to the receiver, the rates set by tactful diplomacy
will express many of the elemental conditions that are resumed otherwise in the economist’s supply curves and demand curves. Into both
would enter, and to the same general effects, the real difficulties of
production, natural scarcities, the social uses of goods, and the possibilities of substitution. In many respects the opposite of market competition, the etiquette of primitive trade may conduct by a different
route to a similar result. But then, there is from the beginning a basic
similarity: the two systems share the premise that the trader should be
satisfied materially, the difference being that in the one this is left solely
to his own inclination while in the other it becomes the responsibility
of his partner. To be a diplomatically satisfactory “price” however, the
price of peace, the customary exchange ratio of primitive trade should
approximate the normal market price. As the mechanisms differ, this
correspondence can only be approximate, but the tendency is one.
STABILITY AND FLUCTUATION OF EXCHANGE RATES
Provisionally at least, we come to the following conclusion: the material
conditions expressed familiarly by the terms “supply” and “demand”
are likewise subsumed in the understandings of good treatment built
into the procedure of Melanesian trade. But then, how do exchange
ratios remain immune to short-lived changes in supply/demand?
Certain reasons for this short-term stability have already been mentioned. First, the customary rates have moral force, understandable
from their function as standards of fair conduct in an area where tenuous intergroup relations constantly menace the peace of trade. And
although moral practice everywhere may be vulnerable to expediency,
it is usually not so easy to change the rules. Secondly, in the event of an
unbalance of quantities on hand relative to demand (at the prevailing
rate of exchange), partnership trade opens more attractive alternatives
to cutting the “asking price” or raising the offer: better to find new
partners for trade at old rates; or else to embarrass an existing partner by a large overpayment, obliging him to extend himself and later
on reciprocate, again thus defending the usual rate. The last is not an

287

288

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

hypothetical tactic of my own devising. Consider this Busama technique for encouraging a supply of pigs:
The difference between the native method of doing business and our
own was made plain by an exchange which took place early in 1947.
The Salamaua area had suffered more damage than the northern
settlements, most of which still had their pigs. On the resumption
of voyages after the Japanese defeat, a man from Bukawa’ had the
notion of bringing a young sow to a Busama kinsman named Boya.
The animal was worth about £ 2, but hints indicated that pots would
be more acceptable than money. A collection of ten was required
for a reasonable equivalent, and as Boya had only five to spare he
informed his relatives that anyone prepared to assist would in due
course receive a piglet. This invitation was accepted, and twenty-two
pots were contributed, making a total of twenty-seven. All were
handed over to the visitor, rather to his surprise, as he confessed
to me in private. Yet such generosity was not as absurd as it may
appear: by giving so much Boya imposed an obligation on his guest
to bring across another sow.
(Hogbin, 1951, pp. 84–85)

The success of Boya’s maneuver was made possible only by the social
qualities of the trade relation. Partnership is not merely the privilege
but the duty of reciprocity. Specifically it comprehends the obligation
to receive as well as to repay. Some people may end up with more of a
certain good than they needed, expected or bargained for, but the point
is they did not bargain for it. A trade friend is prevailed upon to accept
things for which he has no use; thereupon, he will have to repay—for
no good “economic” reason. Father Ross of Mt. Hagen seems not to
have appreciated the spiritual ethic involved:
The missionary told the author that natives who have traded with
him, and who are in needy circumstances at the moment, will
come to the mission station with items possessing no material
value and which have no utility to the missionary. The natives seek
to trade these items in exchange for things they need. Upon his
refusal the natives point out to him that his conduct is not proper,
for according to their view he is their friend and should accept a
thing which he does not need so as to assist them when they need

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

such help. They will say to him, “You buy our food, we sell you our
pigs, our boys work for you. Therefore you should buy this thing
which you claim you do not want, and it is not right for you to
refuse to purchase it.”
(Gitlow, 1947, p. 68)18

Working the same principle, the people of the hinterland above Sio
(northeast New Guinea) may overcome their coastal partners’ reluctance to trade:
The Sios also, of course, frequently accept goods which they do not
need at the time. When I asked one Sio man why he had four bows
(most men have more than one), he replied: “If a bush [trade–] friend
comes with a bow, you have to help him.”
(Harding, 1967, pp. 109–110)

Finally, a striking example of the same, appended by Malinowski
to his description of fish-yam exchange (wasi) between different
Trobriand communities. To this day, Malinowski noted, inland yam
growers continued to insist on their coastal partners’ obligation to
receive, thus periodically teasing from the latter a supply of fish, and
at the usual terms, though the fishing people could occupy themselves much more profitably diving for pearls. Money thus remained
the servant of custom, and partnership the master of indigenous
exchange rates:
Nowadays, when the fishermen can earn about ten or twenty times
more by diving for pearls than by performing their share of the wasi,
the exchange is as a rule a great burden on them. It is one of the most
conspicuous examples of the tenacity of native custom that in spite of
all the temptation which pearling offers them, and in spite of the great
pressure exerted upon them by white traders, the fishermen never try
to evade a wasi, and when they have received the inaugurating gift,
the first calm day is always given to fishing, and not to pearling.
(Malinowski, 1922, p. 188 n)

So acting to maintain the stability of exchange values, the trade
partnership merits a more general and respectful interpretation of its
economic significance. The primitive trade partnership is a functional

289

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

290

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

counterpart of the market’s price mechanism. A current supply-demand
imbalance is resolved by pressure on trade partners rather than exchange
rates. Where in the market this equilibrium is effected by a change in
price, here the social side of the transaction, the partnership, absorbs
the economic pressure. The rate of exchange remains undisturbed—
although the temporal rate of certain transactions may be retarded.
The primitive analogue of the business price mechanism is not the
customary exchange rate; it is the customary exchange relation.
Short-term consistency of exchange values is thus accomplished. Yet
the same deflection of the pressure from the rate of exchange to the
relation of partnership makes the latter all the more vulnerable to a
sustained discrepancy of supply-demand. Suppose a continuing and/
or widening disparity between the traditional exchange rate and the
amount of goods actually disposable—due, it may be, to some new
facility in the acquisition of one of the goods at issue. Then partnership trade increases the material pressure in the course of repeatedly
resolving it. Holding steady the terms of exchange, the tactic of overpayment proves equitable and endurable only if the supply-demand
unbalance is reversible. Otherwise, an inherent tendency to accumulate volume makes it unsupportable. For by an attack on a partner’s
obligation to receive, granted his possible delay in response, exchange
proceeds always at the quantity sought by the most importunate party.
In this respect, the inducement to production and exchange exceeds
even the dynamic of the competitive market.
That is to say, at any permutation of supply moving above or below
demand at a certain price, the volume of exchange implied by partnership trade is greater than the analogous market equilibrium. Perhaps
the available quantity of pigs is momentarily less than the quantity
demanded at a rate of one pig = five pots; tant pis for the pig raisers:
they will have to deliver more at the same rate, to the point that all the
pots are exhausted. In the open market, the total quantity transacted
would be lower, and on terms more favorable to the trade in pigs.
Plain to view that, if the disparity persists between the going rates
and the goods on hand, partnership trade must discover its limits
as an equilibrating mechanism, always making a supply available to
the demand and always on the usual terms. Taken at the social level, the
trade becomes irrational: one group enters into economic development

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

by pre-emption of another group’s labor. Nor could the harassed set of
partners be expected to indefinitely countenance the imbalance, any
more than a society that tolerated the procedure could be expected
to continue indefinitely. On the individual level the irrationality most
likely presents itself as a disutility to accumulation, more concrete than
the unrequited cost of production. There must come a moment, after
a man is in possession of five bows, or perhaps it is ten, or maybe
twenty, when he begins to wonder about the advisability of collecting
all the stuff his partner seems intent on unloading. What happens then,
when people become unwilling or unable to meet their trade obligations? If we knew, it would unlock the last of the mysteries empirically
posed by Melanesian trade: the observed tendency of exchange values
to adjust over the long run, if not over the short, to changes in supply/
demand. For the apparent solution is to evaluate the rates. But how?
By a relocation of trade, a revision of partnerships. We know, on one
hand, what happens when a trade partner is disinclined to reciprocate.
The sanction everywhere is dissolution of the partnership. For a time
a man can stall, but if he delays too long, or fails in the end to make
the adequate return, the trade relation is broken off. In such an event,
moreover, the volume of exchange declines, and the pressure to trade
thus mounts. On the other hand, we also know (or we suppose) that
the process by which exchange value is determined in the first place,
i.e., through reciprocal good measure, incorporates current average
supply-demand conditions. The solution, thus, to a persistent disconfirmity between exchange values and supply/demand would be a
social process by which old partnerships are terminated and new ones
negotiated. Perhaps even the network of trade will have to be modified, geographically and ethnically. But in any case, a fresh start, going
through with new partners the traditional tactful maneuvers of reciprocal overpayment, restores the correspondence between exchange
value and supply/demand.
This model, if hypothetical, corresponds to certain facts, such as the
social organization of the deflation experienced in Melanesian trade
networks during the postcontact period. The indigenous trade continued for some time without the benefit of businesslike competition.
But the same Europeans who brought excessive quantities of axes,
shells or pigs also happened to impose peace. In the colonial era the

291

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

292

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

sphere of Melanesian safe-conduct expanded, the social horizons of
tribal communities widened. A significant reshuffling and extension
of trade contacts became possible. And a revaluation of trade rates as
well: as, for example, in the coast-hinterland trade of Huon Gulf, on
the whole more recently opened up, and apparently much more sensitive to supply/demand than the traditional maritime trade (Hogbin,
1951, p. 86; cf. Harding, 1967).
Which leads to a final suggestion: depending on the social qualities of the trade relation, the rates of exchange in differently organized trade systems are probably differentially sensitive to changes in
supply/demand. The precise nature of the partnership becomes significant: it may be more or less sociable, so admitting of longer or shorter
delays in reciprocation—trade-kinship, for example, probably longer
than trade-friendship. The prevailing relation has a coefficient of economic fragility, and the entire system accordingly a certain responsiveness to variations of supply/demand. The simple matter of customary
privacy or publicity may be similarly consequential; perhaps it is feasible (for all one knows) to secretly come to new terms with old partners. And what freedom is given within the system to recruit new
partners? Aside from the difficulties of breaking paths into villages or
ethnic groups previously outside the system, partnerships may be by
custom inherited and the set of contacts thus closed, or perhaps more
readily contracted and the exchange values thereby more susceptible
to revision. In brief, the economic flexibility of the system depends on
the social structure of the trade relation.
If the process as outlined does truly describe long-term variations in
exchange value, then at a high level of generalization and with a great
deal of imperfection it is like business competition. Of course the differences are profound. In primitive trade, the path to economic equilibrium lay not across the play of autonomous individuals or firms
fixing a price through the parallel contentions of buyers and sellers.
It began rather from the interdiction of competition within the community of either, traversed a structure of institutional arrangements
that with varying facility brought together partners mutually obliged
to be generous, upon separating those not so inclined, to negotiate in
the end an analogous “price.” The similarity to market trade appears
when abstraction is made of all this—and of the protracted space-time

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

EXCHANGE VALUE AND PRIMITIVE TRADE

scale, perhaps in reality a changeover of decades from trade with one
ethnic group to partnerships in another. Then the primitive system,
globally considered, does bring those particular persons into relations
of trade, and at those rates, as reasonably reflect the availability and
utility of goods.
But what is the theoretical status of this residual resemblance? First
appreciated in its bourgeois form, does this make it the analytical
private property of conventional Economics? One might fairly judge
not, for in its bourgeois form the process is not general, while in
its general form it is not bourgeois. The conclusion to this aspect of
Melanesian trade will serve as well for the whole: a primitive theory
of exchange value is also necessary, and perhaps possible—without
saying it yet exists.

293

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

E ndnotes

FOREWORD TO THE ROUTLEDGE CLASSICS EDITION
1

2

For purposes of full disclosure, I consider myself, in my own modest way,
continuing this tradition, combining activist engagements with a very
self-conscious effort to pursue Mauss’ and Sahlin’s tradition of publicly
engaged economic anthropology.
I note in passing that, in a remarkable example of intellectual convergence,
the three concentric circles model is almost exactly the same as the one produced by Edmund Leach himself in “Animal Categories and Verbal Abuse”
to describe the relation of marriage patterns and attitudes towards animals.
The two pieces appeared at almost exactly the same time, 1964, and 1965,
respectively, and neither author seems to have been aware of the other
beforehand.

1 THE ORIGINAL AFFLUENT SOCIETY
1
2
3
4

5

At least to the time Lucretius was writing (Harris, 1968, pp. 26–27).
On the historically particular requisites of such calculation, see Codere, 1968
[especially pp. 574–575].
For the complementary institutionalization of “scarcity” in the conditions of
capitalist production, see Gorz, 1967, pp. 37–38.
It deserves mention that contemporary European-Marxist theory is often
in accord with bourgeois economics on the poverty of the primitive. Cf.
Boukharine, 1967; Mandel, 1962, vol. 1; and the economic history manual
used at Lumumba University (listed in bibliography as “Anonymous, n.d.”).
Elman Service for a very long time almost alone among ethnologists stood
out against the traditional view of the penury of hunters. The present paper
owes great inspiration to his remarks on the leisure of the Arunta (1963,
p. 9), as well as to personal conversations with him.

Endnotes

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

6

The evident fault of White’s evolutionary law is the use of “per capita”
measures. Neolithic societies in the main harness a greater total amount
of energy than preagricultural communities, because of the greater number
of energy-delivering humans sustained by domestication. This overall rise
in the social product, however, is not necessarily effected by an increased
productivity of labor—which in White’s view also accompanied the neolithic
revolution. Ethnological data now in hand (see text infra) raise the possibility
that simple agricultural regimes are not more efficient thermodynamically
than hunting and gathering—that is, in energy yield per unit of human labor.
In the same vein, some archaeology in recent years has tended to privilege
stability of settlement over productivity of labor in explanation of the neolithic advance (cf. Braidwood and Wiley, 1962).
7 For a similar comment, referring to missionary misinterpretation of curing by blood consumption in eastern Australia, see Hodgkinson, 1845,
p. 227.
8 Conditions of primitive hunting peoples must not be judged, as Carl Sauer
notes, “from their modern survivors, now restricted to the most meagre
regions of the earth, such as the interior of Australia, the American Great
Basin, and the Arctic tundra and taiga. The areas of early occupation were
abounding in food” (cited in Clark and Haswell, 1964, p. 23).
9 Through the prison of acculturation one glimpses what hunting and gathering might have been like in a decent environment from Alexander Henry’s
account of his bountiful sojurn as a Chippewa in northern Michigan: see
Quimby, 1962.
10 Turnbull similarly notes of Congo pygmies: “The materials for the making
of shelter, clothing, and all other necessary items of material culture are all
at hand at a moment’s notice.” And he has no reservations either about
subsistence: “Throughout the year, without fail, there is an abundant supply
of game and vegetable foods” (1965, p. 18).
11 Certain food collectors not lately known for their architectural achievements
seem to have built more substantial dwellings before being put on the run
by Europeans. See Smythe, 1871, vol. 1, pp. 125–128.
12 But recall Gusinde’s comment: “Our Fuegians procure and make their
implements with little effort” (1961, p. 213).
13 Fish Creek was an inland camp in western Arnhem Land consisting of six
adult males and three adult females. Hemple Bay was a coastal occupation
on Groote Eylandt; there were four adult males, four adult females, and five
juveniles and infants in the camp. Fish Creek was investigated at the end of
the dry season, when the supply of vegetable foods was low; kangaroo hunting was rewarding, although the animals became increasingly wary under
steady stalking. At Hemple Bay, vegetable foods were plentiful; the fishing
was variable but on the whole good by comparison with other coastal camps
visited by the expedition. The resource base at Hemple Bay was richer than
at Fish Creek. The greater time put into food-getting at Hemple Bay may
reflect, then, the support of five children. On the other hand, the Fish Creek
group did maintain a virtually full-time specialist, and part of the difference in hours worked may represent a normal coastal-inland variation. In

295

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

296

