ON THE SOCIOLOGY OF
PRIMITIVE EXCHANGE
In a discussion that has anthropological pretensions, “provisional generalization” is no doubt a redundant phrase. Yet the present venture
needs a doubly cautious introduction. Its generalizations have developed out of a dialogue with ethnographic materials—many of these
are appended Tylorian fashion as “illustrative materials”—but no rigorous tests have been applied. Perhaps the conclusions may be offered
as a plea to enthnography rather than a contribution to theory, if these
are not again the same thing. At any rate, there follow some suggestions about the interplay in primitive communities between forms,
material conditions, and social relations of exchange.
MATERIAL FLOW AND SOCIAL RELATIONS
What are in the received wisdom “noneconomic” or “exogenous”
conditions are in the primitive reality the very organization of economy.1 A material transaction is usually a momentary episode in a
continuous social relation. The social relation exerts governance: the
flow of goods is constrained by, is part of, a status etiquette. “One
cannot treat Nuer economic relations by themselves, for they always
form part of direct social relations of a general kind,” Evans-Pritchard

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

writes: “. . . there is always between them a general social relationship of one kind or another, and their economic relations, if such
they may be called, must conform to this general pattern of behavior”
(1940, pp. 90–91). The dictum is broadly applicable (cf. White, 1959,
pp. 242–245).
Yet the connection between material flow and social relations is
reciprocal. A specific social relation may constrain a given movement
of goods, but a specific transaction—“by the same token”—suggests
a particular social relation. If friends make gifts, gifts make friends.
A great proportion of primitive exchange, much more than our own
traffic, has as its decisive function this latter, instrumental one: the
material flow underwrites or initiates social relations. Thus do primitive peoples transcend the Hobbesian chaos. For the indicative condition of primitive society is the absence of a public and sovereign
power: persons and (especially) groups confront each other not merely
as distinct interests but with the possible inclination and certain right
to physically prosecute these interests. Force is decentralized, legitimately held in severalty, the social compact has yet to be drawn, the
state nonexistent. So peacemaking is not a sporadic intersocietal event,
it is a continuous process going on within society itself. Groups must
“come to terms”—the phrase notably connotes a material exchange
satisfactory on both sides.2
Even on its strictly practical side, exchange in primitive communities has not the same role as the economic flow in modern industrial communities. The place of transaction in the total economy is
different: under primitive conditions it is more detached from production, less firmly hinged to production in an organic way. Typically,
it is less involved than modern exchange in the acquisition of means of
production, more involved with the redistribution of finished goods
through the community. The bias is that of an economy in which food
holds a commanding position, and in which day-to-day output does
not depend on a massive technological complex nor a complex division of labor. It is the bias also of a domestic mode of production: of
household producing units, division of labor by sex and age dominant, production that looks to familial requirements, and direct access
by domestic groups to strategic resources. It is the bias of a social
order in which rights to control returns go along with rights to use

169

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

170

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

resources of production, and in which there is very limited traffic in
titles or income privileges in resources. It is the bias, finally, of societies
ordered in the main by kinship. Such characteristics of primitive economies as these, so broadly stated, are of course subject to qualification
in specific instances. They are offered only as a guide to the detailed
analysis of distribution that follows. It is also advisable to repeat that
“primitive” shall refer to cultures lacking a political state, and it applies
only insofar as economy and social relations have not been modified
by the historic penetration of states.
On a very general view, the array of economic transactions in the
ethnographic record may be resolved into two types.3 First, those
“vice-versa” movements between two parties known familiarly as
“reciprocity” (A ⇄ B). The second, centralized movements: collection from members of a group, often under one hand, and redivision
within this group:

This is “pooling” or “redistribution.” On an even more general view,
the two types merge. For pooling is an organization of reciprocities, a system of
reciprocities—a fact of central bearing upon the genesis of large-scale
redistribution under chiefly aegis. But this most general understanding merely suggests concentration in the first place on reciprocity; it
remains the course of analytic wisdom to separate the two.
Their social organizations are very different. True, pooling and reciprocity may occur in the same social contexts—the same close kinsmen that pool their resources in household commensality, for instance,
also as individuals share things with one another—but the precise
social relations of pooling and reciprocity are not the same. Pooling is
socially a within relation, the collective action of a group. Reciprocity is
a between relation, the action and reaction of two parties. Thus pooling
is the complement of social unity and, in Polanyi’s term, “centricity”;
whereas, reciprocity is social duality and “symmetry.” Pooling stipulates a social center where goods meet and thence flow outwards,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

and a social boundary too, within which persons (or subgroups) are
cooperatively related. But reciprocity stipulates two sides, two distinct
social-economic interests. Reciprocity can establish solidary relations,
insofar as the material flow suggests assistance or mutual benefit, yet
the social fact of sides is inescapable.
Considering the established contributions of Malinowski and Firth,
Gluckman, Richards, and Polanyi, it does not seem too sanguine to
say that we know fairly well the material and social concomitants of
pooling. Also, what is known fits the argument that pooling is the
material side of “collectivity” and “centricity.” Cooperative food production, rank and chieftainship, collective political and ceremonial
action, these are some of the ordinary contexts of pooling in primitive
communities. To review very briefly:
The everyday, workaday variety of redistribution is familial pooling
of food. The principle suggested by it is that products of collective
effort in provisioning are pooled, especially should the cooperation
entail division of labor. Stated so, the rule applies not only to householding but to higher-level cooperation as well, to groups larger than
households that develop about some task of procurement—say, buffalo impounding in the Northern Plains or netting fish in a Polynesian lagoon. With qualifications—such as the special shares locally
accorded special contributions to the group endeavor—the principle
remains at the higher, as at the lower, household level: “goods collectively procured are distributed through the collectivity.”
Rights of call on the produce of the underlying population, as well
as obligations of generosity, are everywhere associated with chieftainship. The organized exercise of these rights and obligations is
redistribution:
I think that throughout the world we would find that the relations
between economics and politics are of the same type. The chief,
everywhere, acts as a tribal banker, collecting food, storing it, and
protecting it, and then using it for the benefit of the whole community. His functions are the prototype of the public finance system and
the organization of State treasuries of to-day. Deprive the chief of his
privileges and financial benefits and who suffers most but the whole
tribe?
(Malinowski, 1937, pp. 232–233)

171

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

172

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

This use “for the benefit of the whole community” takes various forms:
subsidizing religious ceremony, social pageantry, or war; underwriting
craft production, trade, the construction of technical apparatus and of
public and religious edifices; redistributing diverse local products; hospitality and succor of the community (in severalty or in general) during
shortage. Speaking more broadly, redistribution by powers-that-be serves
two purposes, either of which may be dominant in a given instance. The
practical, logistic function—redistribution—sustains the community, or
community effort, in a material sense. At the same time, or alternatively,
it has an instrumental function: as a ritual of communion and of subordination to central authority, redistribution sustains the corporate structure itself, that is in a social sense. The practical benefits may be critical,
but, whatever the practical benefits, chiefly pooling generates the spirit
of unity and centricity, codifies the structure, stipulates the centralized
organization of social order and social action—
. . . every person who takes part in the aηa [feast organized by a Tikopia
chief] is impelled to participate in forms of cooperation which for the
time being go far beyond his personal interests and those of his family
and reach the bounds of the whole community. Such a feast gathers
together chiefs and their clansfolk who at other times are rivals ready to
criticize and slander each other, but who assemble here with an outward
show of amity. . . . In addition, such purposive activity subserves certain
wider social ends, which are common in the sense that every person
or nearly every person knowingly or unknowingly promotes them. For
instance, attendance at the aηa and participation in the economic contributions does in fact help to support the Tikopia system of authority.
(Firth, 1950, pp. 230–231)

So we have at least the outline of a functional theory of redistribution. The central issues are now likely to be developmental ones,
the specification by comparison or phylogenetic study of selective
circumstances. The economic anthropology of reciprocity, however, is
not at the same stage. One reason, perhaps, is a popular tendency to
view reciprocity as balance, as unconditional one-for-one exchange.
Considered as a material transfer, reciprocity is often not that at all.
Indeed, it is precisely through scrutiny of departures from balanced

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

exchange that one glimpses the interplay between reciprocity, social
relations and material circumstances.
Reciprocity is a whole class of exchanges, a continuum of forms.
This is specially true in the narrow context of material transactions—
as opposed to a broadly conceived social principle or moral norm
of give-and-take. At one end of the spectrum stands the assistance
freely given, the small currency of everyday kinship, friendship, and
neighborly relations, the “pure gift” Malinowski called it, regarding
which an open stipulation of return would be unthinkable and unsociable. At the other pole, self-interested seizure, appropriation by chicanery or force requited only by an equal and opposite effort on the
principle of lex talionis, “negative reciprocity” as Gouldner phrases it.
The extremes are notably positive and negative in a moral sense. The
intervals between them are not merely so many gradations of material balance in exchange, they are intervals of sociability. The distance
between poles of reciprocity is, among other things, social distance:
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother
thou shalt not lend usury.
(Deuteronomy xxiii, 21)
Native [Siuai] moralists assert that neighbors should be friendly
and mutually trustful, whereas people from far-off are dangerous and
unworthy of morally just consideration. For example, natives lay
great stress on honesty involving neighbors while holding that trade
with strangers may be guided by caveat emptor.
(Oliver, 1955, p. 82)
Gain at the cost of other communities, particularly communities at
a distance, and more especially such as are felt to be aliens, is not
obnoxious to the standards of homebred use and wont.
(Veblen, 1915, p. 46)
A trader always cheats people. For this reason intra-regional trade is
rather frowned upon while inter-tribal trade gives to the (Kapauku)
businessman prestige as well as profit.
(Pospisil, 1958, p. 127)

173

174

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

A SCHEME OF RECIPROCITIES
A purely formal typology of reciprocities is possible, one based exclusively on immediacy of returns, equivalence of returns, and like material and mechanical dimensions of exchange. The classification thus
in hand, one might proceed to correlate subtypes of reciprocity with
diverse “variables” such as kinship distance of parties to the transaction.
The virtue of this manner of exposition is that it is “scientific,” or so it
would seem. Among the defects is that it is a conventional metaphor of
exposition, not a true history of experiment. It ought to be recognized
from the beginning that the distinction of one type of reciprocity from
another is more than formal. A feature such as the expectation of returns
says something about the spirit of exchange, about its disinterestedness
or its interestedness, the impersonality, the compassion. Any seeming
formal classification conveys these meanings: it is as much a moral as
a mechanical scheme. (That the recognition of the moral quality prejudges the relation of exchange to social “variables,” in the sense that
the latter are then logically connected to variations in exchange, is not
contested. This is a sign that the classification is good.)
The actual kinds of reciprocity are many in any primitive society, let
alone in the primitive world taken as a whole. “Vice-versa movements”
may include sharing and counter-sharing of unprocessed food, informal hospitality, ceremonious affinal exchanges, loaning and repaying,
compensation of specialized or ceremonial services, the transfer that
seals a peace agreement, impersonal haggle, and so on and on. We have
several ethnographic attempts to cope typologically with the empirical diversity, notably Douglas Oliver’s scheme of Siuai transactions
(1955, pp. 229–231; cf. Price, 1962, p. 37 f; Spencer, 1959, p. 194 f;
Marshall, 1961, and others). In Crime and Custom, Malinowski wrote
rather broadly and unconditionally about reciprocity; in the Argonauts,
however, he developed a classification of Trobriand exchanges out of
manifold variations in balance and equivalence (Malinowski, 1922,
pp. 176–194). It was from this vantage point, looking to the directness
of returns, that the continuum which is reciprocity was revealed:
I have on purpose spoken of forms of exchange, of gifts and countergifts, rather than of barter or trade, because, although there exist
forms of barter pure and simple, there are so many transitions and

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

gradations between that and simple gift, that it is impossible to draw
any fixed line between trade on the one hand, and the exchange of
gifts on the other. . . . In order to deal with these facts correctly it is
necessary to give a complete survey of all forms of payment or present. In this survey there will be at one end the extreme cases of pure
gift, that is an offering for which nothing is given in return [but see
Firth 1957, pp. 221, 222]. Then, through many customary forms of
gift or payment, partially or conditionally returned, which shade into
each other, there come forms of exchange, where more or less strict
equivalence is observed, arriving finally at real barter.
(Malinowski, 1922, p. 176)

Malinowski’s perspective may be taken beyond the Trobriands and
applied broadly to reciprocal exchange in primitive societies. It seems
possible to lay out in abstract fashion a continuum of reciprocities, based
on the “vice-versa” nature of exchanges, along which empirical instances
encountered in the particular ethnographic case can be placed.The stipulation of material returns, less elegantly, the “sidedness” of exchange, would
be the critical thing. For this there are obvious objective criteria, such as the
toleration of material unbalance and the leeway of delay: the initial movement of goods from hand to hand is more or less requited materially and
there are variations too in the time allowed for reciprocation (again see
Firth, 1957, pp. 220–221). Put another way, the spirit of exchange swings
from disinterested concern for the other party through mutuality to selfinterest. So expressed, the assessment of “sidedness” can be supplemented
by empirical criteria in addition to those of immediacy and material
equivalence: the initial transfer may be voluntary, involuntary, prescribed,
contracted; the return freely bestowed, exacted, or dunned; the exchange
haggled or not, the subject of accounting or not; and so forth.
The spectrum of reciprocities proposed for general use is defined by
its extremes and mid-point:
Generalized reciprocity, the solidary extreme

4

“Generalized reciprocity” refers to transactions that are putatively
altruistic, transactions on the line of assistance given and, if possible and necessary, assistance returned. The ideal type is Malinowski’s
“pure gift.” Other indicative ethnographic formulas are “sharing,”
“hospitality,” “free gift,” “help,” and “generosity.” Less sociable, but

175

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

176

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

tending toward the same pole are “kinship dues,” “chiefly dues,” and
“noblesse oblige.” Price (1962) refers to the genre as “weak reciprocity”
by reason of the vagueness of the obligation to reciprocate.
At the extreme, say voluntary food-sharing among near kinsmen—
or for its logical value, one might think of the suckling of children in
this context—the expectation of a direct material return is unseemly.
At best it is implicit. The material side of the transaction is repressed by
the social: reckoning of debts outstanding cannot be overt and is typically left out of account. This is not to say that handing over things in
such form, even to “loved ones,” generates no counter-obligation. But
the counter is not stipulated by time, quantity, or quality: the expectation of reciprocity is indefinite. It usually works out that the time and
worth of reciprocation are not alone conditional on what was given
by the donor, but also upon what he will need and when, and likewise
what the recipient can afford and when. Receiving goods lays on a
diffuse obligation to reciprocate when necessary to the donor and/or
possible for the recipient. The requital thus may be very soon, but then
again it may be never. There are people who even in the fullness of
time are incapable of helping themselves or others. A good pragmatic
indication of generalized reciprocity is a sustained one-way flow. Failure to reciprocate does not cause the giver of stuff to stop giving: the
goods move one way, in favor of the have-not, for a very long period.
Balanced reciprocity, the midpoint
“Balanced reciprocity” refers to direct exchange. In precise balance,
the reciprocation is the customary equivalent of the thing received and is
without delay. Perfectly balanced reciprocity, the simultaneous exchange
of the same types of goods to the same amounts, is not only conceivable but ethnographically attested in certain marital transactions (e.g.,
Reay, 1959, pp. 95 f), friendship compacts (Seligman, 1910, p. 70), and
peace agreements (Hogbin, 1939, p. 79; Loeb, 1926, p. 204; Williamson, 1912, p. 183). “Balanced reciprocity” may be more loosely applied
to transactions which stipulate returns of commensurate worth or utility
within a finite and narrow period. Much “gift-exchange,” many “payments,” much that goes under the ethnographic head of “trade” and
plenty that is called “buying-selling” and involves “primitive money”
belong in the genre of balanced reciprocity.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Balanced reciprocity is less “personal” than generalized reciprocity.
From our own vantage-point it is “more economic.” The parties confront each other as distinct economic and social interests. The material side of the transaction is at least as critical as the social: there is
more or less precise reckoning, as the things given must be covered
within some short term. So the pragmatic test of balanced reciprocity
becomes an inability to tolerate one-way flows; the relations between
people are disrupted by a failure to reciprocate within limited time
and equivalence leeways. It is notable of the main run of generalized
reciprocities that the material flow is sustained by prevailing social
relations; whereas, for the main run of balanced exchange, social relations hinge on the material flow.
Negative reciprocity, the unsociable extreme
“Negative reciprocity” is the attempt to get something for nothing with impunity, the several forms of appropriation, transactions
opened and conducted toward net utilitarian advantage. Indicative
ethnographic terms include “haggling” or “barter,” “gambling,” “chicanery,” “theft,” and other varieties of seizure.
Negative reciprocity is the most impersonal sort of exchange. In
guises such as “barter” it is from our own point of view the “most
economic.” The participants confront each other as opposed interests,
each looking to maximize utility at the other’s expense. Approaching the transaction with an eye singular to the main chance, the aim
of the opening party, or of both parties, is the unearned increment.
One of the most sociable forms, leaning toward balance, is haggling
conducted in the spirit of “what the traffic will bear.” From this, negative reciprocity ranges through various degrees of cunning, guile,
stealth, and violence to the finesse of a well-conducted horse raid. The
“reciprocity” is, of course, conditional again, a matter of defense of
self-interest. So the flow may be one-way once more, reciprocation
contingent upon mustering countervailing pressure or guile.
It is a long way from a suckling child to a Plains Indians’ horseraid. Too long, it could be argued, the classification too widely set.
Yet “vice-versa movements” in the ethnographic record do grade into
each other along the whole span. It is well to recall, nevertheless, that
empirical exchanges often fall somewhere along the line, not directly

177

178

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

on the extreme and middle points here outlined. The question is, can
one specify social or economic circumstances that impel reciprocity
toward one or another of the stipulated positions, toward generalized,
balanced, or negative reciprocity? I think so.
RECIPROCITY AND KINSHIP DISTANCE
The span of social distance between those who exchange conditions
the mode of exchange. Kinship distance, as has already been suggested, is especially relevant to the form of reciprocity. Reciprocity
is inclined toward the generalized pole by close kinship, toward the
negative extreme in proportion to kinship distance.
The reasoning is nearly syllogistic. The several reciprocities from
freely bestowed gift to chicanery amount to a spectrum of sociability,
from sacrifice in favor of another to self-interested gain at the expense
of another. Take as the minor premise Tylor’s dictum that kindred goes
with kindness, “two words whose common derivation expresses in
the happiest way one of the main principles of social life.” It follows
that close kin tend to share, to enter into generalized exchanges, and
distant and nonkin to deal in equivalents or in guile. Equivalence
becomes compulsory in proportion to kinship distance lest relations
break off entirely, for with distance there can be little tolerance of
gain and loss even as there is little inclination to extend oneself. To
nonkin—“other people”, perhaps not even “people”—no quarter
must needs be given: the manifest inclination may well be “devil take
the hindmost.”
All this seems perfectly applicable to our own society, but it is more
significant in primitive society. Because kinship is more significant in
primitive society. It is, for one thing, the organizing principle or idiom
of most groups and most social relations. Even the category “nonkin”
is ordinarily defined by it, that is, as the negative aspect of it, the logical
extreme of the class—nonbeing as a state of being. There is something
real to this view; it is not logical sophistry. Among ourselves, “nonkin”
denotes specialized status relations of positive quality: doctor-patient,
policeman-citizen, employer-employee, classmates, neighbors, professional colleagues. But for them,“nonkin” connotes the negation of
community (or tribalism); often it is the synonym for “enemy” or

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

“stranger.” Likewise the economic relation tends to be a simple negation of kinship reciprocities: other institutional norms need not come
into play.
Kinship distance, however, has different aspects. It may be organized
in several ways, and what is “close” in one of these ways need not be
so in another. Exchange may be contingent on genealogical distance
(as locally imputed), that is, on interpersonal kinship status. Or it may
hinge on segmentary distance, on descent group status. (One suspects
that where these two do not correspond the closer relation governs the
reciprocity appropriate in dealings between individual parties, but this
ought to be worked out empirically.) For the purpose of creating a general model, attention should also be given to the power of community
in stipulating distance. It is not only that kinship organizes communities,
but communities kinship, so that a spatial, coresidential term affects the
measure of kinship distance and thus the mode of exchange.
Brothers living together, or a paternal uncle and his nephews living in
the same house were, as far as my observation goes, on much closer
terms with each other than relatives of similar degrees living apart.
This was evident whenever there was a question of borrowing things,
of getting help, of accepting an obligation, or of assuming responsibilities for each other.
(Malinowski, 1915, p. 532; the reference is to the Mailu)

Mankind [to Siuai] consists of relatives and strangers. Relatives are
usually interlinked by both blood and marital ties; most of them live
nearby, and persons who live nearby are all relatives . . . Transactions
among them should be carried out in a spirit devoid of commerciality—
preferably consisting of sharing [i.e., “pooling” in terms of the present
discussion], nonreciprocable giving, and bequeathing, among closest
relatives, or of lending among more distantly related ones. . . . Except
for a few very distantly related sib-mates, persons who live far away
are not relatives and can only be enemies. Most of their customs are
unsuitable for the Siuai, but a few of their goods and techniques
are desirable. One interacts with them only to buy and sell—utilizing
hard bargaining and deceit to make as much profit from such transactions as possible (Oliver, 1955, pp. 454–455).

179

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

180

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Here is one possible model for analyzing reciprocity: the tribal plan
can be viewed as a series of more and more inclusive kinship-residential
sectors, and reciprocity seen then to vary in character by sectoral position. The close kinsmen who render assistance are particularly near
kinsmen in a spatial sense: it is in regard to people of the household,
the camp, hamlet, or village that compassion is required, inasmuch as
interaction is intense and peaceable solidarity essential. But the quality
of mercy is strained in peripheral sectors, strained by kinship distance,
so is less likely in exchanges with fellow tribesmen of another village
than among covillagers, and still less likely in the intertribal sector.
Kinship-residential groupings from this perspective comprise
ever-widening co-membership spheres: the household, the local lineage, perhaps the village, the subtribe, tribe, other tribes—the particular plan of course varies. The structure is a hierarchy of levels of
integration, but from the inside and on the ground it is a series of concentric circles. Social relations of each circle have a specific ­quality—
household relations, lineage relations, and so on—and except as the
sectoral divisions be cut through by other organizations of kinship
solidarity—say, nonlocalized clans or personal kindreds—relations
within each sphere are more solidary than relations of the next, more
inclusive sector. Reciprocity accordingly inclines toward balance
and chicane in proportion to sectoral distance. In each sector, certain modes of reciprocity are characteristic or dominant: generalized
modes are dominant in the narrowest spheres and play out in wider
spheres, balanced reciprocity is characteristic of intermediate sectors,
chicane of the most peripheral spheres. In brief, a general model of the
play of reciprocity may be developed by superimposing the society’s
sectoral plan upon the reciprocity continuum. Such a model is shown
in Figure 5.1.
The plan does not rest alone upon the two terms of sectoral division
and reciprocity variation. Something is to be said for the embedded
third term, morality. “Far more than we ordinarily suppose,” Firth
has written, “economic relations rest on moral foundations” (1951,
p. 144). Certainly that must be the way the people see it—“Although
the Siuai have separate terms for ‘generosity,’ ‘cooperativeness,’ ‘morality’ (that is, rule abiding), and ‘geniality,’ I believe that they consider
all these to be closely interrelated aspects of the same attribute of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Figure 5.1 Reciprocity and Kinship Residential Sectors

goodness . . .” (Oliver, 1955, p. 78). Another contrast with ourselves
is suggested, a tendency for morality, like reciprocity, to be sectorally
organized in primitive societies. The norms are characteristically relative and situational rather than absolute and universal. A given act, that
is to say, is not so much in itself good or bad, it depends on who the
“Alter” is. The appropriation of another man’s goods or his woman,
which is a sin (“theft,” “adultery”) in the bosom of one’s community,
may be not merely condoned but positively rewarded with the admiration of one’s fellows—if it is perpetrated on an outsider. The contrast
with the absolute standards of the Judeo-Christian tradition is probably overdrawn: no moral system is exclusively absolute (especially
in wartime) and none perhaps is entirely relative and contextual. But
situational standards, defined often in sectoral terms, do seem to prevail in primitive communities and this contrasts sufficiently with our
own to have drawn repeated comment from ethnologists. For instance:
Navaho morality is . . . contextual rather than absolute. . . . Lying is
not always and everywhere wrong. The rules vary with the situation.

181

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

182

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

To deceive when trading with foreign tribes is a morally accepted practice. Acts are not in themselves bad or good. Incest [by its nature, a
contextual sin] is perhaps the only conduct that is condemned without qualification. It is quite correct to use witchcraft techniques
in trading with members of foreign tribes. . . . There is an almost
complete absence of abstract ideals. Under the circumstances of
aboriginal life Navahos did not need to orient themselves in terms
of abstract morality. . . . In a large, complex society like modern America,
where people come and go and business and other dealings must be
carried on by people who never see each other, it is functionally necessary to have abstract standards that transcend an immediate concrete
situation in which two or more persons are interacting.
(Kluckhohn, 1959, p. 434)

The scheme with which we deal is at least tripartite: social, moral,
and economic. Reciprocity and morality are sectorally structured—the
structure is that of kinship-tribal groupings.
But the scheme is entirely a hypothetical state of affairs. One can
conceive circumstances that would alter the social-moral-reciprocal
relations postulated by it. Propositions about the external sectors are
particularly vulnerable. (For “external sector” one can generally read
“intertribal sector,” the ethnic peripherae of primitive communities;
in practice it can be set where positive morality fades out or where
intergroup hostility is the normal in-group expectation.) Transactions
in this sphere may be consummated by force and guile, it is true, by
wabuwabu, to use the near-onomatopoeic Dobuan term for sharp practice. Yet it seems that violent appropriation is a resort born of urgent
requirements that can only, or most easily, be supplied by militant
tactics. Peaceful symbiosis is at least a common alternative.
In these nonviolent confrontations the propensity to wabuwabu no
doubt persists; it is built in to the sectoral plan. So if it can be socially
tolerated—if, that is, countervailing peace-enforcing conditions are
sufficiently strong—hard bargaining is the institutionalized external relation. We find then gimwali, the mentality of the market place,
the impersonal (no-partnership) exchange of Trobriand commoners
of different villages or of Trobrianders and other peoples. But still
gimwali does suppose special conditions, some sort of social insulation that prevents the economic friction from kindling a dangerous

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

conflagration. In the ordinary case, haggling is actually repressed, particularly, it appears, if the exchange of the border is critical to both
sides, as where different strategic specialties move against each other.
Despite the sectoral distance, the exchange is equitable, utu, balanced:
the free play of wabuwabu and gimwali is checked in the interest of the
symbiosis.
The check is delivered by special and delicate institutional means of
border exchange. The means sometimes look so preposterous as to be
considered by ethnologists some sort of “game” the natives play, but
their design manifestly immunizes an important economic interdependence against a fundamental social cleavage. (Compare the discussion
of the kula in White, 1959, and Fortune,1932.) Silent trade is a famous
case in point—good relations are maintained by preventing any relations. Most common are “trade-partnerships” and “trade-friendships.”
The important thing in all varieties is a social suppression of negative
reciprocity. Peace is built in, haggling outlawed, and, conducted as a
transfer of equivalent utilities, the exchange in turn underwrites the
peace. (Trade-partnerships, often developed along lines of classificatory
or affinal kinship, particularly incapsulate external economic transactions in solidary social relations. Status relations essentially internal are
projected across community and tribal boundaries. The reciprocity then
may lean over backward, in the direction not of wabuwabu but something
to the generalized side. Phrased as gift-giving, the presentation admits
of delay in reciprocation: a direct return may indeed be unseemly. Hospitality, on another occasion returned in kind, accompanies the formal
exchange of trade goods. For a host to give stuff over and above the
worth of things brought by his partner is not unusual: it both befits
the relation so to treat one’s partner while he is traveling and stores up
credits. On a wider view, this measure of unbalance sustains the trade
partnership, compelling as it does another meeting.)
Intertribal symbiosis, in short, alters the terms of the hypothetical
model. The peripheral sector is breached by more sociable relations
than are normal in this zone. The context of exchange is now a narrower co-membership sphere, the exchange is peaceful and equitable.
Reciprocity falls near the balance point.
Now the assertions of this essay, as I have said, developed out of a
dialogue with ethnographic materials. It seems worthwhile to append

183

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

184

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

some of these data to appropriate sections of the argument. Accordingly,
Appendix A sets out materials relevant to the present section, “Reciprocity
and Kinship Distance.” This is not by way of proof, of course—there are
indeed certain exceptions, or seeming exceptions, in the materials—
but by way of exposition or illustration. Moreover, since the ideas only
gradually came over me and the monographs and articles had been in
many instances consulted for other purposes, it is certain that data pertinent to reciprocity in the works cited have escaped me. (I hope this
is sufficiently apologetic and that the ethnographic notes of Appendix
A are of interest to someone besides myself.)
Whatever the value of these notes as exposition of the asserted relation between reciprocity and kinship distance, they must also suggest
to the reader certain limitations of the present perspective. Simply to
demonstrate that the character of reciprocity is contingent upon social
distance—even if it could be demonstrated in an incontestable way—is
not to traffic in ultimate explanation, nor yet to specify when exchanges
will in fact take place. A systematic relation between reciprocity and sociability in itself does not say when, or even to what extent, the relation will
come into play. The supposition here is that the forces of constraint lie
outside the relation itself.The terms of final analysis are the larger cultural
structure and its adaptive response to its milieu. From this wider view
one may be able to stipulate the significant sectoral lines and kinship categories of the given case, and to stipulate too the incidence of reciprocity
in different sectors. Supposing it true that close kinsmen would share
food, for example, it need not follow that the transactions occur. The total
(cultural-adaptive) context may render intensive sharing dysfunctional
and predicate in subtle ways the demise of a society that allows itself the
luxury. Permit me to quote in extenso a passage from Fredrik Barth’s brilliant ecological study of South Persian nomads. It shows so well the larger
considerations that must be brought to the bar of explanation; in detail it
exemplifies a situation that discounts intensive sharing:
The stability of a pastoral population depends on the maintenance of a
balance between pastures, animal population, and human population.
The pastures available by their techniques of herding set a maximal
limit to the total animal population that an area will support; while the
patterns of nomadic production and consumption define a minimal
limit to the size of the herd that will support a human household. In

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

this double set of balances is summarized the special difficulty in establishing a population balance in a pastoral economy: the human population must be sensitive to imbalances between flocks and pastures.
Among agricultural, or hunting and collecting people, a crude Malthusian type of population control is sufficient. With a growing population,
starvation and death-rate rise, until a balance is reached around which
the population stabilizes. Where pastoral nomadism is the predominant or exclusive pattern, the nomad population, if subjected to such a
form of population control, would not establish a population balance,
but would find its whole basis for subsistence removed. Quite simply,
this is because the productive capital on which their subsistence is
based is not simply land, it is animals—in other words food. A pastoral
economy can only be maintained so long as there are no pressures
on its practitioners to invade this large store of food. A pastoral population can therefore only reach a stable level if other effective population controls intervene before those of starvation and death-rate. A first
requirement in such an adaptation is the presence of the patterns of
private ownership of herds, and individual economic responsibility
for each household. By these patterns, the population becomes fragmented with respect to economic activities, and economic factors can
strike differentially, eliminating some members of the population [i.e.,
through sedentarization] without affecting other members of the same
population. This would be impossible if the corporate organization
with respect to political life, and pasture rights, were also made relevant to economic responsibility and survival.
(Barth, 1961, p. 124)

Now, about the incidence of reciprocity in the specific case, here is
something else to consider—the people may be stingy. Nothing has
been said about sanctions of exchange relations nor, more importantly,
about forces that countervail. There are contradictions in primitive
economies: inclinations of self-interest are unleashed that are incompatible with the high levels of sociability customarily demanded.
Malinowski long ago noticed this and Firth (1926) in an early paper
on Maori proverbs skillfully brought to light the clash, the subtle
interplay, between the moral dictates of sharing and narrow economic
interests. The widespread mode of family production for use, it might
be remarked, acts to brake outputs at comparatively low levels even as
it orients economic concern inward, within the household. The mode

185

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

186

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

of production thus does not readily lend itself to general economic
solidarity. Suppose sharing is morally called for, say by the destitution of a near kinsman, all the things that make sharing good and
proper may not evoke in an affluent man the inclination to do it. And
even as there may be little to gain by assisting others, there are no
iron-clad guarantees of such social compacts as kinship. The received
social-moral obligations prescribe an economic course, and the publicity of primitive life, increasing the risk of evoking jealousy, hostility,
and future economic penalty, tends to keep people on course. But, as
is well known, to observe that a society has a system of morality and
constraints is not to say that everyone acquiesces in it. There may be
biša-baša times, “particularly in the late winter, when the household
would hide its food, even from relatives” (Price, 1962, p. 47).
That biša-baša is the pervasive condition of some peoples is not
embarassing to the present thesis. The Siriono, everyone knows, parley
hostility and crypto-stinginess into a way of life. Interestingly enough,
the Siriono articulate ordinary norms of primitive economic intercourse. By the norm, for instance, the hunter should not eat the animal
he has killed. But the de facto sector of sharing is not merely very narrow,
“sharing rarely occurs without a certain amount of mutual mistrust
and misunderstanding; a person always feels that it is he who is being
taken advantage of,” so that “The bigger the catch the more sullen the
hunter” (Holmberg,1950, pp. 60, 62; cf. pp. 36, 38–39). The Siriono
are not thereby different in kind from the run of primitive communities. They simply realize to an extreme the potentiality elsewhere
less often consummated, the possibility that structural compulsions of
generosity are unequal to a test of hardship. But then, the Siriono are a
band of displaced and deculturated persons. The whole cultural shell,
from rules of sharing through institutions of chieftainship and Crow
kinship terminology, is a mockery of their present miserable state.
RECIPROCITY AND KINSHIP RANK
It is by now apparent—it is made apparent by the illustrative materials
of Appendix A—that in any actual exchange several circumstances may
simultaneously bear upon the material flow. Kinship distance, while
perhaps significant, is not necessarily decisive. Something may be said

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

for rank, relative wealth and need, the type of goods whether food or
durables, and still other “factors.” As a tactic of presentation and interpretation, it is useful to isolate and separately consider these factors.
Accordingly, we move on to the relation between reciprocity and kinship rank, but with this proviso: propositions about the covariation of
kinship distance or of kinship rank and reciprocity can be argued separately, even validated separately to the extent to which it is possible to
select instances in which only the factor at issue is in play—holding
“other things constant”—but the propositions do not present themselves separately in fact. The obvious course of further research is to
work out the power of the several “variables” during combined plays. At
best only the beginnings of this course are suggested here.
Rank difference as much as kinship distance supposes an economic
relation. The vertical, rank axis of exchange—or the implication of
rank—may affect the form of the transaction, just as the horizontal
kinship-distance axis affects it. Rank is to some extent privilege, droit du
seigneur, and it has its responsibilities, noblesse oblige. The dues and duties
fall to both sides, both high and low have their claims, and feudal
terms indeed do not convey the economic equity of kinship ranking.
In its true historic setting noblesse oblige hardly cancelled out the droits
du seigneur. In primitive society social inequality is more the organization of economic equality. Often, in fact, high rank is only secured or
sustained by o’ercrowing generosity: the material advantage is on the
subordinate’s side. Perhaps it is too much to see the relation of parent
and child as the elemental form of kinship ranking and its economic
ethic. It is true, nevertheless, that paternalism is a common metaphor
of primitive chieftainship. Chieftainship is ordinarily a relation of
higher descent. So it is singularly appropriate that the chief is their
“father,” they his “children,” and economic dealings between them
cannot help but be affected.
The economic claims of rank and subordination are interdependent.
The exercise of chiefly demand opens the way to solicitation from below,
and vice versa—not uncommonly a moderate exposure to the “larger
world” is enough to evoke native reference to customary chiefly dues
as local banking procedure (cf. Ivens, 1927, p. 32). The word then for
the economic relation between kinship ranks is “reciprocity.” The reciprocity, moreover, is fairly classed as “generalized.” While not as sociable

187

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

188

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

as the run of assistance among close kinsmen, it does lean toward
that side of the reciprocity continuum. Goods are in truth yielded to
powers-that-be, perhaps on call and demand, and likewise goods may
have to be humbly solicited from them. Still the rationale is often assistance
and need, and the supposition of returns correspondingly indefinite.
Reciprocation may be left until a need precipitates it, it bears no necessary equivalence to the initial gift, and the material flow can be unbalanced in favor of one side or the other for a long time.
Reciprocity is harnessed to various principles of kinship rank.
Generation-ranking, with the elders the privileged parties, may be
of significance among hunters and gatherers not merely in the life of
the family but in the life of the camp as a whole, and generalized reciprocity between juniors and seniors a correspondingly broad rule
of social exchange (cf. Radcliffe-Brown,1948, pp. 42–43). The Trobrianders have a name for the economic ethic appropriate between
parties of different rank within common descent groups—pokala. It
is the rule that “Junior members of a sub-clan are expected to render gifts and services to their seniors, who in return are expected to
confer assistance and material benefits on the juniors” (Powell,1960,
p. 126). Even where rank is tied to genealogical seniority and consummated in office power—chieftainship properly so called—the
ethic is the same. Take Polynesian chiefs, officeholders in large,
segmented polities: supported on the one hand by various chiefly
dues, they are freighted, as many have observed, with perhaps even
greater obligations to the underlying population. Probably always
the “economic basis” of primitive politics is chiefly generosity—at
one stroke an act of positive morality and a laying of indebtedness
upon the commonalty. Or, to take a larger view, the entire political
order is sustained by a pivotal flow of goods, up and down the social
hierarchy, with each gift not merely connoting a status relation but,
as a generalized gift not directly requited, compelling a loyalty.
In communities with established rank orders, generalized reciprocity is enforced by the received structure, and once in operation the
exchange has redundant effects on the rank system. There is a large
range of societies, however, in which rank and leadership are in the
main achieved; here reciprocity is more or less engaged in the formation of rank itself, as a “starting mechanism.” The connection between

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

reciprocity and rank is brought to bear in the first case in the form, “to
be noble is to be generous,” in the second case, “to be generous is
to be noble.” The prevailing rank structure influences economic relations in the former instance; the reciprocity influences hierarchical
relations in the latter. (An analogous feedback occurs in the context of
kinship distance. Hospitality is frequently employed to suggest sociability—this is discussed later. John Tanner, one of those “feral Whites”
who grew to manhood among the Indians, relates an anecdote even
more to the point: recalling that his Ojibway family was once saved
from starvation by a Muskogean family, he noted that if any of his
own people ever afterwards met any of the latter, “he would call him
‘brother,’ and treat him as such” [Tanner, 1956, p. 24].)
The term “starting mechanism” is Gouldner’s. He explains in this
way how reciprocity may be considered a starting mechanism:
. . . it helps to initiate social interaction and is functional in the early
phases of certain groups before they have developed a differentiated
and customary set of status duties. . . . Granted that the question of
origins can readily bog down in a metaphysical morass, the fact is
that many concrete social systems [perhaps “relations and groups”
is more apt] do have determinate beginnings. Marriages are not made
in heaven. . . . Similarly, corporations, political parties, and all manner
of groups have their beginnings. . . . People are continually brought
together in new juxtapositions and combinations, bringing with them
the possibilities of new social systems. How are these possibilities
realized? . . . Although this perspective may at first seem somewhat
alien to the functionalist, once it is put to him, he may suspect that
certain kinds of mechanisms, conducive to the crystallization of social
systems out of ephemeral contacts, will in some measure be institutionalized or otherwise patterned in any society. At this point he would
be considering “starting mechanisms.” In this way, I suggest, the
norm of reciprocity provides one among many starting mechanisms.
(Gouldner, 1960, pp. 176–177)

Economic imbalance is the key to deployment of generosity, of generalized reciprocity, as a starting mechanism of rank and leadership.
A gift that is not yet requited in the first place “creates a something
between people”: it engenders continuity in the relation, solidarity—at

189

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

190

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

least until the obligation to reciprocate is discharged. Secondly, falling
under “the shadow of indebtedness,” the recipient is constrained in
his relations to the giver of things. The one who has benefited is held
in a peaceful, circumspect, and responsive position in relation to his
benefactor. The “norm of reciprocity,” Gouldner remarks, “makes two
interrelated minimal demands: (1) people should help those who
have helped them, and (2) people should not injure those who have
helped them” (1960, p. 171). These demands are as compelling in the
highlands of New Guinea as in the prairies of Peoria—“Gifts [among
Gahuka-Gama] have to be repaid. They constitute a debt, and until
discharged the relationship of the individuals involved is in a state of
imbalance. The debtor has to act circumspectly towards those who
have this advantage over him or otherwise risk ridicule” (Read, 1959,
p. 429). The esteem that accrues to the generous man all to one side,
generosity is usefully enlisted as a starting mechanism of leadership
because it creates followership. “Wealth in this finds him friends,” Denig
writes of the aspiring Assiniboin, “as it does on other occasions everywhere” (Denig, 1928–29, p. 525).
Apart from highly organized chiefdoms and simple hunters and
gatherers, there are many intermediate tribal peoples among whom
pivotal local leaders come to prominence without yet becoming holders of office and title, of ascribed privilege and of sway over corporate
political groups. They are men who “build a name” as it is said, “bigmen” they may be reckoned, or “men of importance,” “bulls,” who
rise above the common herd, who gather followers and thus achieve
authority. The Melanesian “big-man” is a case in point. So too the
Plains Indian “chief.” The process of gathering a personal following
and that of ascent to the summits of renown is marked by calculated
generosity—if not true compassion. Generalized reciprocity is more
or less enlisted as a starting mechanism.
In diverse ways, then, generalized reciprocity is engaged with
the rank order of the community. Yet we have already characterized the economics of chieftainship in other transactional terms,
as redistribution (or large-scale pooling). At this juncture the evolutionist question is posed: “When does one give way then to the
other, reciprocity to redistribution?” This question, however, may
mislead. Chiefly redistribution is not different in principle from

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

kinship-rank reciprocity. It is, rather, based upon the reciprocity
principle, a highly organized form of that principle. Chiefly redistribution is a centralized, formal organization of kinship-rank reciprocities, an extensive social integration of the dues and obligations
of leadership. The real ethnographic world does not present us with
the abrupt “appearance” of redistribution. It presents approximations and kinds of centricity. The apparent course of wisdom is to
hinge our characterizations—of rank reciprocities versus a system
of redistribution—on formal differences in the centralization process, and in this way to resolve the evolutionist issue.
A big-man system of reciprocities may be quite centralized and a
chiefly system quite decentralized. A thin line separates them, but it is
perhaps significant. Between centricity in a Melanesian big-man economy such as Siuai (Oliver, 1955) and centricity in a Northwest Coast
chiefdom such as the Nootka (Drucker, 1951) there is little to choose.
A leader in each case integrates the economic activity of a (more or
less) localized following: he acts as a shunting station for goods flowing reciprocally between his own and other like groups of society.
The economic relation to followers is also the same: the leader is the
central recipient and bestower of favors. The thin line of difference is
this: the Nootka leader is an officeholder in a lineage (house group),
his following is this corporate group, and his central economic position is ascribed by right of chiefly due and chiefly obligation. So centricity is built into the structure. In Siuai, it is a personal achievement.
The following is an achievement—a result of generosity bestowed—
the leadership an achievement, and the whole structure will as such
dissolve with the demise of the pivotal big-man. Now I think that
most of us concerned with “redistributive economies” have come to
include Northwest Coast peoples under this head; whereas assigning
Siuai that status would at least provoke disagreement. This suggests
that the political organization of reciprocities is implicitly recognized
as a decisive step. Where kinship-rank reciprocity is laid down by
office and political grouping, and becomes sui generis by virtue of customary duty, it takes on a distinctive character. The distinctive character may be usefully named—chiefly redistribution.
A further difference in economies of chiefly redistribution is worth
remarking. It is another difference in centricity. The flow of goods

191

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

192

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

both into and out of the hands of powers-that-be is for the most part
unintegrated in certain ethnographic instances. Subordinates in severalty and on various occasions render stuff to the chief, and often
in severalty receive benefits from him. While there is always some
massive accumulation and large-scale handout—say during rites of
chieftainship—the prevailing flow between chief and people is fragmented into independent and small transactions: a gift to the chief
from here, some help given out there. So aside from the special occasion, the chief is continuously turning over petty stocks. This is the
ordinary situation in the smaller Pacific island chiefdoms—e.g., Moala
(Sahlins, 1962), apparently Tikopia—and it may be generally true of
pastoralist chiefdoms. On the other hand, chiefs may glory in massive
accumulations and more or less massive dispensations, and at times
too in large stores on hand congealed by pressure on the commonalty.
Here the independent act of homage or noblesse oblige is of less significance. And if, in addition, the social scale of chiefly redistribution is
­extensive—the polity large, dispersed, and segmented—one confronts
a measure of centricity approximating the classical magazine economies of antiquity.
Appendix B presents illustrative ethnographic materials on the
relation between rank and reciprocity. (See the citation from Malo
under B.4.2 and from Bartram under B.5.2 on magazine economies
of various scale.)
RECIPROCITY AND WEALTH
According to their [the Yukaghir] way of thinking, “a man who possesses provisions must share them with those who do not possess
them” (Jochelson, 1926, p. 43).
This habit of share and share alike is easily understandable in a community where everyone is likely to find himself in difficulties from time
to time, for it is scarcity and not sufficiency that makes people generous, since everybody is thereby ensured against hunger. He who
is in need to-day receives help from him who may be in like need
tomorrow.
(Evans-Pritchard, 1940, p. 85)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

One of the senses of previous remarks on rank and reciprocity is that
rank distinctions, or attempts to promote them, tend to extend generalized exchange beyond the customary range of sharing. The same
upshot may come of wealth differences between parties, often anyhow
associated with rank differences.
If one is poor and one’s comrade is rich, well, there are certain constraints on acquisitiveness in our dealings—at least if we are to remain
comrades, or even acquaintances, for very long. There are particularly
restraints on the wealthier, if not a certain richesse oblige.
That is to say, given some social bond between those who exchange, differences in fortune between them compel a more altruistic (generalized)
transaction than is otherwise appropriate. A difference in affluence—
or in capacity to replenish wealth—would lower the sociability content of balanced dealing. As far as the exchange balances, the side that
cannot afford it has sacrificed in favor of the side that did not need it.
The greater the wealth gap, therefore, the greater the demonstrable
assistance from rich to poor that is necessary just to maintain a given
degree of sociability. Reasoning further on the same line, the inclination toward generalized exchange deepens where the economic gap
amounts to oversupply and undersupply of customary requirements
and, especially, of urgent stuff. The thing to look for is food-sharing
between haves and have-nots. It is one thing to demand returns on
woodpecker scalps, yet one spares a dime—brother!—for even a hungry stranger.
The “brother” is important. That scarcity and not sufficiency
makes people generous is understandable, functional, “where
everyone is likely to find himself in difficulties from time to time.”
It is most understandable, however, and most likely, where kinship
community and kinship morality prevail. That whole economies are
organized by the combined play of scarcity and differential accumulation is no secret to Economic Science. But then the societies
involved do not wrest a livelihood as limited and uncertain as the
Nuer’s, nor do they meet hardship as kinship communities. It is
such circumstances precisely that make invidious accumulation of
fortune intolerable and dysfunctional. And if the affluent do not
play the game, they ordinarily can be forced to disgorge, in one way
or another:

193

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

194

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

A Bushman will go to any lengths to avoid making other Bushmen
jealous of him, and for this reason the few possessions the
Bushmen have are constantly circling among members of their
groups. No one cares to keep a particularly good knife too long,
even though he may want it desperately, because he will become
the object of envy; as he sits by himself polishing a fine edge on the
blade he will hear the soft voices of the other men in his band saying: “Look at him there, admiring his knife while we have nothing.”
Soon somebody will ask him for his knife, for everybody would like
to have it, and he will give it away. Their culture insists that they
share with each other, and it has never happened that a Bushman
failed to share objects, food, or water with other members of his
band, for without very rigid co-operation Bushmen could not survive
the famines and droughts that the Kalahari offers them.
(Thomas, 1959, p. 22)

Should the potential for poverty be extreme, as for food collectors
such as these Bushmen, best that the inclination to share out one’s
abundance be made lawful. Here it is a technical condition that some
households day in and day out will fail to meet their requirements.
The vulnerability to food shortage can be met by instituting continuous sharing within the local community. I think this the best way
to interpret tabus that prohibit hunters from eating game they bring
down, or the less drastic and more common injunction that certain
large animals be shared through the camp—“the hunter kills, other
people have, say the Yukaghir” (Jochelson, 1926, p. 124). Another way
to make food-sharing the rule, if not a rule, is to freight it heavily with
moral value. If this is the case, incidentally, sharing will break out not
merely in bad times but especially in good. The level of generalized
reciprocity “peaks” on the occasion of a windfall: now everyone can
cash in on the virtues of generosity:
They gathered almost three hundred pounds [of tsi nuts]. . . .
When the people had picked all they could find, when every possible bag was full, they said they were ready to go to Nama, but
when we brought the jeep and began to load it they were already
busy with their endless preoccupation, that of giving and receiving,
and had already begun to give each other presents of tsi. Bushmen feel a great need to give and receive food, perhaps to cement

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

relationships with each other, perhaps to prove and strengthen
their dependence upon each other; because the opportunity to do
this does not occur unless huge quantities of food are at hand.
Bushmen always exchange presents of foods that come in huge
quantities, these being the meat of game antelope, tsi nuts, and the
nuts of the mangetti trees, which at certain seasons are scattered
abundantly all through the mangetti forests. As we waited by the
jeep Dikai gave a huge sack of tsi to her mother. Her mother gave
another sack to Gao Feet’s first wife, and Gao Feet gave a sack to
Dikai. Later, during the days that followed, the tsi was distributed
again, this time in smaller quantities, small piles or small bagfuls,
after that in handfuls, and, last, in very small quantities of cooked
tsi which people would share as they were eating. . . .
(Thomas, 1959, pp. 214–215)

The bearing of wealth differences upon reciprocity, of course, is not
independent of the play of rank and kinship distance. Real situations
are complicated. For instance, wealth distinctions probably constrain
assistance in some inverse proportion to the kinship distance of the
sides to exchange. It is poverty in the in-group particularly that engenders compassion. (Conversely, helping people in distress creates very
intense solidarity—on the principle of “a friend in need. . . . ”) On
the other hand, material distinctions between distant relatives or aliens
may not commensurately, or even at all, incline the affluent party to be
charitable. If the interests had been opposed to begin with, well now
the desperate traffic will bear more.
The observation is frequently made that any accumulation of
wealth—among such and such people—is followed hard upon by its
disbursement. The objective of gathering wealth, indeed, is often that
of giving it away. So, for example, Barnett writes of Northwest Coast
Indians that “Accumulation in any quantity by borrowing or otherwise is, in fact, unthinkable unless it be for the purpose of immediate redistribution” (1938, p. 353). The general proposition may
be allowed that the material drift in primitive societies tends on the
whole away from accumulation towards insufficiency. Thus: “In general it may be said that no one in a Nuer village starves unless all are
starving” (Evans-Pritchard, 1951, p. 132). But in view of foregoing
remarks there must be qualification. The incline toward have-nots is

195

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

196

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

steeper for more urgently than for less urgently required goods, and it
is steeper within local communities than between them.
Supposing some tendency to share in favor of need, even if qualified
by community, it is possible to draw further inferences about economic
behavior in general scarcity. During lean food seasons the incidence of
generalized exchange should rise above average, particularly in the
narrower social sectors. Survival depends now on a ­double-barreled
quickening of social solidarity and economic cooperation (see Appendix C, e.g., C.1.3). This social and economic consolidation conceivably
could progress to the maximum: normal reciprocal relations between
households are suspended in favor of pooling of resources for the
duration of emergency. The rank structure is perhaps mobilized and
engaged, either in governance of pooling or in the sense that chiefly
food reserves are now put into circulation.
Yet the reaction to depression “all depends”: it depends on the
social structure put to test and on the duration and intensity of
the shortage. For the forces that countervail are strengthened in these
biša-baša times, the tendency to look to household interests especially,
and also the tendency for compassion to be more-than-proportionately expended on close kin in need than on distant kin in the same
straits. Probably every primitive organization has its breaking-point, or
at least its turning-point. Every one might see the time when cooperation is overwhelmed by the scale of disaster and chicanery becomes
the order of the day. The range of assistance contracts progressively to
the family level; perhaps even these bonds dissolve and, washed away,
reveal an inhuman, yet most human, self-interest. Moreover, by the
same measure that the circle of charity is compressed that of “negative
reciprocity” is potentially expanded. People who helped each other
in normal times and through the first stages of disaster display now
indifference to each others’ plight, if they do not exacerbate a mutual
downfall by guile, haggle, and theft. Put another way, the whole sectoral scheme of reciprocities is altered, compressed: sharing is confined to the innermost sphere of solidarity and all else is devil take the
hindmost.
Implicit in these remarks is a plan of analysis of the normal sectoral
system of reciprocities in the given case. The prevailing reciprocity
scheme is some vector of the quality of kin-community relations

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

and the ordinary stresses developing out of imbalances in production. But it is the emergency condition that concerns us now. Here
and there in the illustrative materials to this section we see the two
predicted reactions to depressed food supplies, both more sharing
and less. Presumably the governing conditions are the community
structure on one side and the seriousness of shortage on the other.
A final remark under the head of reciprocity and wealth. A community will, if suitably organized, tighten not only under economic
threat but in the face of other present danger, of external politicalmilitary pressure, for example. In this connection, two notes on the
economics of native war parties are included in the illustrative materials appended to the present section (Appendix C: C.1.10 and C.2.5).
They illustrate an extraordinary intensity of sharing (generalized reciprocity) between haves and have-nots during preparations for attack.
(Likewise, the experience of recent wars would show that transactions
move a long way from yesterday’s dice game in the barracks to today’s
sharing of rations or cigarettes on the front line.) The sudden outbreak
of compassion is consistent with what has been said of sociability,
sharing, and wealth differences. Generalized reciprocity is not merely
the sole exchange congruent with the now serious interdependence,
it strengthens interdependence and so the chances of each and all to
survive the noneconomic danger.
Ethnographic data relevant to the propositions of this section may
be found in Appendix C.
RECIPROCITY AND FOOD
The character of the goods exchanged seems to have an independent
effect on the character of exchange. Staple foodstuffs cannot always
be handled just like anything else. Socially they are not quite like anything else. Food is life-giving, urgent, ordinarily symbolic of hearth
and home, if not of mother. By comparison with other stuff, food is
more readily, or more necessarily, shared; barkcloth and beads more
readily lend themselves to balanced gift-giving. Direct and equivalent
returns for food are unseemly in most social settings: they impugn the
motives both of the giver and of the recipient. From this several characteristic qualities of food transfers appear to follow.

197

198

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Food dealings are a delicate barometer, a ritual statement as it were,
of social relations, and food is thus employed instrumentally as a starting, a sustaining, or a destroying mechanism of sociability:
Food is something over which relatives have rights, and conversely
relatives are people who provide or take toll on one’s food.
(Richards, 1939, p. 200)

The sharing of food [among the Kuma] symbolizes an identity of
interests. . . . Food is never shared with an enemy. . . . Food is not
shared with strangers, for they are potential enemies. A man may eat
with his cognatic and affinal relatives and also, people say, with the
members of his own clan. Normally, however, only members of the
same subclan have an unequivocal right to share each other’s food.
. . . If two men or the members of two sub-subclans have a serious
and lasting quarrel, neither they nor their descendants may use one
another’s fires. . . . When affinal relatives come together at marriage,
the formal presentation of the bride and the pork and the valuables
emphasizes the separate identity of the two clans, but the people
actually participating in the ceremony share vegetable food informally, unobtrusively, as they might share it with intimate companions
within the subclan. This is a way of expressing their common interest
in linking the two groups. Symbolically, they belong now to a single
group and so are “brothers,” as affinal relatives should be.
(Reay, 1959, pp. 90–92)

Food offered in a generalized way, notably as hospitality, is good relations. As Jochelson says, putting it for the Yukaghir with near-Confucian
pith: “hospitality often turns enemies into friends, and strengthens the
amicable relations between groups foreign to one another” (1926,
p. 125). But then, a complementary negative principle is implied, that
food not offered on the suitable occasion or not taken is bad relations.
Thus the Dobuan syndrome of suspicion of everyone save the nearest
kinfolk finds its clearest expression in the social range of food-sharing
and commensality—“Food or tobacco is not accepted except within a
small circle” (Fortune, 1932, p. 170; on rules proscribing commensality, cf. pp. 74–75; Malinowski, 1915, 545). Finally there is the principle
that one does not exchange things for food, not directly that is, among

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

friends and relatives. Traffic in food is traffic between foreign interests.
(Look how a novelist quite simply suggests that one of his characters is a real bastard: “He brought his blankets to the bare house, took
silent supper with the Boss family, insisted on paying them—he could
not understand why they pretended reluctance when he offered to pay
them; food cost money; they were not in the restaurant business, but
food cost money, you could not deny that”— MacKinlay Kantor.)
In these principles of instrumental food exchange there seems little variation between peoples. Of course, the extent to which they
are employed, and which of them are employed, vary with the case.
Dobuans proscribe intervillage visiting and hospitality, no doubt for
good and sufficient reasons. Elsewhere, circumstances ranging from
economic interdependence through political strategy enjoin both visiting and the hospitable entertainment of visitors. A detailed look at
the circumstances would be beyond the present purview: the point is
that where some coming to sociable terms with visitors is desirable,
hospitality is an ordinary way of doing it. And the Dobuan syndrome
is by no means typical. Ordinarily, “Savages pride themselves in being
hospitable to strangers” (Harmon, 1957, p. 43).
Consequently the sphere of generalized exchange in food is sometimes wider than the sphere of generalized exchange in other things.
This tendency to transcend the sectoral plan is most dramatized in the
hospitality afforded trade partners, or any kinsmen from afar, who
make visits the occasion for exchanging presents (see examples in
Appendix A). Here are people whose dealings in durables are consciously balanced out—or even potentially run on caveat emptor—by
some miracle charitably supplying one another with food and shelter.
But then hospitality counters the wabuwabu lurking in the background,
and provides an atmosphere in which direct exchange of presents and
trade goods can be equitably consummated.
There is logic in an undue tendency to move food by generalized
reciprocity. Like exchange between rich and poor, or between high
and low, where food is concerned a greater inclination to sacrifice
seems required just to sustain the given degree of sociability. Sharing
needs to be extended to more distant relatives, generalized reciprocity
broadened beyond ordinary sectoral limits. (It might be recalled from
the Appendixes to previous sections that generosity is distinctively
associated with food dealing.)

199

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

200

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

About the only sociable thing to do with food is to give it away,
and the commensurably sociable return, after an interval of suitable
decency, is the return of hospitality or assistance. The implication is
not only a rather loose or imperfect balance in food dealing, but specifically a restraint on exchanges of food for other goods. One notes
with interest normative injunctions against the sale of food among
peoples possessed of primitive currencies, among certain Melanesian
and California tribes for instance. Here balanced exchange is run of the
mill. Money tokens serve as more or less general equivalents and are
exchanged against a variety of stuff. But not foodstuff. Within a broad
social sector where money talks for other things, staples are insulated
against pecuniary transactions and food shared perhaps but rarely sold.
Food has too much social value—ultimately because it has too much
use value—to have exchange value.
Food was not sold. It might be given away, but being “wild stuff”
should not be sold, according to Pomo etiquette. Manufactured articles only were bought and sold, such as baskets, bows and arrows.
(Gifford, 1926, p. 329; cf. Kroeber, 1925, p. 40,
on the Yurok—same sort of thing)
[To the Tolowa-Tututni] food was only edible, not saleable.
(Drucker 1937, p. 241; cf. DuBois, 1936, pp. 50–51)
The staple articles of food, taro, bananas, coconuts, are never sold
[by Lesu], and are given to kindred, friends, and strangers passing
through the village as an act of courtesy.
(Powdermaker, 1933, p. 195)

In a similar way, staple foodstuffs were excluded from balanced trading among Alaskan Eskimo—“The feeling was present that to trade for
food was reprehensible—and even luxury foods that were exchanged
between trade partners were transferred as presents and apart from the
main trading” (Spencer, 1959, pp. 204–205).
It would seem that common foodstuffs are likely to have an insulated “circuit of exchange,” separate from durables, particulary wealth.
(See Firth, 1950; Bohannan, 1955; Bohannan and Dalton, 1962, on
“spheres of exchange”.) Morally and socially this should be so. For

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

a wide range of social relations, balanced and direct food-for-goods
transactions (conversions) would rend the solidary bonds. Distinctive
categorizations of food versus other goods, i.e., “wealth,” express the
sociological disparity and protect food from dysfunctional comparisons of its worth—as among the Salish:
Food was not classed as “wealth” [i.e. blankets, shell ornaments,
canoes, etc.]. Nor was it treated as wealth . . . “holy food,” a Semiahmoo informant called it. It should be given freely, he felt, and could
not be refused. Food was evidently not freely exchanged with wealth.
A person in need of food might ask to buy some from another household in his community, offering wealth for it, but food was not generally offered for sale.
(Suttles,1960, p. 301; Vayda, 1961)

But an important qualification must in haste be entered. These food
and nonfood spheres are sociologically based and bounded. The immorality of food-wealth conversions has a sectoral dimension: at a certain socially peripheral point the circuits merge and thus dissolve. (At
this point, food-for-goods exchange is a “conveyance” in Bohannan
and Dalton’s usage.) Food does not move against money or other stuff
within the community or tribe, yet it may be so exchanged outside
these social contexts, and not merely under duress but as use and wont.
The Salish did customarily take food, “holy food,” to affinal relatives in
other Salish villages and received wealth in return (Suttles, 1960). Likewise, Pomo did “buy”— at any rate gave beads for—acorns, fish, and
like necessities from other communities (Kroeber,1925, p. 260; Loeb,
1926, pp. 192–193). The separation of food and wealth cycles is contextual. Within communities these are insulated circuits, insulated by
community relations; they are kept apart where a demand of return on
necessities would contradict prevailing kinship relations. Beyond this,
in the intercommunity or intertribal sector, the insulation of the food
circuit may be worn through by frictions of social distance.
(Foodstuffs, incidentally, are not ordinarily divorced from the circuit of labor assistance. On the contrary, a meal is in the host of primitive societies the customary return for labor solicited for gardening,
housebuilding, and other domestic tasks. “Wages” in the usual sense
is not at issue. The feeding amounts to an extraordinary extension to

201

202

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

other relatives and to friends of the household economy. Rather than a
tentative move toward capitalism, it is perhaps better understood by
a principle something to the opposite: that those who participate in a
productive effort have some claim on its outcome.)
ON BALANCED RECIPROCITY
We have seen generalized reciprocity in play in instrumental ways,
notably as a starting mechanism of rank distinction and also, in the
form of hospitality, as mediator of relations between persons of different communities. Balanced reciprocity likewise finds instrumental employments, but especially as formal social compact. Balanced
reciprocity is the classic vehicle of peace and alliance contracts,
substance-as-symbol of the transformation from separate to harmonious interests. Group prestations are the dramatic and perhaps the typical form, but there are instances too of interpersonal compact sealed
by exchange.
Here it is useful to recall Mauss’s dictum: “In these primitive and
archaic societies there is no middle path. . . . When two groups of men
meet they may move away or in case of mistrust or defiance they may
resort to arms; or else they can come to terms.” And the terms ought
to balance, insofar as the groups are “different men.” The relations are
too tenuous to long sustain a failure to reciprocate—“Indians notice
such things” (Goldschmidt, 1951, p. 338). They notice a lot of things.
Goldschmidt’s Nomlaki Indians in fact articulate a whole set of glosses
and paraphrases of Maussian principle, among them:
When enemies meet they call to one another. If the settlement is
friendly they approach closer and spread out their goods. One man
would throw something in the middle, one man from the other
side would throw in something for it and take the traded material
back. They trade till one side has traded everything. The ones that
have some left make fun of those who have run out, bragging about
themselves. . . . This trade takes place on the border line.
(Goldschmidt, 1951, p. 338)

Balanced reciprocity is willingness to give for that which is received.
Therein seems to be its efficacy as social compact. The striking of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

equivalence, or at least some approach to balance, is a demonstrable
foregoing of self-interest on each side, some renunciation of hostile
intent or of indifference in favor of mutuality. Against the preexisting context of separateness, the material balance signifies a new state
of affairs. This is not to deny that the transaction is consequential in
a utilitarian sense, as it may well be—and the social effect perhaps
compounded by an equitable exchange of different necessities. But
whatever the utilitarian value, and there need be none, there is always
a “moral” purpose, as Radcliffe-Brown remarked of certain Andaman
transactions: “to provide a friendly feeling . . . and unless it did this it
failed of its purpose.”
Among the many kinds of contract struck as it were by balanced
exchange, the following seem most common:
Formal Friendship or Kinship

These are interpersonal compacts of solidarity, pledges of brotherhood in some cases, friendship in others. The alliance may be sealed
by exchange of identical goods, the material counterpart of some
exchange of identities, but at any rate the transaction is likely to balance
and the exchange is of distant for close relationship (e.g., Pospisil, 1958,
pp. 86–87; Seligman, 1910, pp. 69–70). An association once so formed
may well become more sociable over time, and future transactions both
parallel and compound this trend by becoming more generalized.
Affirmation of Corporate Alliances

One may place in this category the various feasts and entertainments
reciprocally tendered between friendly local groups and communities,
such as certain of the interclan vegetable-heap presentations in the
New Guinea Highlands or inter-village social feasts in Samoa or New
Zealand.
Peace-Making

These are the exchanges of settlement, of cessation of dispute, feud,
and warfare. Both interpersonal and collective hostilities may be thus
quieted by exchange. “‘When an equivalence is struck’, parties to an

203

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

204

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Abelam argument are satisfied: ‘talk is thrown away’ ’’(Kaberry, 1941–
42, p. 341). That is the general principle.
One may wish to include wergeld payments, compensations for
adultery, and other forms of compounding injury in this category,
as well as the exchanges that terminate warfare. They all work on the
same general principle of fair trade. (Spencer provides an interesting
Eskimo example: when a man received compensation from the abductor of his wife, the two men “inevitably” became friendly, he writes,
“because they had conceptually effected a trade” [1959, p. 81]. See
also Denig, 1928–29, p. 404; Powdermaker, 1933, p. 197; Williamson, 1912, p. 183; Deacon, 1934, p. 226; Kroeber, 1925, p. 252; Loeb,
1926, pp. 204–205; Hogbin, 1939, pp. 79, 91–92; etc.)
Marital Alliance

Marriage prestations are of course the classic form of exchange as
social compact. I have little to add to the received anthropological discussion, except a slight qualification about the character of reciprocity
in these transactions, and even this may be superfluous.
It does sometimes miss the point, however, to view marital exchange
as perfectly balanced prestation. The transactions of marriage, and perhaps contingent future affinal exchange as well, are often not exactly
equal. For one thing, an asymmetry of quality is commonplace:
women move against hoes or cattle, toga against oloa, fish against pigs.
In the absence of some secular convertibility, or of a mutual standard
of value, the transfer seems to an extent one of incomparables; neither
equivalent nor total, the transaction may be of incommensurables. In
any event, and even where the same sorts of things are exchanged, one
side or the other may be conceived to benefit unduly, at least for the
time being. This lack of precise balance is socially of the essence.
For unequal benefit sustains the alliance as perfect balance could
not. Truly, the people concerned—and/or the ethnographer—might
muse that in the fullness of time accounts between affines even out.
Or losses and gains may be cancelled by circular or statistical patterns
of alliance. Or some balance in goods, at least, may obtain in the total
political economy, where the flow of payments upwards (against a flow
of women downwards) through a series of ranked lineages is reversed

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

by redistribution from the top (cf. Leach, 1951). Yet it is socially critical that over a certain term, and perhaps forever, the exchange between
two groups united by a marriage has not been balanced. Insofar as
the things transferred are of different quality, it may be difficult ever
to calculate that the sides are “even-steven.” This is a social good. The
exchange that is symmetrical or unequivocally equal carries some disadvantage from the point of view of alliance: it cancels debts and thus
opens the possibility of contracting out. If neither side is “owing”
then the bond between them is comparatively fragile. But if accounts
are not squared, then the relationship is maintained by virtue of “the
shadow of indebtedness,” and there will have to be further occasions
of association, perhaps as occasions of further payment.
Moreover, and quite obviously, an asymmetrical exchange of different things lends itself to alliance that is complementary. The marital
bond between groups is not always, maybe not even usually, some
sort of fifty-fifty partnership between homologous parties. One group
surrenders a woman, another gets her; in a patrilineal context the
wife-receivers have secured continuity, something at the expense of
the wife-givers, at least on this occasion. There has been a differential transfer: the groups are socially related in a complementary and
asymmetrical way. Likewise, in a ranked lineage system the giving of
women may be a specification of the set of subordinate-superordinate
relations. Now in these cases, the several rights and duties of alliance
are symbolized by the differential character of transfers, are attached
to complementary symbols. Asymmetrical prestations secure the complementary alliance once again as perfectly balanced, symmetrical, or
all-out total prestations would not.
The casual received view of reciprocity supposes some fairly direct
one-for-one exchange, balanced reciprocity, or a near approximation
of balance. It may not be inappropriate, then, to footnote this discussion with a respectful demur: that in the main run of primitive
societies, taking into account directly utilitarian as well as instrumental transactions, balanced reciprocity is not the prevalent form of
exchange. A question might even be raised about the stability
of balanced reciprocity. Balanced exchange may tend toward selfliquidation. On one hand, a series of honorably balanced dealings
between comparatively distant parties builds trust and confidence, in

205

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

206

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

effect reduces social distance, and so increases the chances for more
generalized future dealings—as the initial blood-brotherhood transaction creates a “credit rating,” as it were. On the other hand, a renege
acts to sever relations—as failure to make returns breaks a tradepartnership—if it does not actually invite chicanery in return. May we
conclude that balanced reciprocity is inherently unstable? Or perhaps
that it requires special conditions for continuity?
The societal profile of reciprocity, at any rate, most often inclines
toward generalized modes. In the simpler hunting groups the generalized assistance of close kinship seems usually dominant; in neolithic
chiefdoms this is supplemented by kinship-rank obligations. There are
nonetheless societies of certain type in which balanced exchange, if
not exactly dominant, acquires unusual prominence. Interest attaches
to these societies, not alone for the emphasis on balanced reciprocity,
but for what goes with it.
The well-known “labor exchange” in Southeast Asian hinterland
communities brings these immediately to mind. Here is a set of peoples who, placed against the main run of primitive societies, offer
departures in economy, and social structure as well, that cannot fail
to kindle a comparative interest. The well-described Iban (Freeman
1955, 1960), Land Dayak (Geddes, 1954, 1957; cf. Provinse,1937)
and Lamet (Izikowitz,1951) belong in the class—some Philippine
peoples may as well, but I am uncertain how far the analysis about to
be suggested will work for the Philippines.
Now these societies are distinctive not only for uncommon internal characteristics of economy but for unusual external relations—
unusual, that is, in a strictly primitive milieu. They are hinterlands
engaged by petty market trade—and perhaps also by political dominance (e.g., Lamet)—to more sophisticated cultural centers. From
the perspective of the advanced centers, they are backwaters serving as secondary sources of rice and other goods (cf. VanLeur, 1955,
especially pp. 101 f, for some hints about the economic significance
of hinterland provisioning in Southeast Asia). From the hinterlands
view, the critical aspect of the intercultural relation is that the subsistence staple, rice, is exported for cash, iron tools, and prestige goods,
many of the last quite expensive. It is suggested—with all the deference that must be supplied by one who has no research experience

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

in the area—that the peculiar social-economic character of Southeast
Asian hinterland tribes is congruent with this unusual deployment of
household subsistence surpluses. The implication of an external trade
in rice is not merely an internal ban on sharing it, or a corresponding
requirement of quid-pro-quo in intracommunity dealings, but departure from ordinary characteristics of primitive distribution in virtually
all respects.
The engagement with the market makes a key minimal demand:
that internal community relations permit household accumulation of
rice, else the amounts required for external exchange will never be
forthcoming. This stipulation must prevail in the face of limited and
uncertain modes of rice production. The fortunate households cannot
be responsible for the unfortunate; if internal leveling is encouraged
then the external trade relations are simply not sustained.
The set of consequences for the economy and polity of the hinterland tribal communities appear to include: (1) Different households,
by virtue of variations in ratio and number of effective producers,
amass different amounts of the subsistence-export staple. The productive differences range between surfeit above and deficit below family
consumption requirements. These differences, however, are not liquidated by sharing in favor of need. Instead (2) the intensity of sharing
within the village or tribe is low, and (3) the principal reciprocal relation between households is a closely calculated balanced exchange of
labor service. As Geddes remarks of the Land Dayak: “.. co-operation
beyond the household, except on business lines where every service
must have an equal return, is at a low level” (1954, p. 34). Balanced
labor-exchange, of course, maintains the productive advantage (accumulation capacity) of the family with more adult workers. The only
goods that customarily move in generalized reciprocity are game and
perhaps large domestic animals sacrificed in family ceremonies. Such
items are widely distributed through the community (cf. Izikowitz,
1951), much as hunters would share them, but the sharing of meat
is not as decisive in structuring interfamilial relations as the lack of
sharing decreed by export of staples. (4) Even household commensality may be rather rigidly supervised, subjected to accounting of each
person’s rice dole in the interest of developing an exchange reserve,
hence less sociable than ordinary primitive commensality (compare,

207

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

208

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

for example, Izikowitz, 1951, pp. 301–302 with Firth, 1936, pp. 112–
116). (5) Restricted sharing of staples, demanded by articulation with
the siphoning market, finds its social complement in an atomization
and fragmentation of community structure. Lineages, or like systems
of extensive and corporate solidary relations, are incompatible with
the external drain on household staples and the corresponding posture
of self-interest required vis-à-vis other households. Large local descent
groups are absent or inconsequential. Instead, the solidary relations
are of the small family itself, with various and changing interpersonal
kin ties the only such nexus of connection between households. Economically, these extended kin ties are weak ones:
A household is not only a distinct unit, but one which minds its own
business. Perforce, it has to do so, because it has with other households no formal relations, sanctioned by custom, on which it can
rely for certain support. Indeed, the absence of such structured relationships is a condition of the society as at present organized. In
the main economic affairs, cooperation with others is based upon
contract and not primarily upon kinship. . . . As a result of this situation, ties which persons have with others in the community tend
to be widespread, but limited to sentiment and sociability, often
sadly so.
(Geddes, 1954, p. 42)

(6) Prestige apparently hinges upon obtaining exotic items—Chinese
pottery, brass gongs, etc.—from the outside in exchange for rice or
work. Prestige does not, obviously cannot, rest on generous assistance to one’s fellows in the manner of a tribal big-man. The exotic
goods figure internally as ceremonial display items and in marriage
prestations—thus insofar as status is linked to them it is principally
as possession and ability to make payments, again not through giving
them away. (“Wealth does not help a man to become chief because it
gives him power to distribute largesse. Riches rarely incline a Dayak to
charity, although they may to usury’’ [Geddes, 1954, p.50].) No one
then obligates others very much. No one creates followers. As a result
there are no strong leaders, a fact which probably contributes to the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

atomization of the community and may have repercussions on the
intensity of land use (cf. Izikowitz, 1951).
In these Southeast Asian communities, the prevalence of balanced
reciprocity does seem connected with special circumstances. But then
the circumstances suggest that it is not legitimate to involve these peoples in the present context of tribal economics. By the same token,
their use in debating issues of primitive economics, as Geddes uses
the Land Dayak to argue against “primitive communism,” seems not
very pertinent. Perhaps they are best classed with peasants—so long
as one does not thereupon suggest, as is unfortunately often done
under the label “economic anthropology,” that “peasant” and “primitive” belong together in some undifferentiated type of economy distinguished negatively as whatever-it-is that is outside the province of
orthodox economic analysis.
There are, however, incontestable examples of societal emphasis on
balanced reciprocity in primitive settings. Primitive monies serving as
media of exchange at more or less fixed rates argue this. The monies
amount to the suggested special mechanisms for maintaining balance.
It is worthwhile to inquire into their incidence and their economic
and social concomitants.
Yet this is not to be hazarded without some formal definition of
“primitive money,” a problem approaching the status of a classic
dilemma in comparative economics. On one side, any thing that has
a “money use”—as we know money uses: payments, exchange, standard, etc.—may be taken for “money.” If so, probably every society
enjoys the dubious benefits, inasmuch as some category of goods is
usually earmarked for certain payments. The alternative is less relativistic and therefore seems more useful for comparative generalizations:
to agree on some minimal use and quality of the stuff. The strategy,
as Firth suggests, is not to question “What is primitive money?” but
“What is it useful to include in the category of primitive money?”
(1959, p. 39). His specific suggestion, which as I understand it centrally involves the medium-of-exchange function, does indeed appear
useful. (“My own view is that to entitle an object to be classified as
money, it should be of a generally acceptable type, serving to facilitate
the conversion of one object or service into terms of another and used
as a standard of value thereby” [Firth, 1959, pp. 38–39].)

209

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

210

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Let “money” refer to those objects in primitive societies that have
token value rather than use value and that serve as means of exchange.
The exchange use is limited to certain categories of things—land and
labor are ordinarily excluded—and is brought to bear only between
parties of certain social relation. In the main it serves as an indirect
bridge between goods (C-M-C’) rather than commercial purposes
(M-C-M’). These limitations would justify the phrase “primitive
money.” If all this is agreeable, it further appears that pristine developments of primitive money are not broadly spread through the ethnographic scene, but are restricted to certain areas: especially western
and central Melanesia, aboriginal California, and certain parts of the
South American tropical forest. (Monies may also have developed in
pristine contexts in Africa, but I am not expert enough to disentangle their distribution from archaic civilizations and ancient “international” trade.)
This is also to say that primitive money is associated with an historically specific type of primitive economy, an economy with a marked
incidence of balanced exchange in peripheral social sectors. It is not
a phenomenon of simple hunting cultures—if I may be permitted,
cultures of a band level. Neither is primitive money characteristic of
the more advanced chiefdoms, where wealth tokens though certainly
encountered tend to bear little exchange load. The regions noted—
Melanesia, California, South American tropical forest—are (or were)
occupied by societies of an intermediate sort, such as have been called
“tribal” (Sahlins,1961; Service, 1962) or “homogeneous” and “segmented tribes” (Oberg,1955). They are distinguished from band
systems not merely for more settled conditions of life—often associated with neolithic versus paleolithic production—but principally
for a larger and more complex tribal organization of constituent local
groupings. The several local settlements of tribal societies are bound
together both by a nexus of kin relations and by cross-cutting social
institutions, such as a set of clans. Yet the relatively small settlements
are autonomous and self-governing, a feature which in turn distinguishes tribal from chiefdom plans. The local segments of the latter are
integrated into larger polities, as divisions and subdivisions, by virtue
of principles of rank and a structure of chieftainships and subchieftainships. The tribal plan is purely segmental, the chiefdom pyramidal.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

This evolutionary classification of social-cultural types is admittedly
loose. I hope not to raise an issue over it, for it has been offered merely
to direct attention to contrasting structural features of primitivemoney areas. They are precisely the kinds of features that, given previous argumentation, suggest an unusual incidence of balanced reciprocity. A greater play of balanced exchange in tribal over band societies
is argued in part by a greater proportion of craft goods and services
in the societal economic output. Foodstuffs, while still the decisive
share of a tribal economic product, decline relatively. Transactions in
durables, more likely to be balanced than food transactions, increase.
But more important, the proportion of peripheral-sector exchange,
the incidence of exchange among more distantly related people, is
likely to be considerably greater in tribal than in band societies. This
is understandable by reference to the more definite segmental plan
of tribes, which is also to say the more definite sectoral breaks in the
social structure.
The several residential segments of tribes are comparatively stable
and formally constituted. And a corporate political solidarity is as characteristic of the tribal segment as it is lacking in flexible camp-andband arrangements of hunters. Tribal segmental structure is also more
extensive, including perhaps internal lineage groupings in the political segments, the set (and sometimes segmentary subsets) of political
segments, and the tribal-foreigner division. Now the accretion over
band organization is particularly in peripheral structure, in the
development of the intratribal and intertribal sectors. Here is where
exchange encounters increase, whether these be instrumental, peacemaking exchanges, or frankly materialistic dealings. The accretion in
exchange then is in the social areas of balanced reciprocity.
A chiefdom, in further contrast, liquidates and pushes out peripheral sectors by transforming external into internal relations, by including adjacent local groups within enclaving political unions. At the
same time, the incidence of balanced reciprocity is depressed, in virtue of both the “internalization” of exchange relations and their centralization. Balanced exchanges should thus decline in favor of more
generalized with the attainment of a chiefdom level. The implication
for primitive money is perhaps illustrated by its absence in the Trobriands, despite the fact that this island of chiefdoms is set in a sea of

211

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

212

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

money-using tribes, or by the progressive attentuation in exchangeuses of shell beads moving northward from tribal California to protochiefdom British Columbia.
The hypothesis about primitive money—offered with due caution
and deference—is this: it occurs in conjunction with unusual incidence of balanced reciprocity in peripheral social sectors. Presumably
it facilitates the heavy balanced traffic. The conditions that encourage
primitive money are most likely to occur in the range of primitive
societies called “tribal” and are unlikely to be served by band or chiefdom development. But a qualification must in haste be entered. Not all
tribes provide circumstances for monetary development and certainly
not all enjoy primitive money, as the term is here understood. For the
potentiality of peripheral exchange is maximized only by some tribes.
Others remain relatively inner-directed.
First, peripheral sectors become scenes of intensive exchange in
conjunction with regional and intertribal symbiosis. An areal ecological regime of specialized tribes, the respective families and communities of which are in trade relation, is probably a necessary condition
for primitive money. Such regimes are characteristic of California and
Melanesia—about South America I am not prepared to say—but in
other tribal settings symbiosis is not characteristic and the intertribal
(or interregional) exchange sector is comparatively underdeveloped.
Perhaps just as important are circumstances that put premiums on
delayed exchange and so on tokens that store value in the interim.
The outputs of interdependent communities, for example, may be
unavoidably unbalanced in time—as between coastal and inland peoples, where an exchangeable catch of fish cannot always be met by
complementary inland products. Here a currency acceptable on all
sides very much facilitates interdependence—so that shell beads, say,
taken for fish at one time can be converted for acorns at another (cf.
Vayda, 1954; Loeb, 1926). Big-man leadership systems, it would seem
from Melanesia, may likewise render delayed balanced exchange functional. The tribal big-man operates on a fund of power consisting of
food, pigs, or the like, stuffs with the common quality that they are
not easy to keep around in large amounts over long periods. But, at the
same time, the extractive devices for accumulating these political funds
are underdeveloped, and collection of goods for a climactic giveaway

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

would have to be gradual and thus technically difficult. The dilemma
is resolvable by monetary manipulations: by converting wealth into
tokens and by calculated deployment of money in loans and exchange,
so that a time will come when a massive call on goods can be made
and the whole fund of wealth, given away, converted into status.
AN AFTERTHOUGHT
It is difficult to conclude with a dramatic flourish. The essay has not
a dramatic structure—its main drift seems downhill. And a summary
would be needlessly repetitive.
But there is a curiosity worth remarking. Here has been given a
discourse on economics in which “economizing” appears mainly as
an exogenous factor! The organizing principles of economy have been
sought elsewhere. To the extent they have been found outside man’s
presumed hedonist propensity, a strategy for the study of primitive
economics is suggested that is something the reverse of economic
orthodoxy. It may be worth while to see how far this heresy will get us.

213

214

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Appendix A

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Notes on Reciprocity and Kinship Distance

A.1.0	
Hunters and Gatherers — Generally, sectoral breaks in reciprocity
not always as definite as for neolithic peoples, but variation in
reciprocity by interpersonal kinship distance apparent. Generalized reciprocity often consists of specific obligations to
render goods to certain kinsmen (kinship dues) rather than
altruistic assistance. Notable differences between the handling
of foods and durables.
A.1.1	
Bushmen — The !Kung term lack of generosity or failure to
reciprocate “far-hearted”—a felicitious choice of words, from
our perspective.
	  Three social-material breaking points in reciprocity are
apparent in Marshall’s (1961) paper on !Kung exchange: (1) a
range of close kin in the camp with whom meat is shared,
often as customary obligation; (2) more distant kin within
the camp and other Bushmen, with whom economic relations
are characterized by “gift-giving” of durables in a more balanced fashion and transactions in meat that approximate “giftgiving”; (3) “trade” with Bantu. Marshall’s materials are
rich and indicate the play of various social considerations
and sanctions determining specific transactions. Large game
moves through a camp in several waves. Initially it is pooled
in the hunting party by the taker, with shares going also to
the arrow. “In the second distribution [here we move into
reciprocity proper] close kinship is the factor which sets the
pattern of the giving. Certain obligations are compulsory.
A man’s first obligation at this point, we were told, is to give
to his wife’s parents. He must give to them the best he has
in as generous portions as he can, while still fulfilling other
primary obligations, which are to his own parents, his
spouse, and offspring [note, these cook and eat meat separately]. He keeps a portion for himself at this time and from
it would give to his siblings, to his wife’s siblings, if they are

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

present, and to other kin, affines, and friends who are there,
possibly only in small quantities by then. Everyone who
receives meat gives again, in another wave of sharing, to his
or her parents, parents-in-law, spouses, offspring, siblings,
and others. The meat may be cooked and the quantities
small. Visitors, even though they are not close kin or affines,
are given meat by the people whom they are visiting” (Marshall, 1961, p. 238). Beyond the range of close kin, giving
meat is a matter of individual inclination in which friendship, obligation to return past favors, and other considerations come into account. But this giving is definitely more
balanced: “In the later waves of sharing when the primary
distribution and the primary kinship obligations have been
fulfilled, the giving of meat from one’s own portion has the
quality of gift-giving. !Kung society requires at this point
only that a person should give with reasonable generosity
in proportion to what he has received and not keep more
than an equitable amount for himself in the end, and that
the person who receives a gift of meat must give a reciprocal gift some time in the future” (p. 239). Marshall reserves
“gift-giving” to the exchange of durables; this occurs also,
and importantly, between !Kung of different bands. One
should neither refuse such gifts nor fail to make a return.
Much of the gift-giving is instrumental, having principally
social effects. Even asking for a thing, claimed one man,
“formed a love” between people. It means “he still loves
me, that is why he is asking.” And Marshall adds laconically,
“At least it forms a something between people, I thought”
(p. 245). “Gift-giving” is distinguishable from “trade”
both in form of reciprocity and social sector. “In reciprocating [a gift] one does not give the same object back
again but something of comparable value. The interval
of time between receiving and reciprocating varied from
a few weeks to a few years. Propriety requires that there
be no unseemly haste. The giving must not look like trading” (p. 244). The mechanics of trading are not specified.

215

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

216

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

“Negotiation” however is mentioned; the implication is of
haggle. The social sphere is in any case clear: “The !Kung do
not trade among themselves. They consider the procedure
undignified and avoid it because it is too likely to stir up bad
feelings. They trade with Bantu, however, in the settlements
along the B.P. border. . . . The odds are with the Bantu in the
trading. Big, aggressive, and determined to have what they
want, they easily intimidate the Bushmen. Several !Kung
informants said that they tried not to trade with Herero if it
was possible to avoid it because, although the Tswana were
hard bargainers, the Herero were worse”(p. 242).
	  Intense generalized reciprocity within Bushmen camps
and bands—especially food-sharing—is also indicated by
Thomas (1959, pp. 22, 50, 214–215) and Schapera (1930,
pp. 98–101, 148). Interband exchange, however, is characterized as “barter” by Schapera (1930, p. 146; cf. Thomas’s
amusing anecdote of the trouble that developed between a
man and woman of different groups over an unrequited gift
presented to the father of the former by the woman’s father
[1959, pp. 240–242].)
	  Theft reported unknown to them (Marshall, 1961, pp. 245–
246; Thomas, 1959, pp. 206). However, Schapera implies it
exists (1930, p. 148).
A.1.2	
Congo Pygmies — In general, the scheme of reciprocity looks
very much like the Bushmen’s, including a rather impersonal
exchange with “Negroes” (Putnam, 1953, p. 322; Schebesta
1933, p. 42; Turnbull, 1962). Hunting spoils, large game
especially, are shared out in the camp, on a kinship-distance
basis it appears—Putnam implies that first the family shares,
then the “family group” gets shares (1953, p. 332; cf. Schebesta, 1933, pp. 68, 124, 244).
Washo — “Sharing obtained at every level of Washo social
A.1.3	
organization. Sharing also decreased as kinship and residence
distances increased” (Price, 1962, p. 37). It is difficult to say
where “trade” leaves off and “gift-giving” begins, but “In
trade there tended to be immediate reciprocation while gift

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

exchange often involved a time lapse. Trade also tended to be
competitive and to increase with less intense social ties. Trade
involved explicit negotiation and social status was secondary
as a factor in the transaction” (p. 49).
A.1.4	
Semang — Sharp sectoral break in reciprocity at the “family
group” (band) border: “Each family contributes from its own
food, already cooked and prepared, to every other family. If
one family on any particular day is unusually well supplied,
they give generously to all kindred families, even if it leaves
them with too little. If other families not belonging to the
group are in the camp, they do not share, or only to a very
small extent, in the distribution” (Schebesta, n.d., p. 84).
A.1.5	
Andamans — Radcliffe-Brown’s (1948) account suggests a
higher level of generalized reciprocity within the local group,
particularly in food dealings and in transactions between
junior and senior generations (cf. pp. 42–43), and more balanced forms of reciprocity between people of different bands,
particularly in durables. The exchange of presents is characteristic of interband meetings, an exchange that could amount
to swapping local specialties. In this sector, “It requires a good
deal of tact to avoid the unpleasantness that may arise if a man
thinks he has not received things as valuable as he has given”
(p. 43; cf. pp. 83–84; Man, n.d., p. 120).
A.1.6	
Australian Aboriginals — A number of formal, compulsory kin
dues and also formal precedence orders for sharing food
and other goods with relatives of the camp (see Elkin, 1954,
pp. 110–111; Meggitt, 1962, pp. 118, 120, 131, 139, etc.; Warner, 1937, pp. 63, 70, 92–95; Spencer and Gillen, 1927, p. 490).
	  A strong obligation to share out food in the horde (RadcliffeBrown, 1930–31, p. 438; Spencer and Gillen, 1927,
pp. 37–39).
	  Yir-Yiront exchange seems to parallel the Bushman scheme
(above). Sharp notes that reciprocity varies on both sides
of the set of customary kin dues, toward balance beyond
and toward generalized reciprocity in the narrowest sphere
of closest kin. Giving to persons outside the range of those

217

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

218

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

entitled dues “amounts to compulsory exchange. . . . But
there is also irregular giving, though within a relatively narrow social range, for which the incentives seem to be chiefly
sentimental, and which may be considered altruistic; this may
lead to a desire to acquire property in order to give it away”
(Sharp, 1934–35, pp. 37–38).
	  On the connection between assistance and close kinship:
Meggitt observes of the Walbiri that “. . . a man who has several spears parts with them willingly; but, should he have only
one, his son or father should not ask for it. If he is asked, the
man usually gives the single article to an actual or close father
or son, but he refuses distant ‘fathers’ and ‘sons’ ” (Meggitt,
1962, p. 120).
	  Balanced reciprocity, in various specific guises, is characteristic of the well-known interband and intertribal trade
exchange, which is often effected by trade partners who are
classificatory kin (see, for example, Sharp, 1952, pp. 76–77;
Warner, 1937, pp. 95, 145).
A.1.7	
Eskimo — High level of generalized reciprocity in the camp,
associated by Birket-Smith with “the fellowship of the settlement.” This concerns food in the main, particularly large animals, and especially during the winter season (Birket-Smith,
1959, p. 146; Spencer, 1959, pp. 150, 153, 170; Boas, 1884–
85, p. 562; Rink, 1875, p. 27).
	  Taken all in all, Spencer’s study of the North Alaskan
Eskimo suggests significant differences between the reciprocity appropriate among kinsmen, among trade partners, and
among nonkin who are also not trade partners. These variations concern durables, especially trade goods. Nonkin within
the camp would presumably be given some food if they are
short, but trade goods are exchanged with them, as well as
with outsiders (who are not trade partners), in an impersonal “bidding” transaction (reminiscent of Brazilian Indians’
“trade game”). Trade partnerships are formed—on quasi-kin
or institutional-friendship lines—between coastal and inland
men; the exchange is of local specialties. Partners deal without

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

haggle, indeed try to extend themselves, yet without balance
(or near balance) in exchange the partnership would dissolve.
Trade relations are specifically distinguished by Spencer from
kinship-generalized reciprocity. Thus kinsmen do not need to
enter into partnership, he says, for “A relative would always
be of assistance, an arrangement which pointed primarily to
the sharing of food and granting of shelter” (Spencer, 1959,
pp. 65–66). Again: “One would not form a partnership with
a brother, the theory being that one secured assistance and aid
from one’s close relatives in any case” (p. 170).
A.1.8	
Shoshoni — When a family did not have a great deal to share
out, as when only seeds or small animals had been taken, that
given out was to close relatives and neighbors (Steward, 1938,
pp. 74, 231, 240, 253). There seems to have been a fairly high
level of generalized reciprocity in the village, which Steward
links to the “high degree of [kin] relationship between village
members” (p. 239).
A.1.9	
Northern Tungus (mounted hunters) — Much sharing within
the clan, but food sharing most intense within the few
families of a clan that nomadized together (Shirokogoroff,
1929, pp. 195, 200, 307). According to Shirokogoroff, giftgiving among Tungus was not reciprocal, and Tungus
resented Manchu expectations on his head (p. 99); however,
he also wrote that gifts were given to guests (over and above
ordinary hospitality) and these items should be reciprocated
(p. 333). Reindeer sold only outside the clan; inside, pass as
gifts and assistance (pp. 35–36).
Oceania — The sectoral system of reciprocities is often more
A.2.0	
clear and more definite, especially in Melanesia. In Polynesia it
is overriden by centralization of reciprocities in chiefly hands
or by redistribution.
’Gawa (Busama) — Hogbin contrasts maritime intertribal trade
A.2.1	
through partnerships and inland trade with unrelated peoples, saying of the latter exchange: “The parties seem slightly
ashamed, however, and conclude their arrangements outside
the village. [Note the literal exclusion of impersonal exchange

219

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

220

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

from the ’Gawa village:] Commerce it is considered, should be
carried on away from where people live, preferably alongside
the road or the beach (the native-owned store at Busama is
located fifty yards from the nearest dwelling). The Busama
sum up the situation by saying that the maritime people give
one another presents but insist on a proper return from the
bushmen. The basis of the distinction is that on the coast
activities are confined to relatives, but so few of the beach
folk have kinsmen in the hill country that most transactions
take place of necessity between comparative strangers. [Hogbin mentions elsewhere that the bush trade is often recent.]
A certain amount of migration and intermarriage has taken
place around the seaboard, and every coastal native has kinsmen in some of the other shore villages, especially those
close at hand. When trading by sea it is with these, and these
only, that he makes exchanges. Kinship ties and bargaining
are considered to be incompatible, and all goods are handed
over as free gifts offered from motives of sentiment. Discussion of values is avoided, and the donor does the best he can
to convey the impression that no thought of a counter gift
has entered his head. Yet at a later stage, when a convenient
opportunity arises, hints are dropped of what is expected,
whether pots, mats, baskets, or food. . . . Most of the visitors go home with items at least as valuable as those with
which they came. Indeed, the closer the kinship bond the
greater the host’s generosity is, and some of them return a
good deal richer. A careful count is kept, however, and the
score is afterwards made even. . . . [The account goes on to
give examples and to note that failure to balance will cause
termination of the partnership. Now, contrast the foregoing
with reciprocity in the intravillage sector:] It is significant that
when a Busama acquired a string bag from a fellow villager, as
has recently become possible, he always gives twice what he
would pay to a more distant relative [i.e., trading partner] on
the north coast. ‘One is ashamed,’ the people explain, ‘to treat
those with whom one is familiar like a tradesman’ ” (Hogbin,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

1951, pp. 83–86). The variation in reciprocity by linear-kinship distance is also worth noting: “A presentation [of a pig]
from a close relative imposes the usual obligation to return
an animal of equivalent size on some future occasion, but no
money changes hands either when the original gift is made
or later. A similar obligation exists between distant kinsmen,
but in this case each pig has also to be paid for at its full
market price. The transaction is in line with earlier practice,
except that dog’s teeth then served as payment. The members
of the purchasers’ group help him nowadays with a few shillings, just as formerly they would have given him a string or
two of teeth” (p. 124).
A.2.2	
Kuma — Generalized reciprocity is prevalent within such
small-scale descent groups as the “sub-subclan”—“a bank
and a labour force for its members” (Reay, 1959, p. 29)—and
the subclan (p. 70). The interclan sector is characterized by
balanced exchange, by “the general emphasis on exact reciprocity between groups” (p. 47; see also pp. 55, 86–89,
126). In the external sector, balance is appropriate between
trade-partners, but without a partnership the transaction
inclines toward negative reciprocity. “In Kuma trading, there
are two distinct forms: institutionalized transactions through
trading partners, and casual encounters along the trade routes.
In the former, a man is content to conform to the ruling scale
of values . . . but in the latter he haggles for a bargain, trying
to gain a material advantage. The term for ‘trading partner’ is,
most significantly, a verb form, ‘I together I-eat.’ . . . He is, as
it were, drawn into the ‘in-group’ of clansmen and affines,
the people who should not be exploited for private ends”
(pp. 106–107, 110). Hospitality runs alongside the balanced
exchange of trade goods between partners, and “to exploit a
partner for material gain is to lose him” (p. 109). Nonpartnership exchange is mostly a recent development.
Buin Plain, Bougainville — Sectoral distinctions in reciprocity
A.2.3	
among the Siuai have been indicated in previous textual citations. A few further aspects can be mentioned here. First,

221

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

222

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

on the extremely generalized reciprocity appropriate among
very close kinship: “Gift-giving among close relatives over
and beyond the normal expectations of sharing [“sharing”
as Oliver defines it is the “pooling” of the present essay]
cannot entirely be reduced to conscious expectation of reciprocity. A father might rationalize the giving of tidbits to
his son by explaining that he expected to be cared for by the
latter in his old age, but I am convinced that some giving
between, say, father and son does not involve any desire or
expectation for reciprocation” (Oliver, 1955, p. 230). Loans
of productive goods normally brought over-and-above
returns (“interest”), but not from close relatives (p. 229).
Exchange between distant relatives and trade partners is ootu:
it is characterized by approximate equivalence but is distinguished from “sales” involving shell money (as the sale of
craft goods) by the possibility of deferring payments in ootu
(pp. 230–231). In trade-partner transactions, also, giving
above going rates is creditable, so that balance is achieved
perhaps only over the long term (see pp. 297, 299, 307,
350–351, 367–368).
	  Sectoral variations in the economy of the Buin neighbors
of the Siuai (the Terei, apparently) so impressed Thurnwald
that he suggested the existence of three “kinds of economics:
(1) the husbandry [pooling] within the family . . . ; (2) the
inter-individual and inter-familial help among near relatives
and members of a settlement united under a chief; (3) the
inter-communal relations manifested by barter between individuals belonging to different communities or strata of society” (Thurnwald, 1934–35, p. 124).
Kapauku — The difference in reciprocity between interregional
A.2.4	
and intraregional sectors of the Kapauku economy has been
noted in textual citation (above). Also notable is the fact that
kinship and friendship ties lower customary rates of exchange
in Kapauku shell-money dealings (Pospisil, 1958, p. 122).
The Kapauku data are rendered obscure by an inappropriate
economic terminology. So-called “loans,” for example, are

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

generalized transactions— “take it without repayment in the
immediate future” (p. 78; see also p. 130)—but the social
context and extent of these “loans” is not clear.
A.2.5	
Mafulu — Excepting pig-exchange, which the ethnographer
discounts as a ceremonial affair, “Exchange and barter is generally only engaged in between members of different communities and not between those of the same community”
(Williamson, 1912, p. 232).
A.2.6	
Manus — Affinal exchanges, ordinarily between Manus of the
same or different villages, are distinguished by long-term
credit, compared with the short-term credit of trade friendship
or market exchange (Mead, 1937, p. 218). Trade-friendship
exchange, while more or less balanced, is in turn to be differentiated from the more impersonal “market” exchange with
Usiai bushfellows. The trade friendships are developed
with people of distant tribes, sometimes on long-standing kinship ties. Some credit is extended to trade friends, as well as
hospitality, but market exchange is direct: the Usiai are viewed
as furtive and hostile, “whose eye is ever on driving a sharp
bargain, whose trade manners are atrocious” (Mead, 1929, p.
118; see also Mead, 1934, pp. 307–308).
A.2.7	
Chimbu — “Mutual help and sharing characterize relations
among subclan members. A man may call upon a fellow subclansman for help whenever he needs it; he may ask any wife
or daughter of a member of his subclan to give him food
when she has some. . . . However, it is only the most prominent men who can count on such services from persons outside their own subclan” (Brown and Brookfield, 1959–60,
p. 59; on the exception of “prominent men,” compare Appendix B, “Reciprocity and Kinship Rank”). The pig-exchanges
and other exchanges between clans argue balance in the
external sector here, as elsewhere in the New Guinea Highlands (compare, for example, Bulmer, 1960, pp. 9–10).
Buka Passage — The total of internal reciprocity seems limited
A.2.8	
by comparison with external trade, but there are some indications of generalized exchange in internal sectors as contrasted

223

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

224

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

with balanced, though not haggled, external exchange. In
Kurtatchi village, requests from own sibmates of the same sex
for areca or coconuts are honored without repayment though
the recipients are open to counter request; otherwise, no giving of something for nothing—save that near relatives may
take a man’s coconuts (Blackwood, 1935, pp. 452, 454; compare p. 439 f on trade).
A.2.9	
Lesu — “Free gifts” (generalized reciprocity) are especially
rendered to relatives and friends, most especially certain types
of kinsmen. These gifts are food and betel. Between villages
and moieties there are various balanced transactions (Powdermaker, 1933, pp. 195–203).
A.2.10	Dobu — As is well known, a very narrow sector of economic trust and generosity, including only susu and household. Outside of this, theft is a possibility. Intervillage
affinal exchanges more or less balanced, with village mates
helping the sponsoring susu meet its obligations (Fortune,
1932).
A.2.11	
Trobriands — The sociology of the reciprocity continuum
described by Malinowski is only partly sectoral; rank considerations (compare below) and affinal obligations notably
intrude. “Pure gift,” however, is characteristic of family relations (Malinowski, 1922, pp. 177–178); “customary payments, re-paid irregularly, and without strict equivalence”
include urigubu and contributions to a kinsman’s mortuaryceremony fund (p. 180); “gifts returned in economically
equivalent form” (or almost equivalent form) include intervillage presentations at visits, exchanges between “friends”
(apparently these are especially or exclusively outside the village), and, it seems, the “secondary” trade in strategic goods
between kula partners (pp. 184–185); “ceremonial barter with
deferred payment” (not haggled) is characteristic between
kula partners and between partners in the inland-coastal, vegetables versus fish exchange (wasi) (pp. 187–189; cf. p. 42);
“trade, pure and simple,” involving haggling, mainly in nonpartner exchange between members of “industrial” and

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

other villages within Kiriwina (pp. 189–190). The last type is
gimwali; it is characteristic also of vegetable-fish exchange in
the absence of partnership and overseas exchange accompanying kula, again in the absence of partnership (cf. pp. 361 f).
A.2.12	
Tikopia — Near kinsmen and neighbors are privileged economically (e.g., Firth, 1936, p. 399; 1950, p. 203) and are
expected to render economic assistance in various ways
(e.g., Firth, 1936, p. 116; 1950, p. 292). The necessity of
a quid pro quo seems to increase with kinship distance—thus
“forced exchange” (also known ethnographically as “coercive gift”) is a transaction of the more distant sector: “The
importance of the social category comes out . . . in cases such
as when a man wants a coconut-grating stool. If he knows of
a close kinsman who has an extra one, he goes and asks for
it and should get it without ceremony. ‘You give me a stool
for myself; your stools are two.’ It is said that the kinsman
‘rejoices’ to give it because of the tie between them. Sooner
or later he in turn comes and asks for something he fancies and this too will be handed over freely. Such freedom of
approach obtains only between members of a small kinship
group and depends upon the recognition of a principle of
reciprocity. If a man is going to apply to someone not of his
own kin, a ‘different man’ as the Tikopia say, then he cooks
food, fills a large basket, and tops it off with an ordinary
piece of bark-cloth or even a blanket. Armed with this he
goes to the owner and asks for the article. He is usually not
refused” (Firth, 1950, p. 316).
A.2.13	
Maori — A large part of the internal circulation, here of the
village especially, was centralized in chiefly hands—it was
generalized enough but run on the principles of chiefly due
and noblesse oblige (cf. Firth, 1959). The external exchanges
(intervillage, intertribal) involved more direct and equivalent reciprocation, although prestige of course accrued
to liberality (cf. Firth, 1959, pp. 335–337, 403–409,
­422–423). Maori proverb: “In winter a relation, in autumn
a son; signifying ‘he is only a distant relative at the time

225

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

226

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

of cultivation when there is heavy work to be tackled, but
in the time after harvest when all is finished, and there is
plenty of food to be eaten, he calls himself my son’ ” (Firth,
1926, p. 251).
A.3.0 Notes from here and there.
A.3.1	
Pilaga — Henry’s well-known study (1951) of food-sharing
in a Pilaga village is here cited with caution. We have to deal
with a disrupted and resettled population. Also, during the
period of Henry’s observations a great portion of the men
were away working on sugar plantations. It was, moreover,
the “hungry time” of the Pilaga year. “Thus we are dealing
with an economic system from which a considerable number of productive persons had been withdrawn, and during
a period of scarcity, with the society functioning at low ebb”
(Henry, 1951, p. 193). (The intense food-sharing under these
miserable conditions is consistent with propositions developed below on the relation between reciprocity and need.)
I assume that most if not all the instances of sharing were of
the generalized reciprocal sort, the giving out of larger stocks
that had come to hand, rendering assistance and the like. The
assumption is consistent with examples offered by Henry and
with the lack of balance he records in individuals’ outgo and
income. Trade with other groups, reported by Henry to have
occurred, is not considered in the study in question. The principal value of this study for the present discussion is its specification of the incidence of food-sharing by social distance.
The obligation to share food is highest among those closest in
kinship-residential terms. “Membership in the same household
[a multifamily and multidwelling group making up a section of
the village] constitutes a very close tie; but membership in the
same household plus a close kinship tie is the closest of bonds.
This is objectified in food-sharing, those having the closest bond
sharing food most often” (p. 188). The conclusion is supported
by analysis of particular cases. (In one of these, the association
between sharing and close relations was working the other way
around—a woman was sharing food heavily with a man whom

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

she wanted to, and eventually did, marry.) “The cases reviewed
so far concerning distribution within the household [section
of the village] may be summarized as follows: the answer to
the question, to which individual or family did each individual or family give
most often? can be answered only through quantitative analysis of
the behavior of individuals and families. When this is done four
points emerge: (1) The Pilaga distributes most of his product
to members of his own household. (2) He does not distribute equally to all. (3) A variety of factors enter to prevent his
distributing equally to all; (a) differences in genealogical ties,
(b) differences of obligations among the people of the household with respect to their obligations outside it, (c) stability
of residence, (d) dependency needs, (e) marital expectations,
(f) fear of shamans, and (g) special food taboos. (4) When common residence and close genealogical ties combine, the highest rate of interchange of products between families so related
is present” (p. 207). The sectoral incidence of food-sharing is
shown in the following chart (adapted from Henry’s Table IV,
p. 210).The other section of the village, for which Henry did not
have as numerous records—because they were wandering about
the forest a good deal—does not show the same trend (also
Table IV). The second column is in three of four instances larger
than the first—more sharing across the village than within the
“household” section. But this section of the village is not comparable to the other (tabulated above) because in the former
people were “more closely integrated [i.e. closely related] than
those at the other end, thus much of what takes the form of
distribution, the transfer of produce from the producer to another
person, in No. 28’s part of the village [tabulated below], takes
the form of commensality at No. 14’s end of the village. Hence the
percentage of product distributed by No. 14’s people to persons
within the section . . . appears low, while that distributed to
other classes [sectors] seems high” (p. 211; Henry’s emphases).
Since Henry does not consider commensality among different
families of the same “household” as food-sharing, the seeming
exception may be in fairness disregarded.

227

228

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Family

Percent of Times Sharing Food with Families in
Own household
section of village

The other household section of
the village

Outsiders, of
other villages

I

72

18

10

II

43

0

7

III

81

16

3

IV

55

34

11

A.3.2	
Nuer — Intensive food-sharing, hospitality, and other generalized reciprocities in Nuer smaller local groups (hamlet sections of the village) and cattle camps (Evans-Pritchard, 1940,
pp. 21, 84–85, 91, 183; 1951, pp. 2, 131–132; Howell, 1954,
p. 201). Not much exchange in the intratribal (extra-village)
sector except the instrumental transactions of bride-wealth
and feud settlement (as compensations, of their nature balanced). Nuer specifically distinguish internal reciprocity from
trade with Arabs by the directness (temporally) of the latter
exchange (Evans-Pritchard, 1956, p. 223 f). Relations with
neighboring tribes, especially Dinka, notoriously appropriative, amounting in the main to seizure of loot and territory
through violence.
Bantu of North Kavirondo — Intensive informal hospitality among
A.3.3	
neighbors. Exchanges of balanced sort are principally in
durables, with craftsmen, but the rates most favor neighborclansmen, are higher for the clansman who is not a neighbor,
and most dear for strangers (Wagner, 1956, pp. 161–162).
A.3.4	
Chukchee — Certain amount of generosity and assistance within
Chukchee camps (see citations in Sahlins, 1960).Theft from the
herds of other camps is common (Bogoras, 1904–09, p. 49).
Aboriginal trade between maritime and reindeer Chukchee,
and some trade across the Bering Straits: apparently the trade
more or less balanced; some of it was silent and all of it

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

conducted with considerable mistrust (Bogoras, 1904–09,
pp. 53, 95–96).
A.3.5	
Tiv — Clear differentiation at least between external (“market”) and internal spheres. A “market” distinguishable from
the several varieties of gift: the last imply “a relationship
between the two parties concerned which is of a permanence
and warmth not known in a ‘market,’ and hence—though
gifts should be reciprocal over a long period of time—it is
bad form overtly to count and compete and haggle over gifts”
(Bohannan, 1955, p. 60). A “market” is competitive and
exploitative: “In fact, the presence of a previous relationship
makes a ‘good market’ impossible: people do not like to sell
to kinsmen since it is bad form to demand as high a price
from kinsmen as one might from a stranger” (p. 60).
A.3.6	
Bemba — A centralized system of reciprocities (chiefly redistribution) is, analogously to Polynesia, the main part of the
larger economy; a very limited intertribal exchange sector
(Richards, 1939, p. 221 f). Various dues to close relatives by
kin type (pp. 188 f). Apart from hospitality to visiting kinsmen, chiefs and, nowadays, strangers, food-sharing is ordinarily characteristic in a narrow circle of close kin—but
apparently in a wider circle during scarcities (pp. 108–109,
136 f, 178–182, 186, 202–203). The money that has been
introduced is not much used in internal exchange, but when
it is, “People buying from relatives pay less than the normal
rate, and usually add some service to the transaction” (p. 220).
“. . . I have often seen women take a pot of beer and conceal
it in a friend’s granary on the reported arrival of some elderly
relative. To refuse hospitality with a pot of beer sitting on the
hearth would be an impossible insult, but a bland assertion
that ‘Alas, Sir, we poor wretches. . . . We have nothing to eat
here’ is sometimes necessary. This would not be done in the
case of a near relative, but only with a more distant kinsman
of a classificatory type, or one of the well-known ‘cadgers’ of
a family” (p. 202).

229

230

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Appendix B

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Notes on Reciprocity and Kinship Rank

B.0.0	These materials deal with kinship-rank reciprocities both in
simple form and in the context of chiefly redistribution.
B.1.0 Hunting-Gathering Peoples
B.1.1	
Bushmen — “No Bushman wants prominence, but Toma [a band
headman] went further than most in avoiding prominence;
he had almost no possessions and gave away everything that
came into his hands. He was diplomatic, for in exchange for
his self-imposed poverty he won the respect and following of
all the people there” (Thomas, 1959, p. 183). “We did hear
people say . . . that a headman may feel that he should lean well
to the generous side in his giving, for his position as headman
sets him out from the others a little and he wants whatever
attention this attracts not to be envious. Someone remarked
that this could keep a headman poor” (Marshall, 1961, p. 244).
Andamans — “Generosity is esteemed by the Andaman Islanders
B.1.2	
as one of the highest of virtues and is unremittingly practiced
by the majority of them,” Radcliffe-Brown writes (1948, p. 43).
He notes that the person who does not work and must needs be
given food sinks in esteem, while Man remarked that the generous person rises in esteem (Man, n.d., p. 41). There is a definite generation-status influence on reciprocity. Although at least
sometimes appearing as givers of food—on occasions of collective sharing of game—elders are privileged in regard to juniors:
“It is considered a breach of good manners ever to refuse the
request of another. Thus if a man be asked by another to give
him anything that he may possess, he will immediately do so.
If the two men are equals a return of about the same value will
have to be made. As between an older married man and a bachelor or a young married man, however, the younger would not
make any request of such a nature, and if the older asked the
younger for anything, the latter would give it without always
expecting a return” (Radcliffe-Brown, 1948, pp. 42–43).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

B.1.3	
Eskimo — Influence and prestige accrued to the North Alaskan Eskimo whale boat leader or caribou hunting leader at
least in part by virtue of the stuff he doled out in ostensibly
generous fashion (Spencer, 1959, pp. 144, 152 f, 210 f,
335–336, 351). Great men noted for their great generosity (pp. 154–155, 157). Stinginess as usual deplorable
(p. 164).
B.1.4	
Carrier — A big-man, slighted by a fur trader, boasts that he
is just as good a chief as the trader: “‘When it is the proper
season to hunt the beaver, I kill them; and of their flesh I make
feasts for my relations. I, often, feast all the Indians of my
village; and, sometimes, invite people from afar off, to come
and partake of the fruits of my hunts . . . ’ ” (Harmon, 1957,
pp. 143–144; cf. pp. 253–254).
B.2.0	
Melanesia — I have elsewhere presented a general study of
the economics of big-man leadership in western Melanesian societies (Sahlins, 1963). Generalized reciprocity is here
the decisive “starting mechanism” of ranking. A following is
developed through private assistance to individuals, a tribal
name (renown) through large-scale giveaways, often of pigs
and vegetable foods. The wherewithal for his generosity comes
initially from the aspiring big-man’s own household from his
nearest relatives: he capitalizes in the beginning on kinship
dues and by finessing the generalized reciprocity appropriate
among close kin. He often enlarges his household at an early
phase, perhaps by taking additional wives. A leader’s career is
well under way when he is able to link other men and their
families to his faction, to harness their production to his ambition by helping them in some big way. He cannot, however,
extend these people too far: some material benefits must
accrue to followers on pain of encouraging their discontent
and his downfall.
	  Most examples that follow are of big-man systems. The
concluding cases are different: chiefdoms or protochiefdoms
in which generalized reciprocity between ranks is apparent in
a redistributive context.

231

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

232

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

B.2.1	
Siuai — The most thorough exposition of Melanesian bigman economics is Oliver’s (1955) study. The development
of influence and prestige through generalized transactions is
richly described. There are several peripheral features likewise
of interest in the present context. Notable is the influence of
rank on customary rates of balance in shell money dealings:
“One great advantage of being a leader lies in one’s ability to
buy things more cheaply (‘When a mumi [big-man] sends
out thirty spans of mauai to purchase a pig for a feast, the pig
owner would be ashamed to send along a pig worth less than
forty’). On the other hand, this commercial advantage of the
leader is usually counterbalanced by the traditional exercise
of noblesse oblige” (p. 342). So, “the most praiseworthy thing
a man can do is to exceed the transactional requirements of
ordinary trade and kin relationships by paying generously (in
goods) for all goods and services he receives, by giving goods
to persons to whom he is not directly obligated, and by doing
these things after the manner of great leaders of the past”
(p. 456; cf. pp. 378, 407, 429–430).
	  Thurnwald writes of another Buin Plain people that mamoko,
the reward given by a big-man to his followers, “is considered
an act of liberality, for which there is no obligation. Any gift
of friendship is described by the same name. A surplus payment over the price agreed is also called mamoko. Totokai is the
excess payment of a kitere [follower] to his mumira [leader]
for ensuring his good will and his willingness to credit him
with abuta [shell money] on another occasion. Dakai designates
a payment for reconciliation or reparation between men of
equal position” (Thurnwald, 1934–35, p. 135). The variation
of reciprocity by rank difference is clear.
B.2.2 	’Gawa (Busama) — Clubhouse leaders and, especially, outstanding village leaders are typical western Melanesian
big-men. Hogbin writes: “The man who is generous over
a long period thus has many persons in his debt. No problem arises when these are of the same status as himself—
the poor give one another insignificant presents, and the rich

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

exchange sumptuous offerings. But if his resources are greater
than theirs they may find repayment impossible and have to
default. Acutely conscious of their position, they express their
humility in terms of deference and respect. . . . The relation of
debtors and creditors forms the basis of the system of leadership” (Hogbin, 1951, p. 122). The leaders were “men who
ate bones and chewed lime—they presented the best meat to
others, leaving only scraps for themselves, and were so free
with areca nuts and pepper that they had no betel mixture left.
Folk-tales about legendary headmen of the past relate that,
although these men had ‘more pigs than anyone could count
and bigger gardens than are made now,’ they gave everything
away” (p. 123; cf. pp. 118 f). The main run of clubhouse leaders were reluctantly placed in that position. The work was
hard— “His hands are never free from earth, and his forehead
continually drips with sweat” (p. 131)—and the material
rewards nil. The principal big-man of the village, however,
was ambitious. “It is frequently insisted that the headmen
were so jealous of their reputation that they went to the trouble of inventing excuses for giving food away” (p. 139). Low
rank was the reward of stinginess, and he who is prepared to
take advantage of others, “He sinks to the bottom of the social
ladder. . . . ” (p. 126).
B.2.3	
Kaoka (Guadalcanal) — A main-run big-man economy (Hogbin, 1933–34; 1937–38). “Reputation . . . is enhanced not
by accumulating wealth in order to use it for one’s self but by
giving it away. Every event of importance in a person’s life—
marriage, birth, death and even the construction of a new
house or canoe—is celebrated by a feast, and the more feasts
a man gives, and the more lavish he is in providing food, the
greater is his prestige. The social leaders are those who give
away most” (Hogbin, 1937–38, p. 290).
Kapauku — Described by the ethnographer as sort of upland
B.2.4	
New Guinea capitalists. The big-man pattern, however, is an
ordinary (sweet potato) garden variety. “Loans” and “credit”
put out by Kapauku big-men (tonowi, generous richman)

233

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

234

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

are not interest bearing in the standard sense (see above, A.
2.4); they are means of developing status through generosity (Pospisil, 1958, p. 129). “The society views its ideal man
as a most generous individual, who through the distribution
of his fortune satisfies the needs of many people. Generosity is the highest cultural value and an attribute necessary for
acquiring followers in political and legal life” (p. 57). The
big-man’s status sinks if he loses the wherewithal for generosity (p. 59); if he is excessively demanding he is likely to face
an egalitarian rebellion— “‘. . you should not be the only rich
man, we should all be the same, therefore you only stay equal
with us’. . . was the reason given by the Paniai people for
killing Mote Juwopija of Madi, a tonowi who was not generous enough” (p. 80; cf. pp. 108–110). Wealth is not enough:
“. . . a selfish individual who hoards his money and does not
lend [sic] it, never sees the time when his word will be taken
seriously and his advice and decisions followed, no matter
how rich he may become. The people believe that the only
justification for becoming rich is to be able to redistribute the
accumulated property among one’s less fortunate fellows, a
procedure which also gains their support” (pp. 79–80). Bigmen buy more cheaply than prevailing rates (p. 122). One
big-man summed up well, if cynically, the rank-generating
impetus delivered by generalized reciprocity. “‘I am a headman,’ he said, ‘not because the people like me but because
they owe me money and are afraid’ ” (p. 95).
B.2.5	
New Guinea Highlands — The big-man pattern, here worked out
in a segmented lineage context, is general in the Highlands.
“The Kuma ‘big men’ or ‘men of strength’ . . . who can command much wealth, are entrepreneurs in the sense that they
control the flow of valuables between clans by making fresh
presentations on their own account and choosing whether or
not to contribute to others. Their profit in these transactions
is incremental reputation. . . . The aim is not simply to be
wealthy, nor even to act as only the wealthy can act: it is to
be known to be wealthy. Further, a man does not really achieve

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

his ambition until he can be seen to act as if wealth itself were
of no account” (Reay, 1959, p. 96; see pp. 110–111, 130).
There is also the usual Melanesian corollary of the big-man,
the “rubbish man.” “A man is a ‘rubbish man’ of no consequence if he has not enough food to offer many friends and
relatives as well as meet his personal requirements” (p. 23).
	  The use of generalized reciprocity as a mechanism of status differentiation in another Highland instance (Kyaka) is
succinctly put by Bulmer: “These supporters of a leader are
normally in a state of mutual obligation with him, having
been helped by him with bridewealth payment and the like, or
expecting help of this kind. Such assistance obligates them to
channel through him such pigs of their own as they are putting
into the Moka [interclan pig-exchange]” (Bulmer, 1960, p. 9).
B.2.6	
Lesu — “A rich man might pay five tsera for a pig for which
another man would pay four. The more he pays the more prestige the buyer has. Everyone then knows he is a rich man. On
the other hand, the owner of a pig would gain prestige if he
sold it for four tsera when he might have received five” (Powdermaker, 1933, p. 201).
B.2.7	
To’ambaita (N. Malaita) — Another good description of a typical
big-man order, conforming in all essential respects to those
already discussed (Hogbin, 1939, pp. 61 f; 1943–44, pp. 258 f).
B.2.8	
Manus — The Manus have—or had, in their “old lives”—a
big-man pattern (Mead, 1934; 1937a). Their clans, however,
were also ascriptively divided into two ranks, lapan (high)
and lau (low). This ranking was, according to Mead, not of
great political significance, but its economic side is of interest
nonetheless. “Between lapan and lau there is a type of mutual
helpfulness expected, not unlike a slight version of the
feudal relationship—the lapan takes care of the economic
needs of the lau and the lau works for the lapan” (Mead, 1934,
pp. 335–336).
	  For discussion of other big-men systems see Sahlins, 1963.
Among the well-described ones are the Arapesh (Mead, 1937a;
1938; 1947), the Abelam (Kaberry, 1940–41; 1941–42), and

235

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

236

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Tangu (Burridge, 1960). Deacon struck the general note:
“Yet for all that the Malekulan is, as has been said, grasping
and bourgeois in his attitude toward wealth, generosity and
consideration for one’s debtors are held up as virtues. . . . To
be stingy is to sink in public esteem; to be openhanded is to
acquire fame, honour, and influence” (Deacon, 1934, p. 200).
B.2.9	
Sa’a — The generalized reciprocity principle in the context
of a small scale redistributive system. “The good chief and
the commoners regarded one another as mutually dependent
on each other, and the people loved a chief who by his feasts
brought glory on the place, and one of the reasons why [the
chief] Wate’ou’ou was called. . . ‘he who keeps the canoe on
a straight course,’ was because he was good at feasts” (Ivens,
1927, p. 255). “Stowed away safely in the lodge in bags is
the chief’s possession in money, which in a measure is what
Doraadi called the ‘panga,’ the ‘bank’ of the village because
it is drawn on for communal purposes such as feasts or the
payments of blood money. The Sa’a chiefs were wealthy men
owing to the contributions made to them on public occasions
by the commoners” (p. 32). “Chief and priest were exempted
from the obligation to make a return for gifts received which
held always in the case of commoners” (p. 8). “Chiefs were
said to kuluhie hänue, succour the land, to draw the people up
who came to them for protection, and the word kulu, draw or
lift up, appears in the compound mänikulu’e, glorious, a word
associated with feasts and chiefs” (p. 129, cf. pp. 145, 147–
148, 160 f, 221 f).
B.2.10	
Trobriands — Generalized rank reciprocity organized as redistribution. The underlying ethic was reciprocal assistance
between chiefs and people. Malinowski’s many statements
of the economic obligations of chieftainship include several
which highlight the status implications of generosity. For
example: “. . . to possess is to be great, and . . . wealth is the
indispensable appanage of social rank and attribute of personal
virtue. But the important point is that with them to possess is
to give. . . . A man who owns a thing is naturally expected to

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

share it, to distribute it, to be its trustee and dispenser. And the
higher the rank the greater the obligation. . . . Thus the main
symptom of being powerful is to be wealthy, and of wealth is
to be generous. Meanness, indeed, is the most despised vice,
and the only thing about which the natives have strong moral
views, while generosity is the essence of goodness” (1922,
p. 97). Again: “Not in all cases, but in many of them, the
handing over of wealth is the expression of the superiority of
the giver over the recipient. In others, it represents subordination to a chief, or a kinship relation or relationship-in-law”
(p. 175). “Relationship between Chiefs and Commoners.—The tributes
and services given to a chief by his vassals on the one hand,
and the small but frequent gifts which he gives them, and the
big and important contribution which he makes to all tribal
enterprises are characteristic of this relationship” (p. 193).
The Trobriand chief’s difficulties in holding on to his betel,
and the little strategems he employed to save some for himself, are famous anecdotes of the introductory anthropology
course (Malinowski, 1922, p. 97).
B.3.0	
American Plains — Plains Indian chiefs were local equivalents
of Melanesian big-men. The pattern is much the same; the
cultural idiom varies. Generalized reciprocity here again a
decisive starting mechanism of leadership. Military honors
were an important attribute of leaders, but influence rested
as much or more on generous dispositions of horses, of loot,
of meat, of help to the poor and widowed, and the like. The
chief’s faction was a roving band, a cluster of lesser and often
dependent people, for whose well-being the chief felt responsible and upon whom he might draw economically. Wealth in
horses was an ultimate necessity for a band chief: the loss of
this fund of generosity was the loss of influence.
Assiniboin — “The chief of a band is little more than the nomiB.3.1	
nal father of all and addresses them as his children in a body”
(Denig, 1928–29, p. 431). “A chief must give away all to preserve his popularity and is always the poorest in the band,
yet he takes good care to distribute his gifts among his own

237

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

238

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

relatives or the rich, upon whom he can draw at any time he
be in need” (p. 449; cf. pp. 432, 525, 547–548, 563; on the
element of calculation in Assiniboin generosity, see pp. 475,
514–515).
B.3.2	
Kansa-Osage — “The chiefs and candidates for public preferment render themselves popular by their disinterestedness
and poverty. Whenever any extraordinary success attends
them in the acquisition of property, it is only for the benefit
of their meritorious adherents, for they distribute it with a
profuse liberality, and pride themselves in being esteemed the
poorest man in the community” (Hunter, 1823, p. 317).
B.3.3	
Plains Cree — “It is not an easy thing to be a chief. Look at this
chief now. He has to have pity on the poor. When he sees a
man in difficulty he must try to help him in whatever way he
can. If a person asks for something in his tipi, he must give
it to him willingly and without bad feeling” (Mandelbaum,
1940, p. 222; cf. pp. 195, 205, 221 f, 270–271).
B.3.4	
Blackfoot — The same pattern, in essence (Ewers, 1955,
pp. 140–141, 161 f, 188–189, 192–193, 240 f).
B.3.5	
Comanche — The same (Wallace and Hoebel, 1952, pp. 36,
131, 209 f, 240).
B.4.0	
Polynesia — I have elsewhere offered studies of the economies
of Polynesian chieftainship (Sahlins, 1958; 1963). Redistribution is the transactional form, generalized reciprocity
the principle. The few notes here highlight particularly the
principle.
B.4.1	
Maori — Firth’s excellent analysis of Maori economics provides
the mise en scène for considerations of rank reciprocity in Polynesia. I cite two long passages: “The prestige of a chief was
bound up with his free use of wealth, particularly food. This
in turn tended to secure for him a larger revenue from which
to display his hospitality, since his followers and relatives
brought him choice gifts. . . . Apart from lavish entertainment
of strangers and visitors, the chief also disbursed wealth freely
as presents among his followers. By this means their allegiance
was secured and he repaid them for the gifts and personal

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

services rendered to him. All payment among the Maori was
made in the form of gifts. There was thus a continual reciprocity between chief and people. The chief also acted as a kind of
capitalist, assuming the initiative in the construction of certain
‘public works’ if the term may be so used. It was by his accumulation and possession of wealth, and his subsequent lavish
distribution of it, that such a man was able to give the spur to
these important tribal enterprises. He was a kind of channel
through which wealth flowed, concentrating it only to pour
it out freely again” (Firth, 1959a, p. 133). “The quantity and
quality of. . . gifts received tended to increase with the rank
and hereditary position of the chief in the tribe, his prestige, and
the following which he was able to gather around him. But
the relationship was by no means one-sided. If the income of a
chief was largely dependent on his prestige and influence and
the regard of his people, this in its turn was contingent upon his
liberal treatment of them. There were constant calls upon
his resources. His slaves and immediate dependents had to
be fed, he was expected to assist those of his tribesmen who
came to him in need, a crowd of relatives—and the Maori
bonds of kinship stretched far—looked to him for a generous repayment of all the small social services they rendered
him, and for an occasional douceur as a mark of appreciation
of their loyalty. When presents of foodstuffs were made to
him by people of other tribes his regard for his reputation
required that he should distribute a considerable portion of
them among his tribespeople. For all gifts made to him a
return was expected, of equivalent or even greater value. . .
. Again, the calls of hospitality were never ending. Entertainment had to be provided on a lavish scale for visiting chiefs
and their adherents. . . . Moreover, on occasions of the birth,
marriage or death of any people of rank in the village his personal resources were drawn upon to a serious extent, while
the occasional provision of a large feast also drained him of
food supplies. In this connection he seems to have exercised
control of the communal stores of food which he commanded

239

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

240

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

to be disbursed as required. If the chief’s use of wealth be
reviewed, then, it is seen that to the varied sources which provided him with his stores of goods corresponded a number
of serious liabilities. The result was that a sort of equilibrium
was maintained between income and expenditure. In general,
at no time was the chief the possessor of enormous quantities
of valuables, though the system of receipt and redistribution
of goods allowed a great quantity of them to flow through his
hands” (pp. 297–298; cf. pp. 130 f, 164, 294 f, 345–346).
B.4.2	
Hawaii — Chiefs had extensive call on the labor, the resources
and products of the underlying (makaainana) population, as
well as control over certain specialists and enjoyment of certain sumptuary perquisites. The chiefdom, often embracing
the whole of a large island, was an elaborate collection-redistribution apparatus. “It was the practice for kings [i.e.
paramount chiefs of individual islands] to build storehouses in which to collect food, fish, tapas [bark cloth],
malos [men’s loin cloths], pa-us [women’s loin skirts],
and all sorts of goods. These store-houses were designed
by the Kalaimoku [chief’s executive] as a means of keeping
the people contented, so they would not desert the king.
They were like the baskets that were used to entrap the
hinalea fish. The hinalea thought there was something good
within the basket, and he hung round the outside of it. In
the same way the people thought there was food in the
storehouses, and they kept their eyes on the king. As the rat
will not desert the pantry . . . where he thinks food is, so
the people will not desert the king while they think there is
food in his storehouse” (Malo, 1951, p. 195). The tendency
at the highest levels of chieftainship, however—and despite
well meaning advice of counselors—was to press too heavily on the lesser chiefs and people, with the result that, as
Malo puts it, “Many kings were put to death by the people
because of their oppression of the makaainana [commonality]” (p. 195; cf. pp. 58, 61; Fornander, 1880: pp. 76, 88,
100–101, 200–202, 227–228, 270–271).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

B.4.3	
Tonga — A fine native statement of the chiefly economic
ethic, attributed by Mariner to the chief Finau. Upon Mariner’s explanation of the value of money: “Finow replied that
the explanation did not satisfy him; he still thought it a foolish
thing that people should place a value on money, when they
either could not or would not apply it to any useful (physical)
purpose. ‘If,’ said he, ‘it were made of iron, and could be converted into knives, axes and chisels, there would be some sense
in placing a value on it; but as it is, I see none. If a man,’ he
added, ‘has more yams than he wants, let him exchange some
of them away for pork or gnatoo [bark cloth]. Certainly money
is much handier, and more convenient, but then, as it will not
spoil by being kept, people will store it up, instead of sharing
it out, as a chief ought to do, and thus become selfish; whereas,
if provisions were the principal property of man, and it ought
to be, as being both the most useful and the most necessary,
he could not store it up, for it would spoil, and so he would be
obliged either to exchange it away for something else useful,
or share it to his neighbors, and inferior chiefs and dependents, for nothing.’ He concluded by saying ‘I understand now
very well what it is that makes the Papalangis [“Europeans”]
so selfish—it is this money!” ’ (Mariner, 1827 i, pp. 213–214).
	  Conversely, the upward flow: “. . . the practice of making
presents to superior chiefs is very general and frequent. The
higher class of chiefs generally make a present to the king, of
hogs or yams about once a fortnight. These chiefs, about the
same time, receive presents from those below them, and these
last from others, and so on, down to the common people”
(p. 210; cf. Gifford, 1929).
Tahiti — From indications of the Duff missionaries, it looks as
B.4.4	
if Ha’amanimani, the Tahitian priest-chief, acted faithfully to
the ideal expressed by Finau: “Manne Manne was very urgent
for sails, rope, anchor, etc. for his vessel, none of which articles
we had to spare: on which account, though the captain gave
him his own cocked hat and a variety of articles, he was still
discontented; saying, ‘Several people told me that you wanted

241

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

242

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Manne Manne, and now I am come, you give me nothing.’
An observation similar to this he once made to the missionaries: ‘You give me,’ says he, ‘much parow (talk) and much
prayers to the Eatora, but very few axes, knives, scis-sars, or
cloth.’ The case is, that whatever he receives he immediately
distributes among his friends and dependents; so that for all
the numerous presents he had received, he had nothing now
to shew, except a glazed hat, a pair of breeches, and an old
black coat, which he had fringed with red feathers. And this
prodigal behavior he excuses, by saying that, were he not to
do so, he should never be a king, nor even remain a chief of
any consequence” (Duff missionaries, 1799, pp. 224–225).
For all this it is apparent from the Duff journal as well as other
early reports (e.g., Rodriguez, 1919) that Tahitian high chiefs
might accumulate considerable stocks of goods and especially
that they had very considerable power to demand foodstuffs
from the underlying population. The traditional counsel was
the same as in Hawaii—“Your household must not be accused
of food hiding. Let not your name be associated with hidden
foods or hidden goods. The hands of the Arii must be always
open; on these two things rest your prestige” (Handy, 1930,
p. 41)—but apparently Tahitian chiefs were inclined, as it is
said, to “eat the powers of the government too much.” (Yet
see also Davies, 1961, p. 87 note 1).
B.4.5	
Tikopia — A stream of gifts flow from below to the Tikopia
chief, but then his obligation to be generous is at least as
great as his ability to accumulate things. Generosity indeed
was a jealousy guarded chiefly prerogative: “Chiefs are recognized as being proper persons to control large quantities
of food, to have a number of valued objects stored away
in their houses. . . . But the stocks which they accumulate
are expected to be dispersed in a manner which will yield
benefit to their people. Great accumulation by a commoner
must also be followed by a corresponding dispersal. But such
a man would incur the charge from the chiefly families of
fia pasak ‘desiring to boast,’ and would be watched by them

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

lest he attempt to usurp some of their privileges. According
to precedent in Tikopia history they would probably take an
opportunity either to seize his goods or to kill him” (Firth,
1950, p. 243). The Tikopia chiefs, in short, would not tolerate
starting mechanisms. This is not true throughout Polynesia. In
the Marquesas, for example, upward mobility through “accumulating and dispensing wealth” was possible (Linton, 1938,
pp. 150,153, 156–157; Handy, 1923, pp. 36–37,48, 53). (On
other aspects of the reciprocity between Tikopia chiefs and
people see Firth, 1936, pp. 382–383, 401–403; 1950, pp. 34,
58, 109 f, 172, 188, 190, 191, 196, 212 f, 321).
B.5.0 Miscellaneous
B.5.1	
Northwestern North America — Generalized reciprocity permeated
the political economy of the Northwest Coast Indians, both
in the potlatch giveaways between chiefs and in the internal
relation of chiefs and their respective followers. The Nootka
are a clearly described case in point. Chiefs acquired a variety
of dues: from the first catch of salmon traps, early pickings of
berry patches, from large catches of fish taken by their people,
and the like (e.g., Drucker, 1951, pp. 56–57, 172, 255, 272, et
passim). Conversely, “Every time a chief got a lot of food of any
kind, he gave a feast to give it away to his people” (p. 370; see
also Suttles, 1960, pp. 299–300; Barnett, 1938; Codere, n.d.).
	  TheTolowa-Tututni political economy is the same in principle
as that prevailing to the north, albeit a slighter version. Drucker
characterizes the chief-follower relation as ­“symbiotic”—“The
relationship uniting the rich-man and his kinfolk was essentially a symbiotic one. It is said that some of the richest men
never worked; their henchmen hunted and fished for them. In
return the rich-man gave feasts, and in lean times would share
his stores with his people. He bought wives for the young
men, or at least contributed most of the payment; but it was
also he who accepted and held the bride prices paid for their
sisters and daughters. Perhaps most important of all; it was the
rich-man who was obliged to pay compensation for wrongs
his henchmen committed, to save them, and himself, from

243

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

244

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

retaliation . . . he received a lion’s share of any indemnities
paid for injuries to one of them” (Drucker, 1937, p. 245; for
indications of similar rank reciprocity in California see Kroeber, 1925, pp. 3, 40, 42, 55; Goldschmidt, 1951, pp. 324–325,
365, 413; Loeb, 1926, pp. 238–239).
B.5.2	
Creek — One of the finest descriptions of chiefly redistribution, again run on the underlying principle of generalized
reciprocity, appears in W. Bartram’s late eighteenth-century
account of the Creek: “After the feast of the busk is over, and
all the grain is ripe, the whole town again assemble, and every
man carries of the fruits of his labour, from the part [of the
town field] first allotted to him, which he deposits in his own
granary; which is individually his own. But previous to their
carrying off their crops from the field, there is a large crib or
granary, erected in the plantation, which is called the king’s
crib; and to this each family carries and deposits a certain
quantity, according to his [apparently meaning “their”] ability
or inclination, or none at all if he so chooses, this in appearance seems a tribute or revenue to the mico [chief], but in fact
is designed for another purpose, i.e. that of a public treasury,
supplied by a few and voluntary contributions, and to which
every citizen has the right of free and equal access, when his
own private stores are consumed, to serve as a surplus to fly
to for succour, to assist neighboring towns whose crops have
failed, accommodate strangers, or travellers, afford provisions
or supplies, when they go forth on hostile expeditions, and
for all other exigencies of the state; and this treasure is at the
disposal of the king or mico; which is surely a royal attribute
to have an exclusive right and ability in a community to distribute comfort and blessings to the necessitous” (Bartram,
1958, p. 326; cf. Swanton, 1928, pp. 277–278).
Kachin — “In theory then people of superior class receive
B.5.3	
gifts from their inferiors. But no permanent economic advantage accrues from this. Anyone who receives a gift is thereby
placed in debt (hka) to the giver. . . . Paradoxically therefore
although an individual of high-class status is defined as one

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

who receives gifts . . . he is all the time under a social compulsion to give away more than he receives. Otherwise he would
be reckoned mean and a mean man runs the danger of losing
status” (Leach, 1954, p. 163).
B.5.4	
Bemba — Exhibits classic redistributive economy, a classic generalized reciprocity between chief and people. “. . . the distribution of cooked food is an attribute of authority, and therefore
prestige, and . . . its reception puts a man under an obligation
to return to the giver respect, service, or reciprocal hospitality” (Richards, 1939, p. 135). The paramount is most engaged
in the distributive process, and this “is of course necessary to
the chief if he is to make gardens and conduct tribal business
through his councillors. But it is more than this. The giving of
food, as in most African tribes, is an absolutely essential attribute
of chieftainship, just as it is of authority in the village or household, and the successful organization of supplies at the capital
seems to be associated in the Bemba mind with the security and
well-being of the whole tribe itself. . . . The whole institution of
the kamitembo [the sacred kitchen and storehouse of the tribe]
illustrates to my mind that close association between authority and the power to distribute provisions on which the tribal
organization depends. The chief owns the food and receives
tribute, and the chief provides for his subjects and distributes
cooked food to them. Both of these attributes are symbolized
in the kamitembo house” (pp. 148, 150). “I never heard a chief
boast to another about the size of his granaries, but often about
the amount of food brought to him and distributed by him. In
fact chiefs particularly valued the fact that some of their food
was brought to them and not grown in their gardens, for it
gave them some kind of resource to fall back upon. The Bemba
say: ‘We will shake the tree until it gives up its fruit,’ that is to
say, we will nag the big man until he divides his supplies. If a
chief attempted to dry meat and keep it for subsequent division
his followers would sit and stare at it and talk about it until
he was forced to give them some, but supplies brought irregularly from other villages provided constant fresh resources”

245

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

246

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

(p. 214). “The people still definitely prefer their ruler to have
a big granary. It gives them, I think, a sense of security—a
feeling of certainty that there will be food at the capital and
a knowledge that they are working for a powerful and successful
man. . . . Besides this, a hungry man has technically the right to
call upon his chief for help. I did not hear of this claim being
made very often, but still, in a sense, the umulasa [tribute-labour]
garden and umulasa granary are recognized as belonging to the
people. A man can steal from the tribute garden of a chief, but
not from those of his wives, and I have sometimes heard old
natives speak with pride of ‘our’ granary, adding,‘It was we who
filled it to overflowing.’ Thus the commoner got by his labour
the sense of supernatural support, a personal approach to his
chief, food in return for his work, support in time of starvation,
and . . . leadership in economic pursuits. The chief in return got
extra supplies of food to distribute, the means of supporting his
tribal council, the necessary labour for tribal undertakings such
as road-building, and last, but not least, prestige” (p. 261; cf.
pp. 138, 169, 178–180, 194, 215, 221, 244 f, 275, 361–362).
B.5.5	
Pilagá — Generosity is no starting mechanism, but it is a sustaining mechanism of rank. In Henry’s tables (1951, pp. 194,
197, 214) it is the chief who gives more goods (and to more
people) than anyone else. Henry comments regarding this: “It
will. . . be observed that in no case is the contribution of his
[i.e. the chiefs] family to any family equaled or exceeded by
any other family. As a matter of fact, No. 28 [the chief] himself
alone contributes on an average of 35% of the income, i.e.
food received of each family. Thus the role of the chief and
his family in Pilaga society is to support others. The chief
and his family thus become the unifying factor in the village. It is
this that gives meaning to the use of the father term for the
chief and the child term for the members of the village. . . .
The position of the chief, despite the ‘prestige’ it carries also
entails burdens. All the people are his children (kokotepi) for
whom he is responsible. Hence the word for chief, salyaranik,
signifies one who is heavy” (pp. 214–215).

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

Appendix C

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Notes on Reciprocity and Wealth

C.0.0	
Reciprocity and Wealth — The following notes mostly concern
societies already considered in other contexts. The citations
illustrate particularly the association between wealth differences and generosity (generalized reciprocity). That food is the
item so often shared is significant. Examples that indicate sharing in favor of need between socially distant parties—those
who would ordinarily enter balanced exchange—especially
underscore the assertions of this section.
C.1.0 Hunters and gatherers
C.1.1	
Andamans — “It has been stated above that all food is private property and belongs to the man or woman who has
obtained it. Everyone who has food is expected, however,
to give to those who have none. . . . The result of these
customs is that practically all the food obtained is evenly
distributed through the whole camp . . .” (Radcliffe-Brown,
1948, p. 43).
C.1.2	
Bushmen — “Food, whether vegetable or animal, and water
are also private property, and belong to the person who has
obtained them. Everyone who has food is, however, expected
to give to those who have none. . . . The result is that practically all food obtained is evenly distributed through the whole
camp” (Schapera, 1930, p. 148). Compare these last two quotations! It is an extremely rare fortune in anthropology, and
fills one with humble awe, to enter the presence of a great
natural law. Actually, the elided parts of these citations indicate
some difference in manner of distribution. An older married
man among the Andamanese will share out food after he has
reserved sufficient for his family; a younger man hands over
the pigs to elders for distribution (see also Radcliffe-Brown,
1948, pp. 37–38, 41; Man, n.d., pp. 129, 143 note 6). The
one who takes game or veldkos among the Bushman does the
sharing out, according to Schapera.

247

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

248

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

	  The Andamanese who is lazy or helpless is still given
food, despite the probability or certainty of no reciprocation
(Radcliffe-Brown, 1948, p. 50; Man, n.d., 25). A lazy hunter
fares badly among the Bushmen; a crippled one is abandoned
by all save his nearest relations (Thomas, 1959, pp. 157, 246;
see also Marshall, 1961, on Bushman sharing).
C.1.3	
Eskimo — The Alaskan seal-hunter is often solicited for meat,
especially in lean winter months, and these requests are very
rarely refused (Spencer, 1959, pp. 59, 148–149). “In times
of food shortage, it was the successful hunter and his family
who might go hungry, since in his generosity he gave away
whatever he had at hand” (p. 164). Notable are the obligations of the fortunate toward nonkin in the camp: “Generosity was a primary virtue and no man could risk a miserly
reputation. Thus anyone in the community, whether inland
or coastal, could ask aid of a man of wealth and it was never
refused. This might mean that the men of wealth would be
obliged to support an entire group in times of stress. Here,
too, aid was extended to non-kin” (p. 153; presumably these
nonkin might at other times enter balanced exchanges, as in
the “bidding game”—see A. 1.7). Lazy people take advantage of a hunter’s bounty, and do not necessarily reciprocate
even if they have their own stores (pp. 164–165; see also
pp. 345–351, 156–157 for giveaways in which poor stand to
gain materially).
	  Generally among Eskimo large game is “common property,” though smaller animals are not; yet the hunter might
in any case invite people of the camp to a meal (Rink, 1875,
p. 28 f; Birket-Smith, 1959, p. 146; see also Boas, 1884–85,
pp. 562, 574, 582; Weyer, 1932, pp. 184–186).
	  Spencer’s note of the reaction of Alaskan Eskimo to the
Great Depression of the 1930s is of interest in the context of
economic behavior during general shortage. “More so than in
a time of prosperity, the community sense of in-group consciousness appears to have developed. Those who did engage
in hunting were obliged by custom to share their catch—seal,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

walrus, caribou, or any other game—with the less fortunate
members of the community. But while this factor of sharing
operated between non-kin, the economic circumstances of
the period furthered the aboriginal family system as a cooperative institution. Families worked together and extended
their joint efforts to the benefit of the community at large.
The return to the aboriginal social patterns at a time of economic stress appears to have lent the family system a force
which it still possesses. As may be seen, however, the cooperative arrangement between non-kin in the community tends
to break down with the addition of new wealth” (Spencer,
1959, pp. 361–362).
C.1.4	
Australian Aboriginals — Local communities of Walbiri or of
friendly tribes could drop in on neighboring Walbiri when in
need. They were welcomed, even if the hosts’ supplies were
limited, but there was some degree of balance in the economic
relationship. The requests of hungry communities “often took
the form of appeals to actual kinship ties and, couched in
these terms, could hardly be refused. The suppliants, then or
later, made gifts of weapons, hair-string, red ochre and the
like to express their gratitude and, equally important, to rid
themselves of feelings of shame or embarrassment” (Meggitt, 1962, p. 52). In lean seasons among the Arunta, everyone shared in available supplies, ordinary generation, sex, and
kinship-status considerations notwithstanding (Spencer and
Gillen, 1927 i, pp. 38–39, 490).
C.1.5	
Luzon Negritos — Large quantities of food are shared; whenever
a good find is made neighbors are invited to partake until it is
eaten up (Vanoverbergh, 1925, p. 409).
C.1.6 Naskapi— The same (e.g., Leacock, 1954, p. 33).
C.1.7	
Congo Pygmies — A hunter cannot very well refuse—in view
of public opinion—to share out game in the camp (Putnam,
1953, p. 333). Larger animals, at least, were generally shared
through extended family groups; vegetables were not so distributed unless some family had none and then others “come
to their assistance” (Schebesta, 1933, pp. 68, 125, 244).

249

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

250

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

C.1.8	
Western Shoshoni — Essentially the same customary sharing of
large game, and of lesser family supplies in favor of need,
in the camp (Steward, 1938, pp. 60, 74, 231, 253; cf. also
pp. 27–28 on helping families whose traditional pinion
haunts were not bearing).
C.1.9	
Northern Tungus (mounted hunters) — The hunting spoil, by the custom of nimadif, went to the clan—“in other words, the fruit
of the hunting does not belong to the hunter, but to the clan”
(Shirokogoroff, 1929, p. 195). There was great readiness to
assist clansmen in need (p. 200). Reindeer were allocated to the
poor of the clan following epizootics, with the results that
families holding over sixty deer were not to be seen (p. 296).
C.1.10	
Northern Chipewayan and Copper Indians — Samuel Hearne notices
an outbreak of “disinterested friendship” among members of
his crew as they prepare to attack some Eskimos: “Never was
reciprocity of interest more generally regarded among a number of people, than it was on the present occasion by my crew,
for not one was a moment in want of anything that another
could spare; and if ever the spirit of disinterested friendship
expanded the heart of a Northern Indian, it was here exhibited in the most extensive meaning of the word. Property of
every kind that could be of general use now ceased to be private, and every one who had any thing that came under that
description seemed proud of an opportunity of giving it, or
lending it to those who had none, or were most in want of it”
(Heame, 1958, p. 98).
C.2.0	
Plains Indians — In many northern tribes there was insufficiency
of good buffalo horses and unequal possession of them. Those
without horses, however, did not suffer for food in consequence; the meat circulated to have-nots, in various ways. For
example:
Assiniboin — Denig notes that in a large camp men who lacked
C.2.1	
horses, and the old and infirm as well, would follow the hunt,
taking meat as they would but leaving the hide and choice
parts for the hunter, and they got as much meat as they wanted
(Denig, 1928–29, p. 456; cf. p. 532). When food was scarce

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

people would spy out lodges that were better supplied and
drop in at mealtimes, as “No Indian eats before guests without offering them a share, even if it is the last portion they
possess” (p. 509; cf. p. 515). The successful horse raider might
be flattered so by old men upon his return from the raid that
by the time he reached his lodge he (“frequently”) had given
all the loot away (pp. 547–548).
C.2.2	
Blackfoot — The poor in horses might borrow from the
wealthy—the latter thus adding to the number of followers—
and people whose herds had been depleted by misfortune
were particularly so helped by those more fortunate (Ewers,
1954, pp. 140–141). A person who borrowed a horse for a
chase might return to the owner the best of the meat taken,
but this evidently was conditional upon the horse-owner’s
own supply (pp. 161–162). If borrowing was not possible,
the man would have to rely on the “rich” for meat and usually had to take the lean (pp. 162–163; but see pp. 240–241).
A case was cited of an amputee warrior thereafter supplied
with a lodge, horses and food by his band (p. 213). Those who
captured horses on raids were supposed afterward to share
their loot with less fortunate comrades, but arguments were
frequent here (p. 188; compare with Plains Ojibway generosity before the raid, C.2.5). Note how wealth differences generalize exchange: in intratribal trading, rich men paid more
dearly for things than did others; the average man, for example, gave two horses for a shirt and leggings, the rich man
three to nine horses for the same thing (p. 218). A man, in
addition, frequently gave horses to the needy “to get his name
up,” and the poor might take advantage of the rich by giving
small presents to the latter or simply praising them loudly
in the hopes of a horse return (p. 255). Ewers thus summarizes the economic relation between rich and poor: “Generosity was felt to be a responsibility of the wealthy. They were
expected to loan horses to the poor for hunting and moving
camp, to give food to the poor, and to give away horses occasionally. They were expected to pay more in intratribal barter

251

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

252

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

than were Indians who were not well to do. If the man of
wealth had political ambitions it was particularly important
that he be lavish with his gifts in order to gain a large number
of followers to support his candidacy” (p. 242).
	  The reaction to general shortage was heightened sharing.
Lean winter periods were common: “Then the wealthy, who
had put up extensive winter supplies the previous fall, had
to share their food with the poor” (Ewers, 1955, p. 167).
The rank structure of the band was also engaged to organize
relief: hunters had to turn over their bag to the band chief,
who had it cut up and divided equally to each family. When
game became more plentiful, this “primitive form of food
rationing” was discontinued and the chief stepped out of the
central distributive role (pp. 167–168).
C.2.3	
Plains Cree — The same inclination of those better off to
share meat to people without horses, to give horses away on
occasion—for which from the poor one received in return
not meat but fealty (Mandelbaum, 1940, p. 195)—and
other generosities found in the Plains in connection with
wealth differences (pp. 204, 221, 222, 270–271; see also
Wallace and Hoebel, 1952, p. 75 et passim on the Comanche;
Coues on the Mandan [village Indians], 1897, p. 337).
C.2.4	
Kansa — Hunter writes that if one party to an agreed exchange
could not meet his obligations due to ill health or bad hunting
luck, he was not dunned, nor did friendly relations with his
creditors cease. But one who failed of his obligations for reason of laziness was a bad Indian and would be abandoned by
his friends—such types, however, were rare (Hunter, 1823, p.
295). Moreover, “. . . no one of respectable standing will be
allowed to experience want or sufferings of any kind, while it
is in the power of others of the same community to prevent
it. In this respect they are extravagantly generous; always supplying the wants of their friends from their own superabundance” (p. 296).
	  Generalized reciprocity apparently intensified during shortage. “Whenever a scarcity prevails, they reciprocally lend, or

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

rather share with each other, their respective stores, till they
are all exhausted. I speak now of those who are provident, and
sustain good characters. When the case is otherwise, the wants
of such individuals are regarded with comparative indifference; though their families share in the stock, become otherwise common from public exigency” (p. 258).
C.2.5	
Plains Ojibway — Tanner and his Ojibway family, destitute, reach
a camp of Ojibway and Ottawa; the chiefs of the camp meet
to consider their plight and one man after another volunteers to hunt for Tanner’s people; Tanner’s FaBrWi is stingy
to them, but her husband beats her for it (Tanner, 1954,
pp. 30–34). In similar circumstances, an Ojibway lodge
insisted on silver ornaments and other objects of value in
return for giving Tanner’s family some meat one winter. This
insistence on exchange struck Tanner as despicable, for his
people were hungry—“I had not before met with such an
instance among the Indians. They are commonly ready to
divide what provisions they have with any who come to them
in need” (p. 47; see also pp. 49, 60, 72–73, 75, 118, 119).
	  During a period of epidemic and general food shortage
in an Ojibway camp, Tanner and another hunter managed to
kill a bear. “Of the flesh of this animal,” he wrote, “we could
not eat a mouthful, but we took it home and distributed to
every lodge an equal portion” (p. 95). On another similar
occasion, an Indian who had shot two moose tried to get
Tanner to secretly share them, keeping the meat from the rest
of the camp. Tanner, a better Indian than this, refused, went
out hunting, killed four bears and distributed the meat to the
hungry (p. 163).
	  On special economic behavior of the warpath: if a man of
the war party was short of moccasins or ammunition he took
out one of that object and walked about the camp before a
person well supplied; the latter ordinarily gave over the thing
desired without the necessity of anyone speaking, or else, the
leader of the party went from man to man taking what was
needed by the person who was short (p. 129).

253

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

254

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

C.3.0 Miscellaneous
Nuer — See the citations in the text of this section: “Kinsmen
C.3.1	
must assist one another, and if one has a surplus of a good thing
he must share it with his neighbors. Consequently no Nuer
ever has a surplus” (Evans-Pritchard, 1940, p. 183). Generalized reciprocity is characteristic between haves and have-nots,
especially if close kin and neighbors, in the compact dry season
camps, and during seasons of generally low supplies (pp. 21, 25,
84–85, 90–92; 1951, p. 132; Howell, 1954, pp. 16, 185–186).
C.3.2	
Kuikuru (upper Xingú) — The contrast between the handling of the
major crop, manioc, and the disposition of maize is an instructive illustration of the relation of sharing to supplies on hand.
Kuikuru households are in general self-sufficient; there is little
sharing between them, especially of manioc which is produced
with ease and in quantity. But during Carneiro’s stay, maize was
planted by only five men of the village, and their harvest
was divided through the community (Carneiro, 1957, p. 162).
C.3.3	
Chukchee — Despite an anthropological reputation something to the contrary, the Chukchee are remarkably generous “toward everyone who is in need” (Bogoras, 1904–09,
p. 47). This includes aliens, such as poor Lamut families who
got sustenance from neighboring rich Chukchee without
payment, and also starving Russian settlements in whose favor
Chukchee have slaughtered their herds for little or no return
(p. 47). At the annual fall slaughter, about one-third of the
deer were given to guests, who need not make returns, especially if poor; neighboring camps, however, might exchange
slaughtered beasts at this time (p. 375). At serious setbacks
to herds, neighboring camps—these need not be related—
might render assistance (p. 628). Tobacco is highly valued
by Chukchee but is not hoarded when scarce; “. . . the last
pipeful be divided or smoked by turns” (pp. 549, 615 f, 624,
636–638).
California-Oregon — The Tolowa-Tututni “rich-man” was, as we
C.3.4	
have noted, a source of aid to his people (Drucker, 1937).
Poorer people depended on the bounty of richer. “Food was

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

shared by the provident with the improvident within the
village group” (DuBois, 1936, p. 51). Of the Yurok, Kroeber
writes that food was sometimes sold, “but no well-to-do man
was guilty of the practice” (1925, p. 40), implying that the
exchange would be generalized rather than balanced (selling)
in this case. Similarly Kroeber remarks that small gifts among
the Yurok were ordinarily reciprocated, as “Presents were clearly
a rich man’s luxury” (p. 42; cf. p. 34 on the liberal disposition
of fish by successful fishermen). Meat, fish and the like taken in
large quantities by Patwin families went to the village chief for
distribution to families most in need; a family, moreover, might
demand food of fortunate neighbors (McKern, 1922, p. 245).
C.3.5	
Oceania — The Melanesian big-man complex, wherever it
exists, argues the prevalence of generalized reciprocity in
exchange between people of different fortune.
	  The Duff missionaries’ description of Tahitian generosity,
especially of richesse oblige, is probably too good to be true, anyhow too good to be analytically adequate: “All are friendly and
generous, even to a fault; they hardly refuse anything to each
other if importuned. Their presents are liberal, even to profusion. Poverty never makes a man contemptible; but to be affluent and covetous is the greatest shame and reproach. Should
any man betray symptoms of incorrigible avariciousness and
refuse to part with what he has in time of necessity, his neighbors would soon destroy all his property, and put him on a
footing with the poorest, hardly leaving a house to cover his
head. They will give the clothes from their back, rather than be
called peere, peere, or stingy” (1799, p. 334).
	  Firth’s discussion of Maori sharing in favor of need is more
measured: “At a time of shortage of provisions . . . persons
did not as a rule keep to themselves the product of their
labour, but shared it out among the other people of the village” (Firth, 1959, p. 162). It is as true in the forests of New
Zealand as the savannahs of the Sudan that “Starvation or real
want in one family was impossible while others in the village
were abundantly supplied with food” (p. 290).

255

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

256

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

	  Of interest in connection with responses to general scarcity
is the development in food-poor Polynesian atolls of reserve
lands administered in group interests, the products of which
were periodically pooled by communities (e.g., Beaglehole, E.
and P., 1938; Hogbin,1934; MacGregor, 1937). The restudy
of Tikopia by Firth and Spillius, however, provides probably
the most comprehensive report of the reaction of a primitive
society to prolonged and intense food shortage. The reaction
proceeded far: while traffic in food did not develop, theft
certainly did and contraction of foodsharing to the household sphere did too. These latter responses, increases in negative reciprocity and diminution of the sector of generalized
exchange, were apparently progressive, augmenting as the
crisis deepened. It is impossible to do justice here to Firth’s
and Spillius’ analyses, but it is at least useful to excerpt some
remarks from Firth’s summary of exchange behavior during
the famine: “In general it can be said . . . that while morals
degenerated under the strain of famine, manners remained.
At the times of greatest food shortage the ordinary modes of
serving food were kept up. . . . But while in matters of hospitality all the forms of etiquette continued to be maintained
throughout the period of famine, its substance radically altered.
No longer was food actually shared with visitors. Moreover,
after food had been cooked it was . . . concealed—sometimes
even locked up in a box. . . . In this development kinship ties
were affected, though not quite in the same way as the more
general rules of hospitality. Kin who called in were treated as
ordinary visitors; food was not shared with them. . . . In many
cases if food was left in a house a member of the household
remained behind to guard it. Here, it was stated to Spillius,
the inmates were often not so much afraid of theft by strangers but of the inroads of kin who normally would have been
welcome to come and take what they pleased. In the definition of kin interests that took place under the stress of famine
there was some atomization of the larger kin groups on the
consumption side and a closer integration of the individual

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

household group. (This normally meant elementary family
but often included other kin.) Even at the height of the famine it appeared that within an elementary family full sharing
of food continued to be the norm. The atomization tended to
be most strong where food was most desparately short—and
it must be remembered that supplies varied considerably in
different groups, depending on their size and their wealth
in land. But in one respect the strength of kin ties was manifested, in the common practice of pooling supplies, especially where food—though scarce— was not desperately
short. Closely related households ‘linked ovens’ (tau umu) by
each drawing upon its own stock of food and then sharing in
the work of the oven and in a common meal . . . the Tikopia
avoided where possible their general responsibility or undefined responsibility for kin during the famine but showed no
disposition to reject responsibility which had been specifically defined by the undertaking. What the famine did was
to reveal the solidarity of the elementary family. But it also
brought out the strength of other kin ties personally assumed
. . .” (Firth, 1959, pp. 83–84).
C.3.6	
Bemba — High incidence of generalized reciprocity associated
with differential food stocks, and also during general hunger
seasons. Thus, “If a man’s crops are destroyed by some sudden
calamity, or if he has planted insufficient for his needs, relatives in his own village may be able to help him by giving him
baskets of grain or offering him a share in their meals. But if
the whole community has been visited by the same affliction,
such as a locust swarm or a raider elephant, the householder
will move himself and his family to live with other kinsmen
in an area where food is less scarce. . . . Hospitality of this sort
is commonly practised in the hunger season, when families
go all over the country ‘looking for porridge’. . . or ‘running
from hunger’ . . . . Hence the legal obligations of kinship result
in a particular type of food distribution, both within the village and the surrounding neighbourhood, which is not found
in those modern communities in which a more individual

257

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

258

On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange

domestic economy is practised” (Richards, 1939, pp. 108–
109). “The economic conditions under which [a Bemba
woman] lives necessitate reciprocal sharing of foodstuffs,
rather than their accumulation, and extend the individual’s
responsibility outside her own household. Plainly, therefore,
it does not pay a Bemba woman to have very much more
grain than her fellows. She would merely have to distribute
it, and during the recent locust scourge the villagers whose
gardens escaped destruction complained that they were not
really better off than their fellows for ‘our people come and
live with us or beg us for baskets of millet’ ” (pp. 201–202).
C.3.7	
Pilagá — Henry’s Table 7(1951, p. 194) indicates that all unproductive persons in the village studied—it was, recall, a period
of very low supplies—received food from more people than
they gave food to. The “negative” balance of these cases—old
and blind, old women, etc.—varies from –3 to –15 and the
eight persons listed as unproductive make up more than half
of those showing such negative balance. This is contrary to
the general Pilaga trend: “It will be at once clear from the
tables that the Pilaga on the whole gives to more people than
he receives from, but that, with the unproductive Pilaga the
situation is reversed” (pp. 195–197). The negative balance of
unproductive people shows as well in the number of transactions as in the number of people given-to minus receivedfrom (p. 196). In Table III, presenting the approximate ratios of
food quantity received to food quantity given away, ten persons are listed as unproductive and for eight of these income
exceeded out-go; six persons are listed as very or exceptionally productive and four had out-go over income, one had
income over out-go and one had income equal to out-go (p.
201). I take these figures to mean that those who had food
shared it out to those who had none, in the main.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

6
