Endnotes

inland hunting, good things often come in large packages; hence, one day’s
work may yield two days’ sustenance. A fishing-gathering regime perhaps
produces smaller if steadier returns, enjoining somewhat longer and more
regular efforts.
14 At least some Australians, the Yir-Yiront, make no linguistic differentiation
between work and play (Sharp, 1958, p. 6).
15 This appreciation of local resources is all the more remarkable considering that Lee’s ethnographic work was done in the second and third years
of “one of the most severe droughts in South Africa’s history” (1968,
p. 39; 1969, p. 73 n).
16 As were the Tasmanians, of whom Bonwick wrote: “The Aborigines were
never in want of food; though Mrs. Somerville has ventured to say of them
in her ‘Physical Geography’ that they were ‘truly miserable in a country where
the means of existence were so scanty.’ Dr. Jeannent, once Protector, writes:
‘They must have been superabundantly supplied, and have required little
exertion or industry to support themselves.’ ’’(Bonwick, 1870, p. 14).
17 This by way of contrast to other tribes deeper in the Central Australian Desert,
and specifically under “ordinary circumstances,” not the times of long-continued drought when “he has to suffer privation” (Spencer and Gillen, 1899, p. 7).
18 Basedow goes on to excuse the people’s idleness on the grounds of overeating, then to excuse the overeating on the grounds of the periods of hunger
natives suffer, which he further explains by the droughts Australia is heir to,
the effects of which have been exacerbated by the white man’s exploitation
of the country.
19 This phrase appears in a paper by Woodburn distributed to the Wenner-Gren
symposium on “Man the Hunter,” although it is only elliptically repeated in
the published account (1968, p. 55). I hope I do not commit an indiscretion
or an inaccuracy citing it here.
20 “Agriculture is in fact the first example of servile labor in the history of man.
According to biblical tradition, the first criminal, Cain, is a farmer” (Lafargue,
1911 [1883], p. 11 n).
	  It is notable too that the agricultural neighbours of both Bushmen and
Hadza are quick to resort to the more dependable hunting-gathering life
come drought and threat of famine (Woodburn, 1958, p. 54; Lee, 1968,
pp. 39–40).
21 This common distaste for prolonged labor manifested by recently primitive
peoples under European employ, a distaste not restricted to ex-hunters, might
have alerted anthropology to the fact that the traditional economy had known
only modest objectives, so within reach as to allow an extraordinary disengagement, considerable “relief from the mere problem of getting a living.”
	  The hunting economy may also be commonly underrated for its presumed
inability to support specialist production. Cf. Sharp, 1934–35, p. 37; Radcliffe-Brown, 1948, p. 43; Spencer, 1959, pp. 155, 196, 251; Lothrup, 1928,
p. 71; Steward, 1938, p. 44. If there is not specialization, at any rate it is
clearly for lack of a “market,” not for lack of time.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

22 At the same time that the bourgeois ideology of scarcity was let loose, with
the inevitable effect of downgrading an earlier culture, it searched and found
in nature the ideal model to follow if man (or at least the workingman)
was ever to better his unhappy lot: the ant, the industrious ant. In this the
ideology may have been as mistaken as in its view of hunters. The following
appeared in the Ann Arbor News, January 27, 1971, under the head, “Two
Scientists Claim Ants a Little Lazy”: Palm Springs, Calif. (AP)—“Ants aren’t
all they are reported [reputed?] to be,” say Drs. George and Jeanette Wheeler.
	  The husband-wife researchers have devoted years to studying the creatures, heroes of fables on industriousness.
	  “Whenever we view an anthill we get the impression of a tremendous
amount of activity, but that is merely because there are so many ants and
they all look alike,” the Wheelers concluded.
	  “The individual ants spend a great deal of time just loafing. And,
worse than that, the worker ants, who are all females, spend a lot of time
primping.”

2 THE DOMESTIC MODE OF PRODUCTION I
1

2

3

4

5

Following the slight rephrasing by Brown and Brookfield (1963), Allan’s formula is: “carrying capacity” = 100 CL/P where P is the percentage of arable
available to the community, L is the mean acreage per capita under cultivation and C a factor of the number of garden units needed for a full cycle,
calculated as fallow period + cultivation period/fallow period. The result of
100 CL/P is the amount of land required to support one person in perpetuity. This is then converted into a density per square mile or square kilometer.
This conclusion is framed for the population, globally considered, practicing a determinate form of agriculture; it does not preclude that localized
subgroups (families, lineages, villages), under the given rules of recruitment
and land tenure, will not experience “population pressure.” Such of course is
a structural problem, not posed by technology or resources per se.
Four of the 26 groups were above capacity. All four, however, fall into the two
lowest of four categories of data reliability developed by Brown and Brookfield. Only Naregu received the highest classification of reliability. Groups in
the second highest had the following indexes of actual to potential population : 0.8 (two cases), 0.6, 0.5, 0.4, and 0.3.
According to a recent FAO report, some 14 million square miles, occupied
by 200 million people, are still exploited by slash-and-burn (cited in Conklin,
1961, p. 27). Of course, not all of this is primitive domain.
The consistent discrepancy between population density and agricultural
capacity, even where the former attains 200-plus people/square mile, raises
more than one passionate theoretical question. What are we to make of
the popular inclination to invoke demographic pressure on resources in
explanation of diverse economic and political developments ranging from
the intensification of production to the elaboration of patrilineal structure or

297

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

298

Endnotes

the formation of the state? First of all, it is not evident that archaic economies know a tendency to reach, let alone exceed, the population capacity
of their means of production. On the other hand, it is evident that current
mechanistic explanations from demographic cause—or, conversely, the
inference of “population pressure” from an observed economic or political
“effect”—are often oversimplified. In any given cultural formation, “pressure
on land” is not in the first instance a function of technology and resources,
but rather of the producers’ access to sufficient means of livelihood. The latter
clearly is a specification of the cultural system-relations of production and
property, rules of land tenure, relations between local groups, and so forth.
Except in the theoretically improbable case in which the customary rules of
access and labor are consistent with optimum exploitation of land, a society
may experience “population pressure” of various kinds and degrees at global
densities below its technical capacity of production. Thus the threshold of
demographic pressure is not an absolute determination of the means of
production but is relative to the society at issue. Moreover, how this pressure is organizationally experienced, the level of the social order to which it
is communicated, as well as the character of the response, also depend on the
institutions in place. (This point is well made by Kelly’s study of the problem
in the New Guinea Highlands, 1968.) Hence both the definition of population pressure and its social effects pass by way of the existing structure.
Consequently, any explanation of historical events or developments, such as
warfare or the origin of the state, that ignores this structure is theoretically
suspect.
6 These Pirie had himself culled from the Arusha symposium on Conservation
of Nature and Natural Resources in Modern African States (1961). This publication was not available to me on writing. Pirie’s article, moreover, raises
some question about the control of predators (p. 411), the significance of
which is unclear but which may have bearing on the figures for wild animal
yields.
7 Allan, on the other hand, finds among pastoralists some urge to accumulate cattle that may outstrip pasturage capacities, and at least two peoples,
Masai and Mukogodo, with an apparent “excess of livestock in relation to
the economic requirement of simple pastoralism” (1965, p. 311).
8 This is not at all unique to Lele. Polygyny in a society of more or less balanced sex ratio usually means late first marriages for most men. While an
only casual interest in production is not also necessary, it is at least consistent and often encountered.
9 Again I merely raise the point here, reserving it for fuller discussion later
(Chapter 3).
10 The concrete case described in greatest detail concerns the village of Kasaka,
for which Richards recorded a general calender of activities covering mainly
September 1933, and work diaries of 38 adults over 23 days (Richards, 1961,
pp. 162–64 and Table E). Only the old men worked regularly, “those reckoned by the Government as too feeble to pay tax.” Richards observes: “Five

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

old men worked 14 days out of 20; seven young men worked seven days out
of 20 . . . it is obvious that any community in which the young and active
males work exactly half as the old must suffer as regards its food production” (p. 164 n). The records refer to a season of less-than-average agricultural intensity, but not the famous Bemba hunger period.
11 “The herding of livestock does not absorb the energies of the entire [Masai]
population, and the young men from the ages of about sixteen to thirty live
apart from their families and clans as warriors” (Forde, 1963 [1934], p. 29 f).
12 Cf. Clark, 1938, p. 9; Rivers, 1906, pp. 566–67. As for middle-eastern Arabs,
however, “The male Arab is quite content to pass the day smoking, chatting
and drinking coffee. Herding the camels is his only office. All the work of
erecting tents, looking after sheep and goats and bringing water, he leaves to
his women” (Awad, 1962, p. 335).
13 Among Tiv, “ ‘Labor’ is the factor of production in greatest supply” (Bohannan and Bohannan, 1968, p. 76).
14 Here is another society, however, in which labor obligation seems unevenly
divided by sex, and also by age-class. For in addition to gardening, Kapauku
women do a substantial amount of fishing, pig tending, and housework,
even as their men are sometimes away three and four months in trading or
war expeditions, and the unmarried men in particular maintain all the while
a steady indifference to cultivation (Pospisil, 1963, p. 189).
15 Although Tiv also “prefer to work very hard and at a terrific pace and then do
almost nothing for a day or two” (Bohannan and Bohannan, 1968, p. 72).
16 Of course, even as there remains a question whether such a slight record
can be representative of the Nupe economic condition, it is also questionable whether Nupe are truly representative of a primitive economy.
17 Theoretically November to March, but see Richards, 1962, p. 390.
18 Richards’s comments on the duration of the working day provide additional
pertinent information: “Bemba rise at 5 a.m. in the hot weather, but come
reluctantly from their huts at 8 or even later in the cold season, and their
working day is fixed accordingly . . . the Bemba in his unspecialized society
does different tasks daily and a different amount of work each day. The
diary of men’s and women’s activities . . . shows that in Kampamba the
men were employed on five quite separate occupations . . . in the course of
ten days, and at Kasaka . . . various ritual observances, visits from friends
or Europeans, interrupted the daily routine constantly. Domestic needs tie
the women to certain daily tasks . . . but even then their garden work varies
greatly from day to day. The working hours also change in what seems to us
a most erratic manner. In fact I do not think the people ever conceive of such
periods as the month, week, or day in relation to regular work at all. . . . The
whole bodily rhythm of the Bemba differs completely from that of a peasant
in Western Europe, let alone an industrial worker. For instance at Kasaka,
in a slack season, the old men worked 14 days out of 20 and the young
men seven; while at Kampamba in the busier season, the men of all ages
worked on an average of 8 out of 9 working days [Sunday not included]. The

299

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

300

Endnotes

average working day in the first instance was 2¾ hours for men and 2 hours
gardening plus 4 hours domestic work for the women, but the figures varied
from 0 to 6 hours a day. In the second case the average was 4 hours for the
men and 6 for the women, and the figures showed the same daily variation”
(1962, pp. 393–94).
19 Cf. the analogous report from the Cameroons cited by Clark and Haswell
(1964, p. 117).
20 “A strange delusion possesses the working classes of the nations where
capitalist civilization holds its sway. This delusion drags in its train the individual and social woes which for two centuries have tortured sad humanity.
This delusion is the love of work, the furious passion for work, pushed even
to the exhaustion of the vital force of the individual and his progeny. Instead
of opposing this mental aberration, the priests, the economists and the
moralists have cast a sacred halo over work” (Lafargue, 1909, p. 9).
21 See the reference to McCarthy and MacArthur’s study of Australian hunting
in Chapter 1. “The quantity of food gathered in any one day by any of these
groups could in every instance be increased. . . . ” Woodburn writes to the
same effect of the Hadza: “When a man goes off into the bush with his bow
and arrows, his main interest is usually to satisfy his hunger. Once he has
satisfied his hunger by eating berries or by shooting and catching some
small animal, he is unlikely to make much effort to shoot a large animal. . . .
Men most often return from the bush empty-handed but with their hunger
satisfied” (1968, p. 53; cf. p. 51). Women, meanwhile, are doing essentially
the same.
22 Again this is no necessary contradiction to the “original affluent society” of
Chapter 1, which was defined on the collective level and in terms of consumption, not production. The deficiencies here indicated in domestic production do not at all preclude amelioration by interhousehold distribution.
On the contrary, they make intelligible the intensity of such distribution.
23 By contrast, in a parallel study of six household outputs among the Lamet
of Laos, Izikowitz (1951) found considerable variation, but all on the surplus-over-subsistence side. (The Lamet apparently depend more on rice
sales than the Iban, and have apparently done so for a longer time.) Cf. also
Geddes, 1954, on the Land Dayak.
24 However, it may be that the figure of one acre/head was determined in part
from the actual tendency of gardens to cluster around that ratio—coupled
with evidence from a neighboring region that such an amount should
suffice. The norm of one acre/capita, moreover, does not make allowance
for differential food requirements of men, women, and children, important
when assessing the economic success of particular households. In a later
section discussing household labor intensity (Chapter 3), such adjustments
are made in the Mazulu data.
25 Of the Lele, for example, nothing said here will be as satisfactory as Mary
Douglas’s excellent analysis (1960).
26 “Mode of production” is here differently employed than by Terray (following Althusser and Balibar) in his important work Le Marxisme devant les

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

sociétés primitives (1969). Apart from the obvious difference in attention
to superstructural “instances,” the main contrast concerns the theoretical
importance accorded various forms of cooperation, that is, as constituting
corporate structures in control of productive forces over and against the
domestic units. Such an importance is here refused, and from this divergence follow many of the others. Nevertheless, in spite of these significant
differences, it will be obvious that the present perspective joins with Terray’s
on many points, and also with that of Meillassoux (1960; 1964), which was
the basis for Terray’s work.
27 Of course a great deal of knowledge is required for the development and
maintenance of modem machinery; the above sentence confines itself to the
relation of man and tool in the process of production.
28 Marx’s appreciation of the machine revolution, earlier of course than
Veblen’s, is very close to the latter in wording: “Along with the tool, the skill
of the workman in handling it passes over to the machine. . . . In handicrafts and manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory,
the machine makes use of him. There the movements of the instrument of
labour proceed from him, here it is the movements of the machine that he
must follow. In [prefactory] manufacture the workmen are parts of a living
mechanism. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of the
workman, who becomes its mere living appendage. . . . Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour-process, but also a process
of creating surplus-value, has this in common, that it is not the workman
that employs the instruments of labour, but the instruments of labour that
employ the workman” (1967a, vol 1, pp. 420–23). For Marx, it should be
noted, the critical turning point in the man-tool relation was not the substitution of nonhuman power, but the attachment of tools to a transmission
and motor-mechanism; the last might still be human but the workman had
effectively been alienated from the instruments of labor, the skill of handling
them now passing over to the machine. This is the indicative criterion of the
machine and the real beginning of the industrial revolution.
29 Long unknown in the Anglo-Saxon world, Chayanov’s work (1966) assembles a large array of statistical information and intellectual ponderation of
passionate interest to the student of precapitalist economies. (This praise
is not to be tempered by the obvious disagreement between the theoretical
perspective of the present work and the marginalist reading Chayanov gives
in the end to his more substantial reflections.)
30 Chayanov supplies the complete table for 25 families (1966, p. 77). The
average number of working days/worker/year was 131.8; the median, 125.8.
31 “In the first place the wealth of the old tribal and village communities was in no
sense a domination over men. And secondly, even in societies moving in class
antagonisms, insofar as wealth includes domination over men, it is mainly and
almost exclusively a domination over men by virtue of, and through the intermediary of, the domination over things” (Engels, 1966, p. 205).
32 The scheme of the Discourse on the Origin of Inequality among Men is more
complicated. True that men in the first period were isolated, but for lack of

301

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

302

Endnotes

sociable qualities. By the time Rousseau brought in the potential conflict that
in the analyses of others (such as Hobbes) was functionally linked to dispersion, something like society already existed and the earth was fully occupied.
However, it is clear that Rousseau had the same understanding of the relation
between private force and dispersion, because he felt compelled to explain in
footnote why at this later time people were not centrifugally scattered, that is,
because the earth had already been filled (1964, vol. 3, pp. 221–22).

3 THE DOMESTIC MODE OF PRODUCTION II
1

2

3

4

The determination of the main organization of production at an infrastructural level of kinship is one way of facing the dilemma presented by primitive
societies to Marxist analyses, namely, between the decisive role accorded
by theory to the economic base and the fact that the dominant economic
relations are in quality superstructural, e.g., kinship relations (see Godelier,
1966; Terray, 1969). The scheme of the preceding paragraphs might be read
as a transposition of the infrastructure-superstructure distinction from
different types of institutional order (economy, kinship) to different orders
of kinship (household versus lineage, clan). In truth, however, the present
problématique was not directly framed to meet this dilemma.
The same can be phrased also as an inverse relation between intensity and
the proportion for workers, a formulation used earlier and to which we
return presently.
All persons indicated in Scudder’s table as “unmarried people for whom
the wife must cook,” and who were not further tabulated as gardeners, were
counted as preadolescent children. Probably some dependent elders have
thus slipped in as 0.50 consumers.
Besides incertainties in the data, there are external complications, some of
which are indicated in footnotes to Table 3.1. One, however, must be considered in greater detail. There is a modest amount of cash cropping in Mazulu,
mainly of tobacco, with the proceeds invested principally in animal stock.
The effects upon the domestic production of cereals are not altogether clear,
but the figures on hand probably have not been seriously deformed by crop
sales. The total volume of produce sale is quite limited; of subsistence crops
in particular, insignificant. At the time of study, Scudder writes, “most valley
Tonga were essentially subsistence cultivators who rarely sell a guinea’s
worth of produce per annum” (1962, p. 89). Nor did cash cropping appear
an alternative to subsistence gardening, that is, as a means of food purchase, so capable of direct interference in cereal cultivation. Finally, in such
cases of simple commodity production, it must be considered whether trade
actually removes the exchangeable food surplus from internal community
circulation. It happens that those Tongan farmers who convert produce into
animal stock are precisely the ones most subject to imperious requests from
relatives at times of food shortage—for animals constitute a reserve that
may be again sold for grain (pp. 89 f, 179–180; Colson, 1960, p. 38 f).

Endnotes

6xy = Σ (xy)/ Σ (x ), where x = the deviation of each unit from the x mean
(c/w mean), y the deviation from the y (a/w) mean. Given the limited and
scattered distribution of household differences, it should be stressed that
the regression in the Mazulu case (and in subsequent cases treated) has
little predictive or inductive value. It has been adopted here simply as a
description of the main drift in the variations.
6 For a diagrammatic indication of Chayanov’s rule formulated as an inverse
relation, see the interesting analysis of the covariation between domestic
labor force and preferred intensities of labor among Indian farm families
presented in Clark and Haswell, 1964, p. 116.
7 Subject to the caveat, actually realized in the Botukebo case, where the bigman’s production is not extraordinary, that a leader who has successfully
piled up credits and followers may eventually slacken his own particular
efforts.
8 A theoretical argument can be made for inclusion in the domestic quotas
of consumption, hence in the slope of normal intensity, an extra amount
of sweet potato equivalent to the feed that would be needed to supply a
normal per capita pork ration. Apart, however, from arguments also possible
to the contrary, the published data do not readily lend themselves to this
calculation.
9 Pigs included, village production still surpassed the collective subsistence
norm (Pospisil, 1963, p. 394 f).
10 In the same vein, among Ituri Pygmies: “When the hunt returns to camp
there is immediate excitement as those who stayed behind crowd around
for tales of all that happened, and maybe for a few tidbits of raw meat. In
the confusion, men and women alike but particularly women, may be seen
furtively concealing some of their spoils under the leaves of their roofs, or in
empty pots nearby. For although there will have been some sharing on the
scene, there is always more back in the camp, and family loyalty is not that
subject to band loyalty that there is no cheating” (Turnbull, 1965, p. 120; cf.
Marshall, 1961, p. 231).
11 The phrase is L. Althusser’s. See his discussion of “L’objet du Capital”
(Althusser, Rancière, et al.; 1966, vol. 2).
12 Firth’s interpretation of the social conflict of interest as an opposition
between the individual and the society unfortunately lends itself to the grand
mystification now prevailing in comparative economics, for the elaboration
of which anthropologists join with economists to prove that savages are
often moved by a crass self-concern, even as businessmen are pursuing
higher ends: hence people everywhere act on mixed “economic” and “noneconomic” motives, and, the classic economizing behavior being everywhere
the same in principle, it is universally valid in analysis. On one hand, if the
“native” engages in reciprocal exchange to no net material increment, still
he may be looking toward a tangible utility, inasmuch as the gift given now
when it can be afforded may be returned later on when it is most needed.
On the other hand, the bourgeoisie have been known to contribute to charity

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

5

2

303

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

304

Endnotes

and otherwise derive spiritual benefits from material profits. The objective
returns to a given deployment of resources, whether to maximum material
gain or some other use, are thus confused with the economic subject’s own
final relation to the process. Both are called “utilities” or “ends.” The de
facto returns in this way confounded with the subjective satisfactions, and
the motivations of the subject with the nature of his activity, one is permitted to ignore the real differences in the way goods are handled in favor
of apparent resemblances in the satisfactions gained. The attempt of the
“formalist school” to detach the principle of individual maximization from
its bourgeois context and spread it around the world is fatally marked by this
confusion. Cf. Burling, 1962; Cook, 1966; Robbins, 1935; Sahlins, 1969.
13 This pulsation is discussed further in Chapter 5. It is controlled on one hand
by the rule that generosity tends to be more widely extended when differences in wealth appear within the community, and on the other, by the ability
of the social system, given its constituted solidarities, to support this exceptional generosity, an ability that decreases as the general hardship increases.
14 In the terms adopted in Chapter 5, pooling and generalized reciprocity were
now declining in the social sphere, as negative reciprocity extended its range.
15 We shall see shortly that the principle is organized in various ways. But in
some instances the entire scheme of rank is left to the free play of generosity, as in Busama, where: “The relation of debtors to creditors forms the
basis of the system of leadership” (Hogbin, 1951, p. 122).
16 “Mutual helpfulness” (Mead, 1934, p. 335), “continual reciprocity between chief
and people” (Firth, 1959a, p. 133), “mutually dependent” (Ivens, 1927, p. 255).
For other examples see Richards, 1939, pp. 147–150, 214; Oliver, 1955, p. 342;
Drucker, 1937, p. 245. See also Chapter 5. In speaking of “reciprocity” I refer
here to the ideological economic relation between headmen and the underlying
population, not necessarily to the concrete form. The latter may be technically
“redistribution.” Even so, redistribution is conceived and sanctioned as a reciprocal relation, and is in form but a centralization of reciprocities.
17 One reason (or rationale) why Western social science, with its disposition
to accept or even privilege the native models, has so much difficulty with
“exploitation.” Or is it that, having trouble with “exploitation,” it is disposed
to privilege the native model?
18 If again this ideology seems more widespread than primitive society, perhaps in that respect it can be taken in confirmation of Marx’s dictum that
what is not visible in modern economy is often seen en clair in primitive
economy—to which Althusser adds that what is seen en clair in primitive economy is that “l’ économique n’est pas directment visible en clair”
(Althusser et al., 1966a, Vol 2, p. 154).
19 Cf. Hogbin, 1939, p. 35; Oliver, 1949, p. 89; 1955, p. 446, for similar passages,
or more generally, Sahlins, 1963. One could easily collect the same observations from outside Melanesia. For example: “A man who can afford to
acquire all these expensive things which are connected with the cult of the
ancestors, and sacrifice so much at these rites, must be a particularly clever
person, and thus his reputation and his prestige grow with every feast. In this

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

connection social prestige plays an excessive part, and I should even like to
assume that the feast of the ancestors and all connected with it is the driving
force in the entire economic and social life of the Lamet. It forces the more
aspiring and ambitious to produce more than what is required for the necessities
of life . . . This striving for prestige plays a particularly important part in the
economic life of the Lamet, and urges them to a surplus production” (Izikowitz,
1951, pp. 332, 341, emphasis mine).
20 See Handy, 1940 for these and other details of Hawaiian irrigation. W. Bennett reported of Kauai: “The impressive feature of the agricultural terracing
is its tremendous extent. In the valleys in which little disturbance has gone
on, particularly the Napali section, the maximum of tillable soil was utilized.
On the sides of the valleys the terraces run almost to the base of the great
cliffs, where the nature of the talus slopes is not too rocky. Though all these
terraces were not irrigated, a great proportion of them were, and the ingenuity of the engineering is remarkable” (1931, p. 21).
21 Perhaps in part because of the intervention of the colonial power—and
the ethnographers who at times acted in quasi-governmental capacity
(Spillius, 1957).
22 Here is one example of this geopolitics of rebellion: Kalaniopu’u, supreme
chief of the large island of Hawaii—the same who was paternal uncle and
predecessor of Kamehameha I—held court for a time in the Kona district of
the southwest. But, tradition relates, “scarcity of food, after a while, obliged
Kalaniopu’u to remove his court to the Kohala district [in the northwest],
where his headquarters were fixed at Kapaau” (Fornander, 1878–85, vol. 2,
p. 200). What had apparently rendered food scarce in Kona was now
repeated in Kohala: “Here the same extravagant, laissez-faire, eat and be
merry policy continued that had been commenced at Kona, and much
grumbling and discontent began to manifest itself among the resident
chiefs and cultivators of the land, the ‘Makaainana’ ” (ibid.). The local grumbling was echoed by a distant rumbling from the outlying district of Puna,
across to the island to the southeast. The two factions apparently combine,
and the tale then takes on its customary Olympian form, a story of battle
joined between great chiefs. The principal rebels were Imakakaloa of Puna
and one Nu’uanu, a chief of Ka’u who had once lived in Puna but was now
in attendance at Kalaniopu’u’s court. These two, as Fornander writes, were
“the heads and rallying points” of the unrest. From distant Puna, Imakakaloa “openly resisted the orders of Kalaniopu’u and his extravagant demands
for all kinds of property.” Nu’uanu, at the side of the paramount, “was
strongly suspected of favoring the growing discontent” (ibid.). This time,
however, the gods were with Kalaniopu’u. Nu’uanu died of a shark bite,
and after a series of battles, Imakakaloa was trapped, captured, and duly
sacrificed.
23 Hakau is described by another collector of tradition as “rapacious and
extortionate beyond endurance of either chiefs or people” (Fornander,
1878–85, vol. 2, p. 76).
24 On genealogical idiom see Malo, 1951, p. 52.

305

306

Endnotes

4 THE SPIRIT OF THE GIFT
1

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

2

3

4

5

6

7

An English translation of L’Essai sur le don has been prepared by Ian Cunnison, and published as The Gift (London: Cohen and West, 1954).
Hereinafter, I will use the Biggs version except where the argument about
Mauss’s interpretation requires that one cite only the documents available
to him. I take this opportunity to thank Professor Biggs for his generous
help.
It seems from Firth’s account that the same procedure was used both
against thieves and ingrates. I appeal here to Maori authorities for clarification. From my own very limited and entirely textual experience, it seems
that the goods of a victimized party were used particularly in sorcery against
thieves. Here, where the culprit usually is not known, some portion of the
goods remaining—or something from the place they were kept—is the
vehicle for identifying or punishing the thief (for example, Best, 1924, vol. 1,
p. 311). But sorcery against a known person is typically practiced by means
of something associated with him; thus, in a case of failure to repay, the
goods of the deceiver would be more likely to serve as vehicle than the gift
of the owner. For further interest and confusion, such a vehicle associated
with the victim of witchcraft is known to the Maori as hau. One of the
entries under “hau ” in W. Williams’s dictionary is: “something connected
with a person on whom it is intended to practice enchantment; such as a
portion of his hair, a drop of his spittle, or anything which has touched his
person, etc., which when taken to the tohunga [ritual expert] might serve
as a connecting link between his incantations and their object” (Williams,
1892).
The intervention of a third party thus offers no obscurity to Firth. The exchange
between second and third parties was necessary to introduce a second good that
could stand for the first, or for the hau of the first (cf. Firth, 1959a, p. 420 n).
“When Mauss sees in the gift exchange an interchange of personalities, ‘a
bond of souls,’ he is following, not native belief, but his own intellectualized
interpretation of it” (Firth, 1959a, p. 420).
In his latest word on the subject, Firth continues to deny the ethnographic
validity of Mauss’s views on the Maori hau, adding also that no such
spiritual belief is involved in Tikopian gift exchange (1967). Too, he now has
certain critical reservations on Mauss’s discussion of the obligations to give,
receive, and reciprocate. Yet at one level he would agree with Mauss. Not in
the sense of an actual spiritual entity, but in the more generalized social and
psychological sense of an extension of the self, the gift does partake of its
donor (ibid., pp. 10–11, 15–16).
In the original Maori as published by Best, the passage on gifts was actually
intercalculated as an explanatory aside between two descriptions of the ceremony. The continuous English translation, however, deletes the main part
of the first description, this Best having cited a page earlier (1909, p. 438).
Besides, both English and Maori texts begin with a discussion of witchcraft

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

spells, not apparently related to the ceremonial or the gift exchange, but
about which more later.
8 There is a very curious difference between the several versions of Best,
Mauss, and Tamati Ranapiri. Mauss appears to deliberately delete Best’s
reference to the ceremony in the opening phrase. Best had cited “I will now
speak of the hau, and the ceremony of whangai hau” whereas Mauss has it
merely, “Je vais vous [sic] parler du hau . . . ” (ellipsis is Mauss’s). The interesting point is raised by Biggs’s undoubtedly authentic translation, much
closer to that of Mauss, as it likewise does not mention whangai hau at this
point: “Now, concerning the hau of the forest.” However, even in this form
the original text linked the message on taonga with the ceremony of whangai
hau, “fostering” or “nourishing hau,” since the hau of the forest was not the
subject of the immediately succeeding passage on gifts but of the consequent and ultimate description of the ceremony.
9 I use Best’s translation, the one available to Mauss. I also have in hand
Biggs’s interlinear version; it does not differ significantly from Best’s.
10 The earlier discussion of this ritual, preceeding the passage on taonga in
the full Maori text, in fact comments on two related ceremonies: the one
just described and another, performed before, by those sent into the forest
in advance of the fowling season to observe the state of the game. I cite the
main part of this earlier description Biggs’s version: “The hau of the forest
has two ‘likenesses.’ 1. When the forest is inspected by the observers, and
if birds are observed to be there, and if birds are killed by them that day,
the first bird killed by them is offered to the mauri. It is simply thrown away
into the bush, and is said, ‘that’s for the mauri. ’ The reason, lest they get
nothing in the future. 2. When the hunting is finished (they) go out of the
bush and begin to cook the birds for preserving in fat. Some are set aside
first to feed the hau of the forest; this is the forest hau. Those birds which
were set aside are cooked on the second fire. Only the priests eat the birds
of the second fire, Other birds are set aside for the tapairu from which only
the women eat. Most of the birds are set aside and cooked on the puuraakau
fire. The birds of the puuraakau fire are for all to eat. . . . ” (cf. Best, 1909, pp.
438, 440–41, 449 f; and for other details of the ceremonies, 1942, pp. 13,
184 f, 316–17).
11 And in Best’s translation, even reiterating: “Suppose that you possess a
certain article, and you give that article to me, without price. We make no
bargain over it.”
12 Firth cites the following discussion to this point from Gudgeon: “If a man
received a present and passed it on to some third person then there is
no impropriety in such an act; but if a return present is made by the third
party then it must be passed on to the original grantor or it is a hau ngaro
(consumed hau)” (Firth, 1959a, p. 418). The lack of consequence in the first
of these conditions is again evidence against Mauss’s nostalgic hau, ever
striving to return to its foyer.
13 Whitia is the past participle of whiti. Whiti, according to H. Williams’s dictionary, means: (1) v.i., cross over, reach the opposite side; (2) change, turn, to

307

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

308

Endnotes

be inverted, to be contrary; (3) v.t., pass through; (4) turn over, prise (as with
a lever); (5) change (Williams, 1921, p. 584).
14 Best’s further interpretation lent itself to Mauss’s views: “For it seems that
that article of yours is impregnated with a certain amount of your hau, which
presumably passes into the article received in exchange therefore, because
if I pass that second article on to other hands it is a hau whitia”(1900–1901,
p. 198). Thus “it seems.” One has a feeling of participating in a game of
ethnographic folk-etymology, which we now find, from Best’s explanation, is
a quite probable game a quatre.
15 There is also, of course, a narrative bridge between the section on transmission, of magic and the ceremony, as the former ends with the placing of the
mauri which is the key element of the latter.
16 Thus Mauss’s simple translation of hau as spirit and his view of exchange
as a lien d’âmes is at least imprecise. Beyond that, Best repeatedly would
like to distinguish hau (and mauri) from wairua on the grounds that the
former, which ceases to exist with death, cannot leave a person’s body on
pain of death, unlike wairua. But here Best finds himself in difficulty with the
material manifestation of a person’s hau used in witchcraft, so that he is
alternatively tempted to say that some part of the hau can be detached from
the body or that the hau as witchcraft is not the “true” hau.
17 I use the Everyman’s edition for all citations from Leviathan (New York: Dutton, 1950), as it retains the archaic spelling, rather than the more commonly
cited English Works edited by Molesworth (1839).
18 Why this should seem particularly so in Leviathan in comparison with the
earlier Elements of Law and De Cive becomes intelligible from McNeilly’s
recent analysis to the effect that Leviathan completes the transformation
of Hobbes’s argument into a formal rationality of interpersonal relations
(in the absence of a sovereign power), which involves abandonment, as
concerns the logic of argument, of the prior stress on the content of human
passions. Hence if in the early works, “Hobbes attempts to derive political
conclusions from certain (very doubtful) propositions about the specific
nature of individual human beings . . . in Leviathan the argument depends
on an analysis of the formal structure of the relations between individuals”
(McNeilly, 1968, p. 5).
19 Mauss did note in certain transactions of the present day some “fundamental motives of human activity: emulation between individuals of the
same sex, that ‘deep- seated imperialism’ of men, at base part social, part
animal and psychological. . . .” (1966, pp. 258–259). On the other hand, if as
Macpherson (1965) argues, Hobbe’s conception of human nature is just the
bourgeois eternalized, then Mauss is squarely opposed to it (1966,
pp. 271–272).
20 Hobbes’s particular inability to conceive primitive society as such is
manifest by his assimilation of it, that is of the patriarchal chiefdom, to the
commonwealth. This is clear enough in the passages of Leviathan on commonwealths by acquisition, but even more definitive in the parallel sections

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

of Elements of Law and De Cive. Thus, in the latter: “A father with his sons and
servants, grown into a civil person by virtue of his paternal jurisdiction, is
called a family. This family, if through multiplying of children and acquisition
of servants it becomes numerous, insomuch as without casting the uncertain
die of war it cannot be subdued, will be termed an hereditary kingdom. Which
though it differ from an institutive monarchy, being acquired by force, in the
original and manner of its constitution; yet being constituted, it hath all the
same properties, and the right of authority is everywhere the same; insomuch as it is not needful to speak anything of them apart” (English Works
[Molesworth, ed.], 1839, vol. 2, pp. 121–122).

5 ON THE SOCIOLOGY OF PRIMITIVE EXCHANGE
1

For the present purpose,“economy” is viewed as the process of provisioning
society (or the “socio-cultural system”). No social relation, institution, or
set of institutions is of itself “economic.” Any institution, say a family or a
lineage order, if it has material consequence for provisioning society can be
placed in an economic context and considered part of the economic process. The same institution may be equally or more involved in the political
process, thus profitably considered as well in a political context. This way
of looking at economics or politics—or for that matter, religion, education,
and any number of other cultural processes—is dictated by the nature of
primitive culture. Here we find no socially distinct “economy” or “government,” merely social groups and relations with multiple functions, which we
distinguish as economic, political, and so forth.
	  That economy thus presents itself as an aspect of things is probably
generally acceptable. That the emphasis be the provisioning of society may
not prove so acceptable. For the concern is not how individuals go about
their business: “economy” has not been defined as the application of scarce
available means against alternative ends (material ends or otherwise). From
means to end “economy” is conceived as a component of culture rather than
a kind of human action, the material life process of society rather than a
need-satisfying process of individual behavior. Our purpose is not to analyze
entrepreneurs but to compare cultures. We reject the historically specific Business Outlook. In terms of controversial positions recently developed in the
American Anthropologist, the stand adopted is much more with Dalton (1961;
cf. Sahlins, 1962) than with Burling (1962) or LeClair (1962). Also, solidarity
is here affirmed with housewives the world over and Professor Malinowski.
Professor Firth upbraids Malinowski’s imprecision on a point of economic
anthropology with the observation that “This is not the terminology of economics, it is almost the language of the housewife” (Firth, 1957, p. 220). The
terminology of the present effort similarly departs from economic orthodoxy.
This may be justly considered a necessity born of ignorance, but something is

309

310

Endnotes

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

2

3

4

to be said as well for the appropriateness, in a study of kinship economies, of
the housewife’s perspective.
Economy has been defined as the process of (materially) provisioning
society and the definition opposed to the human act of satisfying wants.
The great play of instrumental exchange in primitive societies underscores the usefulness of the former definition. Sometimes the peace-making aspect is so fundamental that precisely the same sorts and amounts
of stuff change hands: the renunciation of opposed interest is in this
way symbolized. On a strictly formal view the transaction is a waste of
time and effort. One might say that people are maximizing value, social
value, but such is to misplace the determinant of the transaction, to fail
to specify the circumstances which produce different material outcomes
in different historical instances, to hold fast to the economizing premise
of the market by a false assignment of pecuniary-like qualities to social
qualities, to take the high road to tautology. The interest of such transactions is precisely that they do not materially provision people and are
not predicated on the satisfaction of human material needs. They do,
however, decidedly provision society: they maintain social relations, the
structure of society, even if they do not to the least advantage the stock of
consumables. Without any further assumptions, they are “economic” in
the suggested meaning of the term (cf. Sahlins, 1969).
The reader familiar with recent discussions of primitive distribution will
recognize my indebtedness to Polanyi (1944, 1957, 1959) on this score, and
likewise the departures from Polanyi’s terminology and threefold scheme of
principles of integration. It is also a pleasure to affirm with Firth that “Every
student of primitive economics, in fact, gratefully builds upon the foundations which Malinowski has laid” (Firth, 1959, p. 174).
Since the original publication of this essay, Lévi-Strauss’s “échange généralisé” has become much more current than our “generalized reciprocity.” This
is only unfortunate because the two do not refer to the same type (let alone
the same universe) of reciprocity. Besides, friends and critics have suggested
various alternatives to “generalized reciprocity,” such as “indefinite reciprocity,” etc. The time for beating a terminological retreat may be near; but for
the moment, I am holding on.

6 EXCHANGE VALUE AND THE DIPLOMACY OF PRIMITIVE TRADE
1

I do not attempt here a general theory of value. The principal concern is
exchange value. By the “exchange value” of a good (A), I mean the quantity
of other goods (B, C, etc.) received in return for it—as in the famous couplet
“The value of a thing/Is just as much as it will bring.” For the historical
economies in question, it remains to be seen whether this “exchange value”
approximates the Ricardian-Marxist “value,” the average social labor embodied in the product. Were it not for the ambiguity introduced by spheres of

Endnotes

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

2

3

4
5

6

exchange in assigning goods different relative standing, the term “relative
value” might be more acceptable all around than “exchange value”; where
the context allows, I substitute the former term. “Price” is reserved for
exchange value expressed in money terms.
“The Manus . . . most disadvantageously placed of all the tribes in that part
of the archipelago, are nevertheless the richest and have the highest standard of living” (Mead, 1937, p. 212).
Local demand in the Manus trade system is indicated by an unusual device.
In Manus transactions with Balowan, where sago is scarce, one package of
sago offered by Manus will bring ten mud hen’s eggs from Balowan; but the
equivalent of a package of sago offered by Manus to Balowan in shell money
commands only three mud hen’s eggs. (Clearly if the Manus anywhere can
convert these several items they make a killing.) Similarly, in Manus daily
trade with Usiai land people, demand is indicated by unequal ratios of the
following sort: one fish from Manus for ten taro or forty betel nut from Usiai;
whereas one cup of lime from Manus for four taro or eighty betel nut from
Usiai. Mead comments: “Betel-chewing need is matched against betel chewing need, to coerce the sea people [Manus] into providing lime for the land
peoples” (Mead, 1930, p. 130). That is to say, when the Usiai want lime, they
offer betel nut, as the Manus can realize more betel in exchange for lime
than for fish; if Usiai wanted fish, they would have brought taro. On the labor
advantage to Manus in this trade, and the gains appreciated through supply/
demand variations in different parts of the Manus network, see Schwartz,
1963, pp. 75, 78.
I cannot however verify these assertions; in the event they prove invalid,
certain suggestions of the following paragraphs will require modification.
Cash has particularly replaced the pigs’ tusks traditionally traded for Tami
bowls, corresponding to a replacement of the latter by European currency in
the brideprices of the Finschhafen area.
Belshaw reports a trade system in the southern Massim apparently similar
in exchange value conditions to the Huon Gulf (1955, pp. 28–29, 81–82).
He notes, however, that rates of certain items—areca nuts, pots, and stick
tobacco—do vary locally with demand. I may not fully understand his argument, which is phrased in shilling equivalents, but what it seems to show,
when taken in conjunction with the published table of exchange ratios
(pp. 82–83), is that values of these goods in terms of each other reflect
respective supply and demand in the southern Massim as a whole, not that
their exchange values vary locally from place to place (except perhaps in
modern shilling deals). A particular good would command more or less of
another, depending on the global supply/demand, but whatever the ratio in
one place it is the same in another. The published tables seem to indicate
fairly uniform customary exchange rates: for example, one pot is traded for
one “bunch” or one “bundle” of areca nuts at several locations (Tubetube,
Bwasilake, Milne Bay), whereas two sticks of tobacco are given for one

311

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

312

Endnotes

“bunch” of areca at Sudest and one pot for two sticks of tobacco at Sumarai
(pp. 81–82).
7 Thus Huon Gulf goods may well pass through Tami into the Siassi–New
Britain area, but probably under different trade terms, for the Tami islanders
act as middlemen in a part of this area, very like the Siassi and probably also
to some net advantage.
8 In speaking of short-term sluggishness in the face of supply and demand
unbalance, it is necessary to bear in mind that the reference is to customary
rates, especially if the economy includes a sector of haggling. Bargaining
proceeds from various degrees of desperation and advantage, personal positions that do not individually represent the aggregate supply and demand
and result in marked differences from transaction to transaction in rates
of exchange. In Marshall’s terms, bargainers can come to an equilibrium,
but only fortituitously to the equilibirum (1961, pp. 791–793). Unless and
until other people get into the bargaining, both on the demand side and the
supply side, such paired haggling does not constitute a “market principle”
nor influence price in the way envisioned by the competitive model. Certain
ethnographic suggestions that prices in one or another primitive society are
even more responsive to supply/demand than in our markets, insofar as
they derive from the haggling sector, ought to be treated with suspicion. In
any event, these kinds of fluctuations are not involved in the present discussion of short-term stability.
9 Or else the trade of their respective communities is arranged between
representative chiefs, who redistribute the proceeds within their groups, for
example, certain Pomo trade (Loeb, 1926, pp. 192–193), or in the Marquesas (Linton, 1939, p. 147). On corporate partnerships between groups, see
below.
10 Oliver provides an example from Siuai of the difficulty of trade—even
between people of the same ethnic group—in the absence of partnership: “It
is not a simple matter to purchase a pig. Owners become fond of their beasts
and are often loath to give them up. A would-be purchaser cannot merely let
it be known that he is interested in buying, and then sit at home and await
orders. . . . One situation was observed in which a hopeful purchaser visited
a potential seller every day for nine days before finally concluding the transaction: all for a [small] pig worth 20 spans of mauai! It is no wonder, then,
that institutionalized arrangements have developed whereby acquiring a pig
becomes simplified. One of these is the taovu [trade partner] relationship
already described” (Oliver, 1955, p. 350).
11 “. . . it is a serious offense [among the Sio of northeast New Guinea] to steal
or to attempt to lure away another person’s trade-friend. In the old days, a
man would attempt to kill an errant trade-friend as well as his new partner”
(Harding, 1967, pp. 166–167). The following also suggests competitive
impotence in trade: “One Komba man [an inland tribe] who is esteemed for
his generosity complained that some Sio [trade-] friends were being intentionally impolite to him. He was very offended: ‘They want me to visit [that

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Endnotes

is, exchange with] them, but I am only one man. What do they want me to
do, cut off my arms and legs and distribute them around?’ ” (p. 168).
12 Again, as bargained rates, auctioned rates are indeterminate and are unlikely
to indicate the equilibrium. Aiston writes of the Australian pitcheri narcotic
auction: “Intrinsic value had nothing to do with the sales; it was quite likely
that a big bag of pitcheri would be exchanged for a single boomerang, but it
was just as likely to be exchanged for half a dozen boomerangs and perhaps
a shield and a pirra; it always depended on what the buyer and seller wanted;
sometimes when the seller had as much as he could carry he would give a
bag in exchange for food for his party (1936–37, pp. 376–377).
13 Or at least I have not construed any definite or general covert price competition. There is one form of trade that possibly admits it—certain of the
so-called “markets” or “market meetings” in Melanesia. This arrangement,
of which Blackwood (1935) provides several examples, might reasonably
be considered a corporate trade partnership between communities, the
members of which meet at traditional places and prearranged times, and
are free to trade with any opposite number who shows up. The trade is
in customary products, is regulated by customary rates of equivalence,
and customarily proceeds without haggle—and little enough of any talk.
Blackwood did see one woman try to get more than the customary rate for
a load of her produce—i.e., try to haggle—but she was foiled (1935, p. 440).
There remains, however, the choice of particular partners and inspection of
the goods offered; although hawking is not indicated, it is conceivable that
women of a side compete with each other by varying the quantity or quality
of their “standard” loads (cf. Blackwood, 1935, p. 443, on variations of certain loads).
	  One other possibility of implicit competition, more general than this, is
discussed further along in the text.
	  Furthermore, there are two rather exceptional conditions of trade on
which we have already put a construction of business-like competition.
One was the mixed economy (Kapauku), combining bargaining and
balanced reciprocity sectors whose differences in rates presumably would
incline people, insofar as social relations permit, to withhold goods from
one sector for the better returns available in the other. Or again, as in the
Huon Gulf, two or more villages may handle the same good, and other
communities have access to more than one of these suppliers. The marketlike effect in both cases would be equalization of rates over the different
sectors or communities. But this interpretation does not solve the critical
problems. How is the trend of indeterminate rates in the bargaining sector
transposed to the customary rates of balanced partnership exchange, such
that the latter too realize the influence of supply/demand? Likewise, in
trade networks competitively patterned at the community level, it remains
difficult to understand just how relative value is adjusted to supply and
demand. For exchange still is conducted at customary rates between pairs
of customary partners.

313

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

314

Endnotes

14 Interesting that Marx reproached Proudhon for the same mistake: “Il ne
suffit pas, à M. Proudhon, d’avoir éliminé du rapport de l’offre et de la
demande les éléments dont nous venons de parler. Il pousse l’abstraction
aux dernières limites, en fondant tous les producteurs en un seul producteur, tous les consommateurs en un seul consommateur, et en établissant
la lutte entre ces deux personnages chimériques. Mais dans le monde réel
les choses se passent autrement. La concurrence entre ceux qui offrent et
la concurrence entre ceux qui demandent, forment un élément nécessaire
de la lutte entre les acheteurs et les vendeurs, d’òu résulte la valeur venale”
(Marx, 1968 [1847], pp. 53–54).
15 “While trading, Indians won’t hand a foreigner both the bow and the arrows
at the same time” (Goldschmidt, 1951, p. 336).
16 Cf. Malinowski, 1922, p. 188 on the unbalances in fish–yam exchange
between partners of different Trobriand villages. For other examples of trade
partner good measure in reciprocation see also Oliver, 1955, pp. 229, 546;
Spencer, 1959, p. 169; cf. Goldschmidt, 1951, p. 335.
17 Further, it appears the empirical case that a discrepancy in labor values can
be sustained by an equivalence in utilities (cf. Godelier, 1969). “Need” is
matched to “need,” perhaps at the real expense of one party—although, as
we have seen, the norm of equal work may still be maintained by ideological
ruse and pretense. This kind of discrepancy would be most likely where the
goods traded belong to different spheres of exchange within one or both
trading communities, for example, manufactured goods for food, especially
where the craft goods are used also in such as bridewealth payments. Then
the high social utility of a small amount of one good (the manufactured
good) is compensated by a large quantity of the item of lesser status. This
may be an important secret in the “exploitation” of richer areas by poorer
(e.g., Siassi).
18 The misunderstanding is cultural and economic, obviously independent of
race and religion: “ . . . Nuer do not regard purchase from an Arab merchant
in the way in which we regard purchase from a shop. It is not to them an
impersonal transaction, and they have no idea of price and currency in our
sense. Their idea of purchase is that you give something to a merchant who
is thereby put under an obligation to help you. At the same time you ask
him for something you need from his shop and he ought to give it to you
because, by taking your gift, he has entered into a reciprocal relationship
with you. Hence kok has the sense of ‘to buy’ or ‘to sell.’ The two acts are
an expression of a single relationship of reciprocity. As an Arab merchant
regards the transaction rather differently misunderstandings arise. In the
Nuer way of looking at the matter what is involved in an exchange of this
kind is a relation between persons rather than between things. It is the merchant who is ‘bought’ rather than the goods. . . .” (Evans-Pritchard, 1956,
pp. 223–224).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

B ibliography

Aiston, G.
1936–37. “The Aboriginal Narcotic Pitcheri,” Oceania 7:372–77.
Allan, William
1949. Studies in African Land Usage in Northern Rhodesia. Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, No. 15.
1965. The African Husbandman. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Althusser, Louis
1966. Pour Marx. Paris: Maspero.
Althusser, Louis, Jacques Ranciere, et al.
1966. Lire le Capital. 2 vols. Paris: Maspero.
Anonymous
(n.d.) Apercu d’histoire et d’économie: Vol. 1, Formations précapitaliestes. Moscow: Editions du Progrès.
Awad, Mohamed
1962. “Nomadism in the Arab Lands of the Middle East,” in The Problems
of the Arid Zone, Proceedings of the Paris Symposium, UNESCO.
Barnett, H. G.
1938. “The Nature of the Potlatch,” American Anthropologist 40:349–58.
Barth, Fredrik
1961. Nomads of South Persia. London: Allen and Unwin, for Oslo University Press.
Barton, F. R.
1910. “Motu-Koita Papuan Gulf Expedition (Hiri),” in C. G. Seligman
(ed.), The Melanesians of British New Guinea. Cambridge: At the University Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

316

Bibliography

Bartram, William
1958. The Travels of William Bartram. Edited by Francis Harper. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press (first published 1791).
Basedow, Herbert
1925. The Australian Aboriginal. Adelaide, Australia: Preece.
Beaglehole, Ernest, and P. Beaglehole
1938. Ethnology of Pukapuka. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin No. 150.
Belshaw, Cyril
1955. In Search of Wealth. American Anthropological Association Memoir
No. 80.
Bennett, Wendell C.
1931. Archeology of Kauai. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin No. 80.
Best, Elsdon
1900–01. “Spiritual Concepts of the Maori,” Journal of the Polynesian
Society 9:173–99; 10:1–20.
1909. “Maori Forest Lore . . . Part III,” Transactions of the New Zealand
Institute 42:433–81.
1922. Spiritual and Mental Concepts of the Maori. Dominion Museum
Monographs No. 2.
1924. The Maori. 2 vols. Memoirs of the Polynesian Society No. 5.
1925a. Tuhoe: The Children of the Mist. Memoirs of the Polynesian Society No. 6.
1925b. Maori Agriculture. Dominion Museum Bulletin No. 9.
1942. Forest Lore of the Maori. Dominion Museum Bulletin No. 14.
Biard, le Père Pierre
1897. “Relation of New France, of its Lands, Nature of the Country, and
of its Inhabitants . . ., ” in R. G. Thwaites (ed.), The Jesuit Relations
and Allied Documents, vol. 3. Cleveland: Burrows. (First French edition, 1616.)
Birket-Smith, Kaj
1959. The Eskimos. 2nd Ed. London: Methuen.
Blackwood, Beatrice
1935. Both Sides of Buka Passage. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press.
Bleak, D. F.
1928. The Naron. Cambridge: At the University Press.
Boas, Franz
1884–85. “The Central Eskimo,” Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Anthropological Reports 6:399–699.
1940. Race, Language and Culture. New York: Free Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

Boeke, J. H.
1953. Economics and Economic Policy of Dual Societies. New York: Institute of Pacific Relations.
Bogoras, W.
1904–19. The Chukchee. American Museum of Natural History Memoirs No. 11 (2–4).
Bohannan, Paul
1954. Tiv Farm and Settlement. Colonial Research Studies No. 15. London: H. M. Stationery Office.
1955. “Some Principles of Exchange and Investment Among the Tiv,”
American Anthropologist 57:60–70.
Bohannan, Paul, and Laura Bohannan
1968. Tiv Economy. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Bohannan, Paul, and George Dalton (eds.)
1962. Markets in Africa. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Bonwick, James
1870. Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians. London: Low and Merston.
Boukharine, N.
1967. La Théorie du matérialism historique. Paris: Editions Anthropos.
(First Russian edition, 1921.)
Braidwood, Robert J.
1952. The Near East and the Foundations for Civilization. Eugene: Oregon State System of Higher Education
1957. Prehistoric Men. 3rd Ed. Chicago Natural History Museum Popular Series, Anthropology, Number 37.
Braidwood, Robert J., and Gordon R. Willey (eds.)
1962. Courses Toward Urban Life. Chicago: Aldine.
Brown, Paula, and H. C. Brookfield
1959–60. “Chimbu Land and Society,” Oceania 30:1–75.
1963. Struggle for Land. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Bücher, Carl
1907. Industrial Evolution. New York: Holt
Bulmer, Ralph
1960–61. “Political Aspects of the Moka Ceremonial Exchange System Among the Kyaka People of the Western Highlands of New
Guinea,” Oceania 31:1–13.
Burling, Robbins
1962. “Maximization Theories and the Study of Economic Anthropology,” American Anthropologist 64:802–21.

317

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

318

Bibliography

Burridge, Kenelm
1960. Mambu: A Melanesian Millenium. London: Methuen.
Carneiro, Robert L.
1957. Subsistence and Social Structure: An Ecological Study of the Kuikuru Indians, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan. Ann Arbor,
Michigan: University Microfilms.
1960. “Slash-and-Burn Agriculture: A Closer Look at its Implications
for Settlement Patterns,” in A. F. C. Wallace (ed.), Men and Cultures.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
1968. “Slash-and-Burn Cultivation among the Kuikuru and its Implications for Cultural Development in the Amazon Basin,” in Y. Cohen
(ed.), Man in Adaptation: The Cultural Present. Chicago: Aldine.
(Reprinted from Anthropologica Supplement No. 2, 1961).
Cazaneuve, Jean
1968. Sociologie de Marcel Mauss. Paris: Presses universitaires de
France.
Chayanov, A. V.
1966. The Theory of Peasant Economy. Homewood, III.: Richard D. Irwin
for the American Economic Association.
Chowning, Ann and Ward Goodenough
1965–66. “Lakalai Political Organization,” Anthropological Forum
1:412–73.
Clark, Colin, and Margaret Haswell
1964. The Economics of Subsistence Agriculture. London: MacMillan.
Clark, Graham
1953. From Savagery to Civilization. New York: Schuman.
Clark, W. T.
1938. “Manners, Customs, and Beliefs of the Northern Bega,” Sudan
Notes and Records 21:1–29.
Codere, Helen
(n.d.) Fighting with Property. American Ethnological Society Monograph 18. New York: Augustine.
1968. “Money-Exchange Systems and a Theory of Money,” Man
3:557–77.
Colson, Elizabeth
1960. Social Organization of the Gwembe Tonga. Manchester: At the
University Press for the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute.
Conklin, Harold C.
1957. Hanunóo Agriculture. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

1959. “Population-Land Balance under Systems of Tropical Forest Agriculture,” Proceedings of the Ninth Pacific Science Congress 7:63.
1961. “The Study of Shifting Cultivation,” Current Anthropology 2:27–61.
Cook, Scott
1966. “The Obsolete ‘Anti-Market’ Mentality: A Critique of the Substantive Approach to Economic Anthropology,” American Anthropologist
63:1–25.
Coues, Elliot (ed.)
1897. The Manuscript Journals of Alexander Henry and of David Thompson, 1799–1814. 2 vols. New York: Harper.
Curr, E. M.
1965. Recollections of Squatting in Victoria, then Called the Port Phillip
District, from 1841–1851. (First edition, 1883.) Melbourne: At the University Press.
Dalton, George
1961. “Economic Theory and Primitive Society,” American Anthropologist
63:1–25.
Davies, John
1961. The History of the Tahitian Mission 1799–1830. Edited by C. W.
Newbury. Cambridge: At the University Press.
Deacon, A. Bernard
1934. Malekula: A Vanishing People in the New Hebrides. London:
Routledge.
Denig, Edwin T.
1928–29. “Indian Tribes of the Upper Missouri,” Smithsonian Institution
Bureau of American Ethnology, Annual Report 46:395–628.
deSchlippe, Pierre
1956. Shifting Cultivation in Africa. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Douglas, Mary
1962. “Lele Economy as Compared with the Bushong,” in G. Dalton and
P. Bohannan (eds.), Markets in Africa. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
1963. The Lele of Kasai. London: Oxford University Press.
Driberg, J. H.
1923. The Lango. London: Fisher, Unwin.
Drucker, Philip
1937. “The Tolowa and their Southwest Oregon Kin,” University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 36:221–300.
1939. “Rank, Wealth, and Kinship in Northwest Coast Society,” American Anthropologist 41:55–65.

319

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

320

Bibliography

1951. The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Smithsonian Institution
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 144. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Dubbledam, L. F. B.
1964. “The Devaluation of the Kapauku-Cowrie as a Factor of Social
Disintegration,” in James Watson (ed.), New Guinea: The Central
Highlands. American Anthropologist 66, Special Publication.
DuBois, Cora
1936. “The Wealth Concept as an Integrative Factor in Tolowa-Tututni
Culture,” in Essays Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Duff Missionaries
1799. A Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean Performed in the
Years 1796, 1797, 1798 in the Ship Duff. . . [etc.] London: T. Chapman.
Elkin, A. P.
1952–53. “Delayed Exchange in Wabag Sub-District, Central Highlands
of New Guinea,” Oceania 23:161–201.
1954. The Australian Aborigines. 3rd Ed. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.
Engels, Frederick
1966. Anti-Dühring. New York: International Publishers. (New World
Paperbacks; first German edition 1878.)
Evans-Pritchard, E. E.
1940. The Nuer. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press.
1951. Kinship and Marriage Among the Nuer. Oxford: At the Clarendon
Press.
1956. Nuer Religion. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press.
Ewers, John C.
1955. The Horse in Blackfoot Indian Culture. Smithsonian Institution
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 159. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Eyre, Edward John
1845. Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia, and Overland from Adelaide to King George’s Sound, in the Years 1840–41. 2
vols. London: Boone.
Firth, Raymond
1926. “Proverbs in Native Life, with Special Reference to Those of the
Maori,” Folklore 37:134–53; 245–70.
1936. We, the Tikopia. London: Allen and Unwin.
1951. Elements of Social Organization. London: Watts.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

1959a. Economics of the New Zealand Maori. 2nd Ed. Wellington: R. E.
Owen, Government Printer.
1959b. Social Change in Tikopia. New York: Macmillan.
1965. Primitive Polynesian Economy. 2nd Ed. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
1967. “Themes in Economic Anthropology: A General Comment,” in
R. Firth (ed.), Themes in Economic Anthropology. London: Tavistock,
ASA Monograph 6.
Firth, Raymond (ed.)
1957. Man and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work of Bronislaw Malinowski.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Forde, C. Daryll
1946. “Native Economies of Nigeria,” in M. F. Perham (ed.), The Economics of a Tropical Dependency. London: Faber and Faber.
1963. Habitat, Economy and Society. 8th Ed. London: Methuen.
1964. Yakö Studies: London: Oxford University Press.
Fornander, Abraham
1878–85. An Account of the Polynesian Race. 3 vols. London: Trübner.
Fortune, Reo
1932. Sorcerers of Dobu. New York: Dutton.
Freeman, J. D.
1955. Iban Agriculture. Colonial Research Studies No. 18. London: H. M.
Stationery Office.
Geddes, W. R.
1954. The Land Dayaks of Sarawak. Colonial Research Studies No. 14.
London: H. M. Stationery Office.
1957. Nine Dayak Nights. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Gifford, E. W.
1926. “Clear Lake Porno Society,” University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 18:287–390.
1929. Tongan Society. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin No. 61.
Gitlow, Abraham L.
1947. Economics of the Mount Hagen Tribes. American Ethnological
Society Monographs No. 12.
Gluckman, Max
1943. Essays on Lozi Land and Royal Property. Rhodes-Livingstone
Papers, No. 10.
Godelier, Maurice
1966 Rationalité et irrationalité en économie. Paris: Maspero.

321

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

322

Bibliography

1969. “La ‘monnaie de sel’ des Baruya de Nouvelle-Guinée,” L’Homme
9 (2):5–37.
Goldschmidt, Walter
1951. “Nomlaki Ethography,” University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 42:303–443.
Goodfellow, D. M.
1939. Principles of Economic Sociology. London: Routledge and Sons
Gorz, Andre
1967. Le socialisme difficile. Paris: Seuil.
Gouldner, Alvin
1960. “The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement,” American
Sociological Review 25:161–78.
Grey, Sir George
1841. Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western
Australia, During the Years 1837, 38, and 39. . . . 2 vols. London: Boone.
Grinnell, George Bird
1923. The Cheyenne Indians. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Guillard, J.
1958. “Essai de mesure de l’activité d’un paysan Africain: le Toupouri,”
L’Agronomie Tropicale 13:415–28.
Gusinde, Martin
1961. The Yamana. 5 vols. New Haven, Conn.: Human Relations Area
Files. (German edition 1931.)
Handy, E. S. Craighill
1923. The Native Culture in the Marquesas. Bernice P. Bishop Museum
Bulletin No. 9.
1930. History and Culture in the Society Islands. Bernice P. Bishop
Museum Bulletin No. 79.
1932. Houses, Boats, and Fishing in the Society Islands. Bernice P. Bishop
Museum Bulletin No. 90.
1940. The Hawaiin Planter. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin No. 161.
Harding, Thomas G.
1967. Voyagers of the Vitiaz Strait. The American Ethnological Society
Monograph 44. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Harmon, Daniel Williams
1957. Sixteen Years in the Indian Country: The Journal of Daniel Williams
Harmon, 1800–1816. Edited by W. K. Lamb. Toronto: Macmillan.
Harris, Marvin
1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

Haury, Emil W.
1962. “The Greater American Southwest,” in J. Braidwood and G. R.
Willey (eds.), Courses toward Urban Life. Chicago: Aldine.
Hearne, Samuel
1958. A Journey from Prince of Wales’ Fort in Hudson’s Bay to the Northern
Ocean, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772. Edited by R. Glover. Toronto: Macmillan.
Henry, Jules
1951. “The Economics of Pilagá Food Distribution,” American Anthropologist 53:187–219.
Herskovits, Melville J.
1952. Economic Anthropology. New York: Knopf.
Hiatt, L.
1965. Kinship and Conflict. Canberra: Australian National University.
Hodgkinson, Clement
1845. Australia, from Port Macquarie to Moreton Bay, with Descriptions of
the Natives. London: Boone.
Hoebel, E. Adamson
1958. Man in the Primitive World. 2nd Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hogbin, H. Ian
1933–34. “Culture Change in the Solomon Islands: Report of Field Work
in Guadalcanal and Malaita,” Oceania 4:233–67.
1934. Law and Order in Polynesia. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
1934–35a: “Native Culture of Wogeo: Report of Field Work in New
Guinea,” Oceania 5:308–37.
1934–35b. “Trading Expeditions in Northern New Guinea,” Oceania
5:375–407.
1937–38. “Social Advancement in Guadalcanal, Solomon Islands,” Oceania 8:289–305.
1938–39. “Tillage and Collection: A New Guinea Economy,” Oceania
9:127–51.
1939. Experiments in Civilization. London: Routledge.
1943–44. “Native Councils and Native Courts in the Solomon Islands,”
Oceania 14:258–83.
1951. Transformation Scene: The Changing Culture of a New Guinea Village. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Holmberg, Allan R.
1950. Nomads of the Long Bow. Smithsonian Institution, Institute of
Social Anthropology, Publication No. 10. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.

323

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

324

Bibliography

Howell, P. P.
1954. A Manual of Nuer Law. London: Oxford University Press.
Hunter, John D.
1823. Memoirs of a Captivity Among the Indians of North America. London: Longmans.
Ivens, W. G.
1927. Melanesians of the Southeast Solomon Islands. London: Kegan,
Paul, Trench, Trübner.
Izikowitz, Karl Gustave
1951. Lamet: Hill Peasants in French Indochina. Etnologiska Studies 17.
Göteborg: Etnologiska Museet.
Jochelson, Waldermar
1926. “The Yukaghir and the Yukaghirzed Tungus,” American Museum
of Natural History Memoirs 13:1–469.
Johansen, J. Prytz
1954. The Maori and His Religion. Copenhagen: Musksgaard.
Kaberry, Phyllis M.
1940–41.“The Abelam Tribe, Sepik District, New Guinea: A Preliminary
Report,” Oceania 11:233–58, 345–67.
1941–42. “Law and Political Organization in the Abelam Tribe, New
Guinea,” Oceania 12:79–95, 205–25, 331–63.
Kelly, Raymond C.
1968. “Demographic Pressure and Descent Group Structure in the
New Guinea Highlands,” Oceania 39:36–63.
Kluckhohn, Clyde
1959. “The Philosophy of the Navaho Indians,” in M. H. Fried (ed.),
Readings in Anthropology, vol. 2. New York: Crowell.
Kroeber, A. L.
1925. Handbook of the Indians of California. Smithsonian Institution
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 78. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Lafargue, Paul
1909. The Right to be Lazy. Chicago: Kerr. (First French edition 1883.)
Landtman, Gunnar
1927. The Kiwai Papuans of British New Guinea. London: Macmillan.
Leach, E. R.
1951. “The Structural Implications of Matrilateral Cross Cousin Marriage,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 81:23–55.
1954. The Political Systems of Highland Burma. London: Bell.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

Leacock, Eleanor
1954. The Montagnais “Hunting Territory” and the Fur Trade. American
Anthropological Association Memoir No. 78.
LeClair, Edward E., Jr.
1962. “Economic Theory and Economic Anthropology,” American
Anthropologist 64:1179–1203.
Lee, Richard
1968. “What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce
Resources,” in R. Lee and I. DeVore (eds.), Man the Hunter. Chicago: Aldine.
1969. “!Kung Bushman Subsistance: An Input-Output Analysis,” in A.
Vayda (ed.), Environment and Cultural Behavior. Garden City, N.Y.:
Natural History Press.
Lee, Richard B., and Irven DeVore (eds.)
1968. Man the Hunter. Chicago: Aldine.
LeJeune, le Père Paul
1897. “Relation of What Occurred in New France in the Year 1634,” in
R. G. Thwaites (ed.), The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, vol.
6. Cleveland: Burrows. (First French edition, 1635.)
Lévi-Strauss, Claude
1943. “Guerre et commerce chez les Indiens de l’Amerique du Sud,”
Renaissance 1:122–39.
1961. Tristes Tropiques. New York: Atheneum.
1966. “Introduction à l’oeuvre de Marcel Mauss,” in M. Mauss, Sociologie et anthropologie. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
1969. The Elementary Structures of Kinship. London: Eyre and
Spottiswoode.
Lewthwaite, Gordon R.
1964. “Man and Land in Early Tahiti: Polynesian Agriculture through
European Eyes,” Pacific Viewpoint 5:11–34.
1966. “Man and the Sea in Early Tahiti: Maritime Economy through
European Eyes,” Pacific Viewpoint 7:28–53.
Linton, Ralph
1939. “Marquesan Culture,” in A. Kardiner, The Individual and His Society. New York: Columbia University Press.
Loeb, Edwin M.
1926. “Pomo Folkways,” University of California Publications in American
Archaeology and Ethnology 19:149–409.
Lothrup, Samuel K.

325

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

326

Bibliography

1928. The Indians of Tierra del Fuego. New York: Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
Lowie, Robert H.
1938. “Subsistence,” in F. Boas (ed.), General Anthropology. Boston:
Heath.
1946. An Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. 2nd Ed. New York:
Rinehart.
McArthur, Margaret
1960. “Food Consumption and Dietary Levels of Groups of Aborigines Living on Naturally Occurring Foods,” in C. P. Mountford (ed.), Records
of the Australian-American Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land, Vol. 2:
Anthropology and Nutrition. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
McCarthy, Frederick D., and Margaret McArthur
1960. “The Food Quest and the Time Factor in Aboriginal Economic
Life,” in C. P. Mountford (ed.), Records of the Australian-American
Scientific Expedition to Arnhem Land, Vol. 2: Anthropology and Nutrition. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
MacGregor, Gordon
1937. Ethnology of the Tokelau Islands. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin No. 146.
McKern, W. C.
1922. “Functional Families of the Patwin,” University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 13 (7):236–58.
McNeilly, F. S.
1968. The Anatomy of Leviathan. London: Macmillan.
MacPherson, C. B.
1965. “Hobbes’s Bourgeois Man,” in K. C. Brown (ed.), Hobbes Studies.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Malinowski, Bronislaw
1915. “The Natives of Mailu,” Transactions of the Royal Society of
South Australia 39:494–706.
1921. “The Primitive Economics of the Trobriand Islanders,” Economic
Journal 31:1–16.
1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. (3rd imp. 1950.) London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
1935. Coral Gardens and Their Magic. Vol. 1. New York: American Book Co.
1939. “Anthropology as the Basis of Social Science,” in Cattel, Cohen,
and Travers (eds.), Human Affairs. London: Macmillan.
Malo, David

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

1951. Hawaiian Antiquities. Bernice P. Bishop Museum Special Publications No. 2.
Man, Edward Horace
(n.d.) On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands. (Reprinted
from the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute.) London: RAI.
Mandel, Ernest
1962. Traite d’économie marxiste. 2 Vols. Paris: Julliard.
Mandelbaum, David G.
1940. “The Plains Cree,” American Museum of Natural History-Anthropological Papers 37:155–316.
Mariner, William
1827. An Account of the Tongan Islands in the South Pacific Ocean. 3 vols.,
3rd Ed. Edited by J. Martin. Edinburgh: Constable.
Marshall, Alfred
1961. Principles of Economics. 8th Ed. London: Macmillan.
Marshall, Lorna
1961. “Sharing, Talking, and Giving: Relief of Social Tensions Among
!Kung Bushmen,” Africa 31:231–49.
Marx, Karl
1967a. Capital. 3 vols. (First German editions, 1867, 1893, 1894.) New
York: International Publishers.
1967b. Fondaments de la critique de l’économie politique. 2 vols. (Manuscripts of 1857–1858, “Grundrisse der Kritik der Politischen okonomie,” first published in Moscow, 1939.) Paris: Editions Anthropos.
1968. Misère de la philosophie. (First edition, in French, 1847.) Paris:
Editions Sociales.
Mathew, John
1910. Two Representative Tribes of Queensland. London: Unwin.
Mauss, Marcel
1966. “Essai sur le don: Forme et raison de l’échange dans les sociétés
archaïques,” in Sociologie et anthropologie. (First published 1923–24
in L’Année Sociologique.) Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
1967. Manuel d’ethnographie. (First published 1947.) Paris: Payot.
Mead, Margaret
1930. “Melanesian Middlemen,” National History 30:115–30.
1934. “Kinship in the Admiralty Islands,” American Museum of Natural
History-Anthropological Papers, 34:181–358.
1937a. “The Manus of the Admiralty Islands,” in M. Mead (ed.), Cooperation and Competition among Primitive Peoples. New York: McGraw-Hill.

327

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

328

Bibliography

1937b. “The Arapesh of New Guinea,” in M. Mead (ed.), Cooperation
and Competition among Primitive Peoples: New York: McGraw-Hill.
1938. “The Mountain Arapesh I. An Importing Culture,” American
Museum of Natural History-Anthropological Papers 36:139–349.
1947. “The Mountain Arapesh III. Socio-economic Life,” American
Museum of Natural History-Anthropological Papers 40:159–232.
Meggitt, Mervyn
1956–57. “The Valleys of the Upper Wage and Lai Rivers, Western Highlands, New Guinea,” Oceania 27:90–135.
1957–58. “The Enga of the New Guinea Highlands: Some Preliminary
Observations,” Oceania 28:253–330.
1962. Desert People. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.
1964. “Indigenous Forms of Government Among the Australian Aborigines,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde 120: 163–80.
Meillassoux, Claude
1960. “Essai d’interprétation du phénomène économique dans les
sociétés traditionelles d’autosubsistence,” Cahiers d’Etudes Africaines 4:38–67.
1964. Anthropologie économique des Gouro de Côte d’Ivoire. Paris:
Mouton.
Nadel, S. F.
1942. A Black Byzantium. London: Oxford University Press.
Nash, Manning
1967. “ ‘Reply’ to reviews of Primitive and Peasant Economic Systems,”
Current Anthropology 8:249–50.
Needham, Rodney
1954. “Siriono and Penan: A Test of Some Hypotheses,” Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology 10:228–32.
Nilles, John
1950–51. “The Kuman of the Chimbu Region, Central Highlands, New
Guinea,” Oceania 21:25–26.
Oberg, Kalervo
1955. “Types of Social Structure in Lowland South America,” American
Anthropologist 57:472–87.
Oliver, Douglas
1949. Studies in the Anthropology of Bougainville, Solomon Islands. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University. Vol. 29, 1–4. Cambridge, Mass.: The Museum.
1955. A Solomon Island Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

Pirenne, Henri
1955. A History of Europe. New York: University Books. (Translated from
the 8th French Ed., 1938.)
Pirie, N. W.
1962. “Future Sources of Food Supply: Scientific Problems,” Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society (Series A) 125:399–417.
Polanyi, Karl
1944. The Great Transformation. New York: Rinehart.
1947. “Our Obsolete Market Mentality,” Commentary 3:109–17.
1957. “The Economy as Instituted Process,” in K. Polanyi, C. Arensberg,
and H. Pearson (eds.), Trade and Market in the Early Empires. Glencoe: The Free Press.
1959. “Anthropology and Economic Theory,” in M. Fried (ed.), Readings
in Anthropology, vol. 2. New York: Crowell.
Pospisil, Leopold
1958. Kapauku Papuans and Their Law. Yale University Publications in
Anthropology No. 54.
1959–60. “The Kapauku Papuans and Their Kinship Organization,”
Oceania 30:188–205.
1963. Kapauku Papuan Economy. Yale University Publications in Anthropology No. 67.
Powdermaker, Hortense
1933. Life in Lesu. New York: Norton.
Powell, H. A.
1960. “Competitive Leadership in Trobriand Political Organization,”
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 90:118–45.
Price, John Andrew
1962. Washo Economy. Nevada State Museum Anthropological Papers
No. 6.
Provinse, John H.
1937. “Cooperative Ricefield Cultivation Among the Siang Dyaks of Borneo,” American Anthropologist 39:77–102.
Putnam, Patrik
1953. “The Pygmies of the Ituri Forest,” in Carelton S. Coon (ed.), A
Reader in General Anthropology. New York: Holt.
Quimby, George I.
1962. “A Year with a Chippewa Family, 1763–1764,” Ethnohistory
9:217–39.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.

329

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

330

Bibliography

1930–31. “The Social Organisation of Australian Tribes,” Oceania 1:34–
63, 206–56, 322–41, 426–56.
1948. The Andaman Islanders. Glencoe: The Free Press. (First edition 1922.)
Read, K. E.
1946–47. “Social Organization in the Markham Valley, New Guinea,”
Oceania 17:93–118.
1949–50. “The Political System of the Ngarawapum,” Oceania
20:185–223.
1959. “Leadership and Consensus in a New Guinea Society,” American
Anthropologist 61:425–36.
Reay, Marie
1959. The Kuma. Carlton: Melbourne University Press.
Redfield, Robert
1953. The Primitive World and its Transformations. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press.
Richards, Audrey I.
1961. Land, Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia. 2nd Ed. London:
Oxford University Press.
Rink, Henry
1875. Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo. Edinburgh: Blackwood.
Rivers, W. H. R.
1906. The Todas. London: Macmillan.
Robbins, Lionel
1935. An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. 2nd
Ed. London: Macmillan.
Rodriguez, Maximo
1919. “Daily Narrative Kept by the Interpreter Maximo Rodriguez at the
Island of Amat, Otherwise Otahiti, in the Year 1774,” in B. G. Corney
(ed.), The Quest and Occupation of Tahiti by Emmissaries of Spain. . .
1772–1776, vol. 3. London: Hakluyt Society.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques
1964. Oeuvres completes. 4 vols. Paris: Bibliothèque de la Pléiade.
Sahlins, Marshall D.
1958. Social Stratification in Polynesia. Monograph of the American Ethnological Society. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
1960. “Political Power and the Economy in Primitive Society,” in Dole
and Carneiro (eds.), Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie
White. New York: Crowell.
1961. “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Predatory Expansion,” American Anthropologist 63:322–45.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

1962a. “Review of Sociological Aspects of Economic Growth” (B. F.
Hoselitz), American Anthropologist 64:1063–73.
1962b. Moala: Culture and Nature on a Fijian Island. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
1963. “Poor Man, Rich Man, Big-Man, Chief: Political Types in Melanesia and Polynesia,” Comparative Studies in Society and History
5:285–303.
1969. “Economic Anthropology and Anthropological Economics,”
Social Science Information 8 (5): 13–33.
Sahlins, Marshall, and Elman R. Service (eds.)
1960. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Salisbury, Richard
1962. From Stone to Steel. Cambridge: At the University Press.
1966. “Politics and Shell-Money Finance in New Britain,” in Marc J.
Swartz, Victor W. Turner, and Arthur Tuden (eds.), Political Anthropology. Chicago: Aldine.
Schapera, I.
1930. The Khoisan Peoples of South Africa. London: Routledge.
Schebesta, Paul
(n.d.) Among the Forest Dwarfs of Malaya. London: Hutchinson.
1933. Among Congo Pygmies. London: Hutchinson.
Schwartz, Theodore
1963. “Systems of Areal Integration: Some Considerations Based on
the Admiralty Islands of Northern Melanesia,” Anthropological
Forum 1:56–97.
Scudder, Thayer
1962. The Ecology of the Gwembe Tonga. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Seligman, C. G.
1910. The Melanesians of British New Guinea. Cambridge: At the University Press.
Service, Elman R.
1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.
1963. Profiles in Ethnology. New York: Harper & Row.
Sharp, Lauriston
1934–35. “Ritual Life and Economics of the Yir-Yiront of Cape York Peninsula,” Oceania 5:19–42.
1952. “Steel Axes for Stone-Age Australians,” Human Organization
11:17–22.

331

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

332

Bibliography

1958. “People without Politics,” in V. F. Ray (ed.), Systems of Political
Control and Bureaucracy in Human Societies. American Ethnological
Society. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Shirokogoroff, S. M.
1929. Social Organization of the Northern Tungus. Shanghai: Commercial Press.
Smyth, R. Brough
1878. The Aborigines of Victoria. 2 vols. Melbourne: Government Printer.
Spencer, Baldwin, and F. J. Gillen
1899. The Native Tribes of Central Australia. London: Macmillan.
1927. The Arunta. 2 vols. London: Macmillan.
Spencer, Joseph E.
1966. Shifting Cultivation in Southeastern Asia. University of California Publications in Geography. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Spencer, Robert F.
1959. The North Alaskan Eskimo: A Study in Ecology and Society. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 171.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Steward, Julian
1938. Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 120. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Steward, Julian H., and Louis C. Faron
1959. Native Peoples of South America. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stewart, C. S.
1828. Journal of a Residence in the Sandwich Islands, during the Years 1823,
1824, and 1825. New York: Haven.
Suggs, Robert C.
1961.“The Archaeology of Nuku Hiva, Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia,” American Museum of Natural History-Anthropological Papers
49 (1).
Suttles, Wayne
1960. “Affinal Ties, Subsistence and Prestige Among the Coast Salish,”
American Anthropologist 62: 296–305.
Swanton, John R.
1928. “Social Organization and Social Usages of the Indians of the
Creek Confederacy,” Smithsonian Institution Bureau of Ethnology-Annual Report 42:23–472.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Bibliography

Tanner, John
1956. A Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures of John Tanner. Edited
by E. James. Minneapolis: Ross & Haines.
Terray, Emmanuel
1969. Le marxisme devant les sociétés “primitives.” Paris: Maspero.
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall
1959. The Harmless People. New York: Knopf.
Thomson, Donald F.
1949a. Economic Structure and the Ceremonial Exchange Cycle in Arnhem
Land. Melbourne: Macmillan.
1949b. “Arnhem Land: Explorations Among an Unknown People,” The
Geographical Journal 113:1–8, 114, 54–67.
Thurnwald, Richard
1932. Economics in Primitive Communities. London: Oxford.
1934–35. “Pigs and Currency in Buin,” Oceania 5:119–41.
Titiev, Mischa
1944. Old Oraibi. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, vol. 22 (1).
Turnbull, Colin
1962. The Forest People. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday and the American
Museum of Natural History.
1965. Wayward Servants. Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press.
Turner, Victor
1957. Schism and Continuity in an African Society. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Van der Post, Laurens
1958. The Lost World of the Kalahari. New York: Morrow.
Vanleur, J. C.
1955. Indonesian Trade and Society. The Hague and Bandung: vanHoeve.
Vanoverbergh, Morice
1925. “Negritoes of Northern Luzon,” Anthropos 20:148–99, 399–443.
Vayda, A. P.
1954. “Notes on Trade Among the Pomo Indians of California,” mimeographed. Columbia University Interdisciplinary Project: Economic
Aspects of Institutional Growth.
1961. “A Re-examination of Northwest Coast Economic Systems,” Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences (Series 2) 23:618–24.
Veblen, Thorstein
1914. The Instinct of Workmanship. New York: Macmillan.

333

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

334

Bibliography

1915. Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution. New York:
Macmillan.
Wagner, Guntar
1956. The Bantu of North Kavirondo. 2 vols. London: Oxford University
Press for the International African Institute.
Wallace, Ernest, and E. A. Hoebel
1952. The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Warner, W. Lloyd
1964. A Black Civilization (Harper “Torchback” from the edition of 1958;
first edition 1937). New York: Harper & Row.
Weyer, E. M.
1932. The Eskimos. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
White, Leslie A.
1949. The Science of Culture. New York: Farrar, Strauss.
1959. The Evolution of Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Williams, Herbert
1921. A Dictionary of the Maori Language. Auckland, N.Z.: Williams and
Northgate.
Williams, William
1892. A Dictionary of the New Zealand Language. Auckland, N.Z.: Williams and Northgate.
Williamson, Robert W.
1912. The Mafulu: Mountain People of British New Guinea. London:
Macmillan.
Woodburn, James
1968. “An Introduction to Hadza Ecology,” in R. Lee and I. DeVore
(eds.), Man the Hunter. Chicago: Aldine.
Woodburn, James (director)
1966. “The Hadza” (film available from the anthropological director,
Department of Anthropology, London School of Economics).
Worsley, Peter M.
1961. “The Utilization of Food Resources by an Australian Aboriginal
Tribe,” Acta Ethnographica 10:153–90.
Worthington, Edgar B.
1961. The Wild Resources of East and Central Africa. Colonial Research
Studies London: H. M. Stationery Office.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

I ndex

Note: bold page numbers indicate tables and italics indicate illustrations.
aboriginals, Australian 3, 7, 8, 14–19,
18, 19, 20, 23–4, 25–6, 27, 28–9, 58,
217, 249
abundance 2, 7, 9, 10, 20, 23, 24–5,
26, 30, 31, 46, 143, 194, 252; see also
affluence; possessions; prosperity;
wealth
accretion, segmentary 275
acquisition 121, 169, 218, 272–4, 281,
290; as deprivation 4
acquisitiveness 13, 193
adolescents 49, 50, 96, 105
adultery 181, 204
affluence 1–2, 4, 11, 27, 33, 34, 35, 37,
38, 186, 193, 195, 255, 261
agreement, secret 272, 292
agriculture 26, 33–4, 36, 38–47, 53–4,
59, 60, 61, 77, 82, 151
alienation 153, 165, 301
altruism 175, 193, 218
ambition 13, 116, 121, 122, 123, 231, 233
anarchy 86–90, 157
Andamans 203, 217, 230, 247–8, 281–2
animism 150, 164–5
anthropology 3, 5, 6, 8, 14, 65, 67–8,
84; economic 5, 11, 14, 62, 74, 76–7,
108, 135, 164–5, 167, 172, 209, 259–

60, 280; evolutionary 5, 73; naive
113; see also reciprocity
anthropomorphism 165
apologies, methodological 67–71
areal integration 275
Arnhem Land 14–19, 18, 19, 20, 22–3,
25, 37
artifacts 9
Arunta 24, 249
asymmetry 204, 205
authority 80, 118, 124, 125, 149–50,
156, 163, 190, 245; need for 117
autoexploitation 122, 123–4, 125
autonomy 70, 83, 87, 116, 123, 124
Azande 57, 61
backwaters 206
balance, concept of 53, 113–14, 120;
see also reciprocity, balanced;
transaction, balanced
banker, tribal 171
Bantu 62, 72, 214, 216, 228
bargaining 179, 182, 220, 221, 260,
277, 280, 283, 288; see also haggling
barter 174–5, 177, 216, 222, 223, 224,
251–2
behavior, general pattern 169

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

336

Index

Bemba 49, 50, 52, 54, 57, 57, 58, 112,
229, 245, 257–8
bidding, competitive 218
big-man, Melanesian 105, 106, 108,
121–3, 190, 191, 212, 231, 232, 233–4,
235, 255
borrowing 10, 179, 195, 251
Botukebo village 103, 104, 105, 106,
107, 107, 108, 109
boundary, trade system 275
bourgeois ownership 84
burdens, logistic 78
burden, white man’s 131
bureaucracy 131
Busama culture 121, 219–21, 232–3,
268–9, 269, 270, 271–2, 273–4, 288
Bushmen 6, 8, 36–7, 49, 72, 124, 167,
194–5, 214, 216, 220, 230, 248;
Dobe 19–22, 21, 46; food resources
9, 20–1, 26, 46, 194–5, 247; leisure
time 22, 53–4; material wealth 9–10,
11–12, 45–6; traps, complexity of 72;
work and 14, 20–2, 21, 49, 52, 53–4
Bushong culture 48–9, 48
business 279; classic forces 272
calculus, of exchange value 285
capital 144; general formula 75–6
capitalist process 75–6, 233–4, 239;
opposite principle 202; see also
imperialism
caveat emptor 173, 199
celebration 233
cement, mystic 139
centricity 170–2, 191–2
ceremony 37, 54, 58, 91, 136, 141–3,
147, 158, 171, 174, 207, 223, 224;
logic of 142
chain, three-village 272–4
chaos 169
charity 114, 196, 208
Chayanov’s rule 79–83, 92, 93, 96, 98;
slope 92, 98–108, 121
chieftainship 68, 84, 90, 92, 111,
114, 115–16, 118–33, 153, 170, 171–2,

176, 187, 188, 190–2, 196, 208, 210,
211–12, 222, 225, 229, 230–46; see
also big-man, Melanesian
Chimbu 40, 41, 43, 44, 223
circulation of goods 274, 276
clans 157, 158, 160, 165, 180, 198, 210,
219, 221, 223, 234, 235, 250, 281
cohabitation 70
collectivity 171
comfort vs. burden 32
commensality 70, 86, 170, 198, 207,
227
commerce, indigenous 262, 264, 267
commodities, circulation of 75, 80
commonwealth 160, 163, 164
compassion 174, 180, 190, 195, 196,
197
compensation 120, 174, 204, 228, 243
competition 278–9, 280, 281, 284–5,
287, 291, 292; rate 292
compulsions, European 58
conditions, marginal 261
confidence, economic 31, 34
conflict of interests 112
conquest, career of 131
constraints, operative 60, 99
consumers 4, 10, 81, 83, 92–101, 94–5,
96, 102, 103, 104, 105–6
consumption, conspicuous 131
continuum of reciprocity 173, 174, 175,
180, 188, 224
contract, social 134, 153–4, 155, 159,
164, 169, 186, 202–3, 204, 208
contradictions 11, 30, 78–9, 127, 129,
130; external 80; hierarchy of 91–2;
internal 80; and kinship 111, 116,
120, 129, 201; social 111–14, 185
cooperation 69, 70, 110, 116, 117, 123,
171, 172, 194, 196, 208; see also
mutual aid; reciprocity; sharing;
solidarity
corporate alliances 203, 208, 211
costs, labor 272
courtesy 200, 282
credit 206, 223, 233, 284

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Index

crisis 256; revelatory 111, 114, 115–16,
127, 129–30
crowd, demand 278
cultivation 33, 43–4, 53, 62, 63, 65, 66,
89, 94–5, 96–8, 100, 101, 103, 104,
127, 128, 225–6, 268; slash-and-burn
39–40, 45
culture: design 31; evolution of 34
cycle 34, 37, 39, 60, 66, 121, 126, 130,
131, 132, 143–4, 143, 149, 201
dancing 22, 53, 60, 122
deceit 179
decentralization 132, 169, 191
decisions, main domestic 69
deduction 175; functionalist 88
deflation 291
delay 175
democracy 10
demography 32, 33, 40–5, 41–2, 44,
46–7
dependency 227, 237, 239, 241, 242,
254; ratio 81
descent, matrilineal and patrilineal 50
destruction, by Europeans 24
development, economic 74, 290–1
dialectic 153
diet 6, 9, 11, 14, 17–18, 24, 37, 93, 105,
106, 268–9
difficulties, symptomatic 274
dignity 122, 125, 163, 279
diminishing returns 30, 31, 32, 33
diplomacy 218–82, 287
dislocation 20
dispersion 86–90
distance: segmentary 179; social 173,
178, 184, 201, 206, 226, 262
distribution 227, 234, 236–8, 239, 242,
244, 245, 246, 247, 249, 253, 255,
258, 266, 273; analysis of 170; global
274; real 276
diversion 54, 58
diversity 17, 30, 68, 139
DMP (domestic mode of production)
70, 71, 75, 78, 79, 80–1, 82–3, 86, 87,

89, 91, 92, 98, 110–11, 114, 116, 117,
121; as anti-surplus system 74, 78
Dobuan culture 182, 198–9, 224
Dogomba 42
domestic group, defined 69–70
drought 46, 194
dynamics 275, 276, 290
Eatora 119, 242
ecology 8, 24, 31, 32, 33, 40, 45, 117,
127, 128, 184, 212, 262, 265–6, 270,
272, 275
Economic Man 13
economics: anthropological 4, 8, 47–8,
62, 65, 74, 77–8, 84, 108, 135, 164,
165, 167, 172, 209, 259–60, 280–1;
and economizing 213; infighting
and confrontation 278; kinds 222;
orthodox theory of 264, 293; politics
of 118, 120–1, 125
economy 58, 62, 68–9, 206, 261;
afflicted 8, 226; business 4; finite
objectives 78, 81; household 68–9,
71, 74–5, 78, 81, 85, 86, 91, 92, 110,
113, 115, 116, 129, 133, 169, 201–2,
207; hunting-gathering 2, 4, 6, 13,
17, 31–5, 185, 210, 257–8; market 2,
27, 206; organization of 4, 12, 36,
65, 67, 168; political 117–33, 204,
243; subsistence 2–3, 17, 25, 38, 45–
7; systematic 261; underdeveloped
77; western 77–8; see also DMP
efficiency 15, 20, 30, 47
enemies 111, 160, 161, 178–9, 198, 202,
282
energy sources 5–6, 73
entitlement vs. title 83
entrepreneurship 4, 75, 122, 234
equilibrium 79, 240, 259, 278, 281,
286, 290, 292
equity 262, 270, 279
equivalence, ratio of 283–5
error, conceptual 139
Eskimo 8, 36, 74, 110, 120, 200, 204,
218, 231, 248, 250, 279

337

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

338

Index

esteem 120, 190, 218, 230, 231, 236,
238, 248, 250, 279
ethic: economic 187, 188, 241; spiritual
208
ethnocentricity 165
ethnography 5, 24, 40–2, 76, 77,
88, 108, 111–12, 116, 168, 233;
consumers 103–5, 104; exchange
168, 170, 174, 175, 176, 177, 183–4,
191, 192, 197, 204, 210, 223, 225,
261, 286; hunting-gathering 6,
8, 11, 14, 37; labor forces 47, 50,
54, 105, 118; Maori 139, 140, 150;
underproduction 45, 67, 69, 74
ethnology 139, 157–8, 160, 165, 181–2,
183
etiquette 69, 168, 256, 270, 285, 286,
287
Europe, medieval 77
evils 145
evolution, social 116, 155
exaggeration 270
exchange 75, 145, 164, 187, 193, 194–5,
209, 210, 218–19, 223–5, 241, 261;
axe-spear 263–4, 277, 284–5, 285;
balanced 200, 207, 210, 211, 212,
219, 221, 223–4, 228, 247, 248, 255,
262, 267; ceremonial 147, 223; cycle
of 37, 143–4, 143, 144; delayed 212;
external 206–7, 223–4, 225; food
and 197–9, 201, 253; forced 225;
forms 146; of gifts 140–5, 143, 144,
147, 149, 152–4, 157–62, 164, 176,
183, 216–17, 262–7, 263, 265; marital
165, 204–5; money and 208, 210,
241, 269; networks 262–93; peace
and 159, 166–7, 176, 203–4; pig 223,
232, 235, 247, 267, 279, 288–91;
production for 74, 75, 76; rates 260,
261, 262, 263, 264, 266, 267, 270–1,
274, 275, 276–7, 279, 281, 282, 284,
285–93, 285; social relations of 168–
258; spheres of 259; structuralist
comprehension of 139–40; theory
of 257, 259, 280–7; value and trade

261, 262–93; value, quest for 75–7;
see also barter; reciprocity; trade;
transaction
expediency 287
exploitation 120, 127, 229, 270
exports 63, 77, 206, 207, 267, 268, 273
expropriation 85
extreme, solidary 175
factor, unifying 246
famine 7, 29, 35, 65, 114, 129, 194,
256–7
farm, family 80
fecundity 151–2
feedback, negative 79
fissioning of village 89–90
flattery 251
flow, one-way 176, 177, 285, 286
fluctuations of supply, seasonal 276
food, sharing of 156–8, 193–8, 199,
200, 207–8, 214–15, 216, 217, 219,
226–8, 228, 229, 230, 243, 247,
248–50, 251, 252–3, 254–5
forces, countervailing 185
freedom 36, 146, 292; of movement
12–13, 27–8
free vs. poor 14
friendship 282; formal 203
fufu bowl 63
gambling 26, 51, 177
game 143, 144, 183; political 85
gap, wealth 193
generosity 154, 158–9, 175, 186, 228,
230, 236, 255, 286; Bushmen 214,
215, 224, 230; Eskimos 120, 231,
248; and exchange 115, 120, 220,
230, 232, 236–7, 247, 281, 282–3,
284, 285, 286–7, 288, 292; food and
125, 194–5, 199, 214, 215, 217, 237,
247, 248, 251–2; and leadership
118–19, 120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 132,
171, 187, 188–9, 190, 191, 230, 231,
232–4, 236, 242, 246; Maori 125,
239; Melanesian 121, 123–4, 231,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Index

232, 233–4, 242, 283–4; Native
Americans 237–8, 251–2, 254;
scarcity and 192, 193
gifts 120, 140, 219, 221, 222, 229, 232,
249, 255, 260, 281; Bushmen 214,
215; coercive 225; cycle of 143, 143,
144, 149; debt and 120, 135, 138, 140,
189–90, 244–5; of food 197, 214,
215, 224; free 144, 175, 220, 224,
283; leaders and people 125–6, 133,
188, 192, 236, 237–9, 242, 244, 252;
Leviathan and 154, 155–67; Maori
135–8, 140, 141–2, 143–6, 143, 144,
148–9, 152–3, 238–9; peace and
153, 159, 161, 162, 164, 167; political
philosophy 152–5; pure 173, 175, 224;
reason and 159; spirit of 134–67;
vs. State 153; trade and 174–5, 176,
183, 188, 214, 215, 216–17, 263, 267,
282–5, 284; unrequited 16, 142, 146,
148, 149, 216
goal, indefinite 76
Golden Age 88
gratitude 162
Hadza culture 26, 46, 51
haggling 174, 175, 177, 183, 196, 216,
218–19, 221, 223–4, 229, 260, 279,
280
Hanunoo 33
hau 134–64
Hawaiians 52, 110–11, 127, 128–9, 130,
131–2, 240
heterogeneity, morphological 69
hierarchy 91–2, 117, 180, 188, 259
hoarding 10, 30, 234, 254
hospitality 158–9, 172, 174, 175, 183,
189, 198, 199, 200, 202, 219, 221,
223, 228, 229, 245, 257; Maori 112,
125, 238, 239; Melanesia 114, 256
hostility 158, 159, 182, 186
humility 233
hunting-gathering peoples 1–37, 45, 49,
50–1, 53, 60, 72, 124, 188, 190, 194,
207, 211, 214, 230–1, 247–50, 252

Huon Gulf trade network 262, 267–72,
268, 269, 274, 275, 283, 286, 292
Iban culture 41, 63–4, 206
ideology 51, 78, 111, 120, 121
idleness, absence of 37
immorality 146, 166, 201, 262
imperialism 8, 51
imports 264, 268, 274
incentives 37
incest 182
incommensurables 204
indebtedness, shadow of 190, 205
index of population capacity 40
individual, rugged 88
industrial revolution 6
influence, European 103
inhumanity 165
injunctions against sale of food 200
institutions 68–9
instrument-user relation 72
integration 280
interdependence 89, 183, 197, 199, 212
interests, conflict of 113
intervention 138
invention 71
irrigation networks 128
jealousy 157, 186, 194, 233
Kampamba 54–5
Kapauku 52–3, 103–8, 104, 105, 107,
108, 173, 222–3, 233–4, 276–7, 279
Kasaka 54, 57
kings 118, 131–2, 133, 240; see also
chieftainship
kinship relations 110, 111, 166, 170,
173, 176, 193, 201, 203, 206, 249,
256, 257, 260, 266, 267, 278, 281,
283, 292; corporate 80; distance
113–14, 174, 176–86, 181, 195,
214–29, 228, 261; as economic force
39, 68, 92, 110–13; extended 208;
Hawaiian 110, 111, 132, 133; Maori
113, 239; rank 186–92, 195, 206,

339

340

Index

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

230–46, 261; trade 262, 266, 281,
283, 292
Kuikuru 40, 41, 43, 52, 60, 117, 254
Kuma 122, 198, 221, 234
labor 4, 73, 74, 286; cost 12, 272, 274,
275; division of 4, 10, 36, 50, 69, 70,
71, 79, 87, 169; exchange 206, 207,
210; force 93, 101, 106, 107, 109,
121; hunting-gathering 20–2, 21, 25,
26–7, 34, 53–4; intensity 74, 76, 80,
81, 92–3, 97, 96–9, 99, 100, 100,
101, 102, 103, 105, 105, 107, 107, 108,
109; and leisure 52, 53, 57; power 38,
75, 80, 81, 90; productivity of 31, 38,
78, 82; saving 6, 34; subsistence 25,
26, 34; surplus 100–1, 103, 106, 107,
109, 110; theory of value 266; tribute
246; underuse 38, 47–62, 55–6, 57,
58, 59, 61, 90, 111
Lakalai 122
Lala tribe 42
Lamet culture 41, 45, 117, 206
land 133, 150–1, 152, 185, 210, 236, 257
law 138, 156, 158–9, 165, 247
laws, iron 276
laziness 26, 37, 51, 248, 252
leadership, tribal 118, 124, 126–7, 188,
189, 190, 191, 212, 231, 233, 237, 246
leisure 2, 3, 5, 14, 18, 22, 23, 26, 34, 52,
53, 57
Lele culture 48–9, 48, 117
Leviathan 154, 155
life, enjoyment of 14
limits, structural 130
linguistic categories 58, 116, 151, 181–2
livelihood orientation 62, 74, 75–6, 78
living, standard of 2, 10, 35, 79
loot 251
Lozi 62
lumpen-proletariat 8
lying 181
magic 22, 122, 139, 141, 148, 149, 159
Manus 116–17, 223, 235, 264, 266
Maori 62, 112–13, 125–6, 134–9, 140–8,

143, 150–2, 185, 225–6, 238–40, 255;
sorcerer’s apprentice 146
market 206, 207, 223, 229, 259, 260,
261, 271–2, 277, 278–80, 287,
292; competitive 262, 287, 290;
industrial system 4; open 279, 290;
price 289–90; principle 280; selfregulating 278
marriage 48, 49, 71, 117, 165, 166, 176,
198, 204–13, 233
Marx, Karl 2, 69, 72, 75–6, 164–5
Masai 50
massacre 160
materialism 13
Mazulu village 65, 66, 93–103, 94, 96,
97, 100, 102, 106, 107, 108, 109
meanness 237, 245, 255
means and ends 2, 5, 36
mechanism: competitive 277; price
277, 290; starting 188–9, 190, 231,
243, 246
medium, spirit 129
Micmac 28
microeconomics 278
middlemen 264, 265, 266–7, 271
miracle 128
missionaries 6, 8, 119, 127, 241, 242,
255, 288
Moala Islanders 50, 62–3, 192
mobility 11, 30, 32, 33; upward 243
models 145, 179–80, 183, 273, 274, 285,
291; business 278, 279
moderation 53
money 200, 201, 221, 222, 229, 232,
234, 241, 262, 269, 270, 276, 277,
288; blood 236; primitive 209–13;
servant of custom 289
mongomongo nut 26, 46
monopoly 266, 267
Montagnais 13, 28–9
morality 113, 118, 133, 159, 180–2, 186,
188, 193, 278
movements, vice-versa 170, 174, 175, 177
Murngin culture 12, 37
mutual aid 120, 162, 223, 235, 260; see
also cooperation

Index

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

mysticism 139–40, 165
myths 129
Nambikwara 118, 124
nature 114, 138, 161; vs. culture 5, 113;
inverted by culture 127; state of 68,
87, 88, 89, 154, 155, 156–7
Navaho 181–2
Ndembu tribe 41, 45
needs 64, 86, 88, 223, 234, 235, 257,
261, 271; dependency 227; infinite
37; limited 77
neolithic era 3, 4, 5–6, 26, 33, 34, 36,
39, 73–4, 206, 210, 214
noblesse oblige 176, 187, 192, 225, 232
nomads 3, 9, 11, 27, 28, 47, 125,
184–5, 219
nonrelative, as stranger 111
nonviolence 182
Nootka 191, 243
norms 181, 186, 261
Northwest Coast Indians 8, 123, 135,
191, 195, 243
Nuer culture 123, 168, 193, 195, 228, 254
Nupe 54, 55
nutrition 14, 17–18, 22
obligations 179, 186, 208, 223, 224,
226, 241, 248–9, 252, 257; of
generosity 171, 214, 217, 236–7,
242, 286–7, 288, 292; leaders'
171, 176, 187, 188, 191, 192, 193,
225, 232, 235, 236–7, 243, 247,
255; to receive 135, 288–9, 290; of
reciprocity 135, 138, 140, 144, 148,
158, 176, 189–90, 206, 214, 215,
221, 236, 245, 279, 282, 286–7,
288–9, 290
Old Stone Age 5, 35
Ona tribe 6
output: economic 211; real 58–9, 78, 98
overpayment 287, 290; reciprocal 291
overreciprocation 282, 288, 291
overrights 83
overture, strategic 274
ownership 83–5; see also property

paleolithic era 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 22, 34, 36,
37, 73–4, 210
Papuan people 59
paradigms 129, 142
paradoxes 163, 164
partnership see trade: partner
passions, natural 163
patrilineal context 205
patronage 278
peace 153, 154, 156, 159, 161, 162–3,
164, 166–7, 169, 174, 176, 180, 182;
price of 287
penalties 271; see also punishment
Peoria, prairies of 190
persons: commercialization of 165;
displaced 186
Pilaga 226–7, 246, 258
pokala 188
political structure 36, 48–9, 116–25,
152–4, 204
polygyny 226–7, 246, 258
pooling 85–6, 87, 115, 170–1, 172, 179,
190, 196, 222, 256, 257; defined 170;
see also sharing
popularity 237
population 3, 20–1, 33, 40–7, 41–2,
44, 89, 98, 117, 131, 184–5, 226, 264,
268–9; critical density 40
portability, as decisive value 12, 30, 32
positivism 139
possessions 11–12, 13, 14, 113, 192,
194, 208, 236, 239–40, 250; vs.
poverty 36, 230; sense of 13;
sloppiness 12
potential and reality 41–2, 43
potlatch 123, 158, 243
poverty 2, 4, 8, 9, 31, 117, 161, 194, 195,
230, 238, 255; cultural vow of 13;
defined 36; due to lack of authority
117; wages of 33
power 36, 120, 123, 125, 126, 129, 130,
132, 138, 141, 154, 155–6, 157, 162,
163, 169, 188, 245; community 179;
fund of 124; of increase 142, 143;
magical 148, 149; spiritual 138
prehistory, as record of instruments 73

341

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

342

Index

pressures 273
prestation 153, 158, 165, 166, 202, 204,
205, 208, 281
prestige 141, 151, 173, 206, 208, 225,
231, 232, 233, 235, 238, 239, 242, 245,
246; see also esteem; power; status
prices 4, 77, 78; asking 287; bride
243; competition 281; equilibrium
and 259, 276, 278, 290; fixing 280,
292; manipulated 279; market 221,
260, 276–7, 278, 279, 280, 286–7,
289–90; mechanism 290; of peace
287; regulated 279
priests 140, 142, 143, 147–8, 150, 236
primary group 86
principle: of equivalence demanded
145; unified and integral 139
privacy 292
privileges of use and disposition 83
prodigality 2, 28, 29, 34, 119
producers, effective 80, 101
production 14–17, 15, 16, 30, 37, 126,
290; constraints 60; domestic
mode 67–133; imbalances in
196–7; of livelihood 79, 121; means
35, 40, 83–4, 92, 111; mode of 33,
35, 38–90, 185–6; as objective of
man 76; problems of 12, 75, 91–2;
relations of 74, 79; spheres of 32;
statistical study of 92–110, 94–5,
96, 97, 100, 102, 104, 105, 107,
108, 109; subsistence 20, 34, 63,
73–4
production-institution, dominant 69
productivity 2, 15, 31, 32, 36, 77, 78,
116, 118, 127, 151, 275; see also labor;
output, real
products, specialized 273
property 10, 11, 12, 13, 35, 36, 69, 83–7,
113, 114, 118, 218, 234, 238, 247, 293;
common 248, 250; and hau 136,
138, 146
prosperity 10, 264
protection 236
proverbs 111–13, 140, 185, 225–6
prudence 31

pulsation, predictable 115
punishment 140, 186
quality and quantity 76
question, evolutionist 190
rates: exchange 260, 262, 263–4,
266–7, 270–1, 272, 274, 275, 276–7,
279, 282, 284, 285–6; going 261,
262, 277, 290; standardized 277
rationalization 29, 120, 139, 140,
157–8, 222, 271
rationing 252
real intensity curve 98
reason 159, 161, 163, 164
rebellion 130, 131, 132, 234
reciprocity 86, 111, 113, 120, 121, 122,
126, 135, 140, 154, 159, 164–5, 170–1,
172, 174–8, 260, 261–2; balanced
114, 172–3, 176–7, 180, 202–13, 217,
218, 277, 282; continuum of 173,
174, 175, 180, 188, 224; failure to
reciprocate 114, 140, 177, 202, 214,
248; and food 197–202, 215, 258;
good measure 283–4, 284, 286,
291; and kinship distance 178–86,
214–29; and kinship rank 186–92,
193, 230–46; leadership and 118,
120, 123–4, 132, 191; Maori 141, 144,
146, 149; Mauss on 135, 139, 164,
238–9; negative 173, 177, 178, 183,
196, 221, 222, 256; peace and 158–9,
161–3, 166, 202, 281; Polynesia 135,
219, 238, 243, 255–6; and wealth
192–7, 246–58
reciprocity, generalized 175, 176, 177,
178, 187, 189, 190, 193, 197, 199,
202, 207, 212, 261; ethnographic
data 214, 217, 219, 221, 222, 224,
226, 228, 231, 234, 235, 236, 237,
238, 244, 245, 247, 252, 254, 255, 257
reconciliation 162, 166–7, 232
redistribution 133, 169, 170, 171, 172,
190–1, 192, 195, 204–5, 219, 230,
273, 280; chiefly 126, 190–1, 229,
230–46; internal 275

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Index

relaxation 54, 60; as compensation 53;
standards of 48
repayment 113, 137, 138, 139, 140,
141, 144, 146, 160, 174, 239, 288;
absence of 148, 223, 224, 233
responsibility 48, 49, 122, 179, 185,
187, 237, 246, 251, 257–8, 287
retaliation 244–5, 270
rights 169–70, 171, 185, 198; and duties
135, 205; of Man 161; of property 67,
83, 113
ritual 37, 51, 58, 59, 60, 64, 67, 78, 86,
92, 141, 142, 147, 172, 198; see also
ceremony
Rousseau, Jean J. 68, 88, 134, 154, 155
“rubbish man” 235
sacred kitchen 245
sacrifice 148, 178, 199, 207
safety, margin of 282
sanction 140–1, 291; threat of 131
savage people in America 157
scarcity 2, 4–5, 12, 13, 23, 24, 51,
192, 193, 196, 226, 229, 250–1,
252–3, 254, 256, 257, 263, 266, 287;
institutionalization 27; see also
drought; famine; poverty; starvation
science, dismal 1
security 88, 160–1, 245, 246
self-interest 112, 113, 116, 164, 173, 177,
178, 185, 196, 203, 208
selfishness 116, 234, 241
self-sufficiency 75, 77
Semang 217
sensitivity 261, 276, 277, 280
sequence 273
sharing 10, 29, 113, 115, 170, 174, 175,
178, 179, 184, 185, 186, 192–3, 194,
196, 197, 216, 219, 222, 223, 236–7,
254; avoiding 112, 113, 241, 253; see
also food, sharing of
Shoshoni Indians 8, 37, 219, 250
Siassi 264–7, 265, 286
Siriono 186
Siuai 58–9, 60, 173, 174, 179, 180, 191,
221, 222, 232

sleep and rest 14, 18–19, 19, 20, 25, 34,
54, 59, 150
slope of normal intensity 98
sociability 58, 86, 111, 112, 115, 173,
184, 185, 189, 193, 197, 198, 199,
208, 278; coefficient of 167, 282;
spectrum 178
social climber 60
social contract 134, 153–4, 155, 159,
164, 169, 186, 202–3, 204, 208
social distance 111, 114, 173, 178, 184,
201, 205–6, 226, 262
social inflection, investigating 93
social order 105
social organization 71, 108, 170, 216,
261, 278–80, 291
social relations 79, 80, 166, 168–73,
177, 178, 180, 183, 192, 200–1, 262,
279
social sector 196, 200, 210, 212, 215,
261
social structure 92, 196, 206, 211, 292
social systems 92–3, 100
social uses of goods 287
society, segmentary 123, 153, 154, 158,
159–60, 166, 179
solidarity 80, 85, 86, 110, 114, 116, 153,
180, 189–90, 196, 203, 211, 257, 261,
278
sorcerer’s apprentice, Maori 146
souls 31, 135, 138, 150
spells, death-dealing 147–9
stability, short-term 287
starvation 1, 6, 22, 27, 28, 35, 185, 189,
195, 246, 255
statistics 79, 81, 93–110, 94, 96, 97,
100, 102, 104, 105, 107, 108, 109
status 10, 36, 69, 168, 178, 179, 183,
188, 189, 191, 208, 213, 217, 232, 236,
245, 249; competition for 103, 121;
differentiation 235; see also kinship
relations, rank; social distance
stealing 115, 129, 246
strangers 9, 11, 125, 173, 178–9, 198,
199, 200, 220, 228, 229, 238, 244,
260, 278, 281, 282–3

343

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

344

Index

structuralism 139, 142
study: interdisciplinary 47;
phylogenetic 172
subsistence 1–3, 14–31, 33–4, 45–6,
50, 117, 185; consumption 63, 65,
94–5, 98, 268; cultivation 65, 66, 98;
exports 63, 206–7, 268; labor and
50, 52, 60, 94–5
suffering 31, 252
superiority 237
supply and demand 260, 262, 264,
267, 276, 277, 278, 279, 286;
equilibrium 278
supply-cost differences 286
surplus 1, 2, 3, 9, 22, 29, 60, 63, 77,
81, 91, 98, 100, 110, 119, 124, 126–7,
207, 244, 254; see also labor, surplus
survival 3, 14, 34, 91, 185, 196;
traditional privilege of chief 130
suspicion 198, 281
Swaka tribe 42
systems: open 121; social 92–3, 100
taboo 59, 227
tact 281, 282, 287, 291
technology 10, 69, 71, 72, 73, 79
theft 140, 177, 181, 196, 216, 224, 228,
256; level 115
threat 197
Tikopian culture 52, 58, 114–15, 129,
130, 172, 192, 225, 242–3, 256–7
Tonga 241
tools 71–4
Toupouri 57, 59
trade 199, 200, 202, 215, 216–17,
218–19, 224–5, 228; chain of 262–4,
263, 272, 274, 275; friendships 183,
223, 262, 281, 288, 292; game 218;
partner 183, 199, 200, 206, 218,
219, 221, 222, 224, 262, 277, 278–9,
280–1, 282, 285, 287, 289–90, 291,
293; relocation of 291; reluctance to
289, 291; systems 262–76, 263, 265,
268, 269; see also exchange; gifts;
transaction

trading, fair 276
tragedy, double 4
transaction 142, 147–8, 165, 166, 168,
169, 170, 174–7, 179, 182, 183, 187,
190, 192, 193, 197, 200–1, 203, 211,
217, 221, 222–3, 225, 228, 229, 232,
234, 238, 258, 259, 260, 261, 263,
273, 277, 279–83, 285, 290; balanced
224, 228; differential 205; marital
204; parallel 278; series 138; threeway 141–2, 143, 143, 145, 272–3,
274; see also exchange, balanced;
reciprocity, balanced
trends, long-term 277
Trobrianders 174–5, 182, 188, 211–12,
224–5, 236–7, 280, 289
Tsembaga 41
turnover 144
type, ideal 68
tyranny 13, 132, 133
unbalance, transitory 283
underproduction 38–90; village 102
uneconomic man 13
unification, purpose 154
use-value vs. exchange-value 75–6,
200, 210, 274, 286
usufruct 84
usury 208
utility, relative 286
utu 136, 137, 141, 183
value 148, 149, 176, 209–10, 220, 234,
239, 241; currency 277; exchange
259–93, 265, 269, 284, 285; labor
270, 286; theory of 259, 262, 266,
277, 280–7; use 270, 286; see also
use-value vs. exchange-value
variations, rate 260, 276–8
village indolent 54
violence 155, 156, 161, 177, 182, 228
visiting, reciprocal 286
Vitiaz Straits 262, 264–7, 265, 270
Volokolamsk 81–3, 82, 83
voyaging: one-way 286; reciprocal 267

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

Index

war 152–3, 155, 156, 158, 159, 162, 163,
166, 172, 197, 253
Washo 216–17
wealth 33, 36, 76, 78, 190, 200, 201,
234, 265, 270; bride 228, 235, 264;
as burden 11, 30; leadership and
122–3, 125–6, 193, 208, 210, 213,
233, 234–5, 236–7, 238–40, 243;
limitations of 13; principle of 4;
reciprocity 192–7, 247–58; see also
poverty
welfare 32, 80, 92, 110, 113, 122, 126,
131
whanau, self-interest of 113–15

witchcraft 112, 140, 142, 145, 147, 151,
182
women, liberated 165
work see labor
work of the Gods 58
workweek 21, 21
Yagaw Hanaoo 41
Yahgan tribe 6, 10, 12, 30
Yakö culture 63, 64
Yamana culture 26–7
Yukaghir 192, 194, 198
zone, marginal 275

345

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 20:29 03 May 2017

