Lapita and the Austronesian Expansion



We can propose for the S.W. Pacific some early community of culture linking New Caledonia, Tonga, and Samoa, antedating the “Melanesian” cultures of the first and ancestral to the historic Western Polynesian cultures of the other two. This community is expressed in terms of variants of the same pottery tradition.

J. GOLSON, “Report on New Zealand, Western

Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji” (1961)





THE REDDISH-GOLD LIGHT OF EARLY morning streamed laterally through motionless coconut palms as the Eloaua village workmen and I headed up the narrow path toward our excavation at a place called Talepakemalai, in the Mussau Islands of Papua New Guinea. The sky was cloudless; I mused silently that it would be another scorching day in the breezeless excavation pit under a baking equatorial sun. Arriving at the site—a waterlogged ancient village of stilt houses that had once fronted the lagoon at Talepakemalai—we took up our places, some at the screening platforms, some at the hand-operated pumps, others excavating. Bauwa Sagila, an alert and careful excavator, began work in one of the one-meter grid units while I took up my place in the adjacent square.

The work progressed steadily through the morning, sweat running in little rivulets off our brows as the tropical sun broke above the cool shade of the surrounding jungle. The point of my trowel revealed a cluster of reddish potsherds, still lying where they had settled in the shallow lagoon bed after being tossed off the platform of a stilt house in this ancient village. Next to me, I could see that Bauwa had uncovered a small, elongate object of heavy bone, which he had left carefully in place. After I had taken the object’s coordinates, Bauwa gingerly lifted the little piece of white bone, about 4 inches long, turning it over as he set it in his palm. Simultaneously, we caught our breath, two pairs of eyes riveted on the exquisitely carved, stylized human face that stared back emotionless, sunlight illuminating it for the first time since it had found its watery grave more than three thousand years earlier (fig. 4.1). Neither of us spoke; then Bauwa muttered in Melanesian pidgin, “God belong ol Lapita!”




FIGURE 4.1 The carved anthropomorphic image, in porpoise bone, from the Talepakemalai Lapita site in Mussau. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





The little “Lapita god” from Talepakemalai was just one of many discoveries we made in the course of three seasons of excavations in Mussau, part of the 1985 Lapita Homeland Project. Lapita sites first attracted the attention of Pacific archaeologists in the 1950s and 1960s, when it became evident that this cultural complex spanned the ethnographic divide between Melanesia and Polynesia. Synthesizing the emerging picture of Lapita in 1961, Jack Golson proposed that this ceramic complex represented a “community of culture” ancestral to many of the later societies of both Melanesia and Polynesia. More than a half century after Golson made this radical proposal, the significance of Lapita for Pacific prehistory is more evident than ever. This chapter summarizes what we have learned of Lapita and the role that the “Lapita peoples” played in the colonization of Remote Oceania.1 First, however, let us review the Oceanic world on the eve of the Lapita phenomenon, between about 4,000 and 3,300 years ago.





THE HUMAN LANDSCAPE OF NEAR OCEANIA AT 2000–1300 B.C.


The first great epoch in the colonization of the Pacific commenced with Pleistocene human movements across Wallacea into Sahul and—seemingly without pause—to the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes beyond. After 30,000 years, perhaps longer, of local cultural development and change, especially in the early to mid-Holocene, a complex human landscape had emerged on the face of Near Oceania. We know far less than we would like to about this island world prior to the advent of the Lapita cultural complex in the late second millennium B.C., but some patterns are discernible.

Human populations in Near Oceania were still small and scattered at this time, for the sites they left seem not to be numerous, nor are they extensive. There are no large permanent villages predating Lapita, and indeed most of our information comes from small, intermittently occupied rockshelters.2 We might infer that individual social groups—whatever their kinship patterns and social organization—were also small, perhaps a few related families. Moreover, there was a settlement pattern of strong inland orientation, as opposed to a coastal focus, even though coastal resources were regularly exploited.

By the mid-Holocene the peoples who occupied island Near Oceania had developed new subsistence strategies that—while continuing to incorporate older patterns of hunting marsupials, reptiles, birds, and other small game, as well collecting forest products—included food production. Edible roots, tubers, fruit, and nuts had been brought under human manipulation and control, domesticated by planting, tending, and selecting. Among these were some bananas (e.g., the Australimusa types with upright inflorescences) and aroids (taro, Colocasia, and, in the coastal lowlands, Alocasia and Cyrtosperma), sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), and a range of tree crops (fig. 4.2). These changes in subsistence were accompanied by new technologies in the working of shell and stone (as seen in the development of obsidian tools in sites near the main obsidian sources on New Britain). Adzes of Tridacna shell were probably used to clear small gardens, and fishhooks of Trochus shell allowed people to catch an expanded range of fish from reefs and inshore waters. The new shell technology was also applied to aesthetics, in the creation of beads and arm rings.




FIGURE 4.2 The large aroid plant Alocasia macrorrhiza is one of many tropical crops domesticated in Near Oceania. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Communication between the varied populations that occupied the islands of Near Oceania is evidenced by the movement of obsidian over considerable distances. Nonetheless, this was hardly a uniform human landscape culturally, linguistically, or biologically. Over 30,000 or more years, the indigenous peoples of Near Oceania had diversified. Linguistically, the Near Oceanic region is one of the most complicated in the world. Not including the Austronesian languages, New Guinea and island Near Oceania encompass at least twelve distinct language families, with hundreds of mutually unintelligible languages.3 These are loosely grouped under the rubric Non-Austronesian or Papuan languages, today concentrated in the interior of New Guinea, with scattered enclaves in the Bismarcks and Solomons (see map 2). Such great linguistic diversity arose primarily through the long time depth of human occupation in Near Oceania, combined with geographic factors favoring isolation. As the linguist William Foley, an expert on Papuan languages, puts it, “Fifty thousand years is a very long time, and if the present-day populations in the Sahul region descend directly from this period, then the extreme linguistic diversity found there, especially in New Guinea, finds a ready historical explanation” (1986:270).

The human landscape of Near Oceania was just as diverse biologically and culturally. Biological anthropologists have long noted the heterogeneity of Melanesian peoples; while some of the diversity seen among the region’s modern populations derives from gene flow with later Austronesian-speaking peoples, it is evident that the Near Oceanic populations already displayed substantial genetic variation by 2000 B.C. (Attenborough and Alpers, eds., 1992; Friedlaender 1987, 2007; Friedlaender et al. 2008; Kayser et al. 2000, 2006). Some populations within island Near Oceania had been in place long enough to evolve genetic changes that were adaptive in a malarious environment, such as the α-thalassemia deletion.4

Just prior to the cultural events that turned this world of “Old” Melanesia upside down in the middle of the second millennium B.C., a natural disaster devastated parts of the Bismarck Archipelago. Mount Witori in New Britain erupted violently around 3,300 years ago (the W-K2 eruption), in what Matthew Spriggs (1997:76) describes as “one of the most massive eruptions to occur anywhere on earth during the time that modern humans have existed on the planet” (see also Machida et al. 1996). The explosion, probably heard hundreds of kilometers away, left a vast expanse of New Britain blanketed in scalding, suffocating volcanic ash. At Mopir, locally exploited obsidian sources were buried under meters of ashfall. The full impact of the Witori eruption on the human landscape of the Bismarcks has yet to be determined archaeologically, but it was doubtless a pivotal event in regional prehistory.

Research in West New Britain, especially by Robin Torrence and colleagues (e.g., Rath and Torrence 2003; Torrence and Boyd 1997; Torrence and Summerhayes 1997; Torrence 2001, 2012, 2016; Torrence, Specht, and Fullagar 1990; Torrence et al. 2000), has demonstrated significant cultural discontinuities associated with the Witori eruption. The W-K2 tephra that blanketed much of New Britain (it reached as far as Lolmo Cave in the Arawe Islands, off the south coast) provides a distinct stratigraphic marker, now estimated by means of Bayesian calibration of radiocarbon dates from a number of sites on New Britain at 1530–1200 B.C. (Petrie and Torrence 2008). Below the W-K2 tephra, in the period dated to about 5,900 to 3,600 years ago, there are distinctive, well-worked obsidian tools with stemmed bases, presumably for hafting. Such stemmed tools are absent above the W-K2 tephra, with a shift to a more expedient lithic technology involving unretouched flakes. (This shift in lithic technology is evident as well at the Yombon site in the interior of New Britain.) There are also changes in land use and settlement patterns, with evidence for high mobility before the W-K2 eruption, followed by more localized settlement, associated with coastal locations. Obsidian exchange, minimal prior to the W-K2 event, became substantial (and specialized) after it (Torrence and Summerhayes 1997:82). Notably, there are no ceramics in the archaeological contexts buried by the W-K2 tephra, whereas after this event the distinctive style of dentate-stamped pottery known as Lapita soon made its appearance in the Bismarck Archipelago. Commenting on the possible implications of the W-K2 eruption, Petrie and Torrence (2008:740) write, “The possible contemporaneity between W-K2, the loss of obsidian stemmed tools and the beginning of Lapita pottery in the Willaumez Peninsula raises the issue of whether this natural disaster was responsible for the wide-scale extinction of particular cultural groups. The catastrophe might have facilitated the arrival of immigrants bearing a new ceramic style and possibly a different language.”





THE ADVENT OF LAPITA


On New Britain following the W-K2 eruption of Mount Witori, the “character and speed of [cultural] change is much more radical than before; for example, pottery is introduced, stone tool types disappear, and the whole pattern of artefact discard is transformed” (Torrence et al. 2000:241). In fact, these sweeping changes are evident across the entire Bismarck Archipelago, marked by the appearance of sites ranging from the Mussau Islands, Anir, and Ambitle to New Ireland to the Arawe group off the southern coast of New Britain and on to Nissan and Buka in the northern Solomons (table 4.1). Several characteristics render these sites wholly different from anything preceding them in Near Oceania. First, they were good-sized settlements (in the case of Talepakemalai, up to 80 or more hectares in extent), situated on coastal beach terraces or built out over the shallow lagoons as clusters of stilt houses. Second, their occupants made, traded, and used large quantities of earthenware ceramics, of both plain and decorated varieties. The plain ware consisted largely of red-slipped globular jars with out-turned rims, while the decorated pottery was covered in finely executed motifs, many representing human faces, made by pressing small toothed, or dentate, stamps into the leather-hard clay before firing (fig. 4.3). Third, the economic base had expanded from that of the preceding phase in Near Oceania, utilizing all of the tree crops that had been domesticated in this region but also including pigs, dogs, and chickens. Fishing strategies were sophisticated, and employed a variety of fishhooks, including trolling lures for taking tuna and other pelagic fish on the open ocean.




FIGURE 4.3 The dentate-stamped method of decoration is characteristic of Lapita pottery. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





The Lapita people were seafarers, venturing beyond coastal waters to move pottery, obsidian, chert, oven stones, and other materials between their communities, frequently over hundreds of kilometers. Their material culture included adzes in stone as well as shell, flake tools of obsidian and chert, shell scrapers and peeling knives, anvil stones, polishers, slingstones, shell rings of a variety of sizes and shapes, bracelet units, arm rings, beads, discs, needles, awls, tattooing chisels, fishhooks, net sinkers, and other items. Archaeologists combine the sites exhibiting these characteristics—but most particularly the dentate-stamped pottery—under the rubric Lapita, the toponym of a site on the Foué Peninsula of New Caledonia, where Edward W. Gifford and his student Richard Shutler Jr. discovered such pottery in 1952 (Sand and Kirch 2002; see chap. 1).

The distinctive Lapita pottery establishes these sites as having been occupied by closely related groups of people sharing a common set of artistic rules and conventions. Radiocarbon dates5 indicate that the earliest Lapita sites in Near Oceania appear suddenly in the second half of the second millennium B.C. Although some initial radiocarbon dates from sites in the Bismarck Archipelago suggested that Lapita might begin as early as 1500 B.C. (Kirch 1997a:58), more extensive dating using AMS and focusing on plant materials rather than shell (which has uncertainty issues because of the marine reservoir effect) now puts the appearance of Lapita in this region at between 1410 and 1290 B.C. (Denham, Ramsey, and Specht 2012).

Despite earlier proposals that the Lapita phenomenon in Near Oceania represents an indigenous, in situ development,6 the conclusion has become inescapable for most archaeologists that Lapita sites represent something entirely new and intrusive on the cultural landscape of this island world. To understand Lapita origins, however, we must broaden our geographic purview and assess developments to the west of Near Oceania, among the islands of Southeast Asia during the period between about 5,000 and 3,300 years ago.





LAPITA ORIGINS: THE AUSTRONESIAN EXPANSION


Until about 3000 B.C., the island world of Southeast Asia exhibited a human landscape not dissimilar from that of adjacent Near Oceania, and indeed there is no reason to think that there was any impermeable boundary between them. Around the beginning of the third millennium B.C., however, ceramic-making peoples are first evidenced on the large island of Taiwan off the Chinese mainland, and over the course of the next 1,500 years, their descendants or closely related peoples expanded south and southeast, toward Near Oceania (Bellwood 2017; Hung and Carson 2014; Kirch 1995; Spriggs 2007a, 2011). On Taiwan, the earliest ceramic phase is the Dabenkeng (or Ta-p’en-k’eng) culture, succeeded around 2200 B.C. by several other cultures, some of which made not only ceramics and ground-stone adzes but also fishhooks and ornaments of Trochus and other shells. These people appear to have been horticulturalists, although more work must be done on the reconstruction of their subsistence economy. Around the same time, similar assemblages appear in the Philippines, such as in the Cagayan Valley (e.g., the Lal-lo and Magapit sites) in northern Luzon. Around 2200 B.C., ceramic-using peoples expanded their distribution to Sulawesi and adjacent islands. At the Uattamdi rockshelter site on Kayoa Island west of Halmahera, red-slipped pottery nearly identical to Lapita plain ware, associated with a rich diversity of stone and shell artifacts, has been dated to about 1300 to 800 B.C. (Bellwood 1998, 2017; Bellwood et al. 1998).

Peter Bellwood, who has synthesized the modern archaeological record of island Southeast Asia,7 argues that this progression of ceramic-using cultures from Taiwan through the Philippines and into the equatorial islands of Southeast Asia represents the expansion of a particular ethnolinguistic group of people: the Austronesian speakers (see also Carson et al. 2013). The Austronesian language family is the most widely dispersed in the world, ranging from Madagascar to Rapa Nui (Easter Island), but its speakers are concentrated in island Southeast Asia and in the islands of the Pacific. Bellwood’s contention that the archaeological record of an expansion of pottery-using, agricultural peoples out of Taiwan into island Southeast Asia and the Pacific correlates with the spread of the Austronesian speakers is shared not only by other archaeologists (e.g., Kirch 1997a; Spriggs 1995, 1997) but also by historical linguists who have studied the deep history of the Austronesian language family.8 The archaeological model and its dating are remarkably consistent with the internal relationships or subgrouping (the “family tree”)9 of the Austronesian languages as worked out through careful linguistic comparisons (fig. 4.4).




FIGURE 4.4 The subgrouping, or “family tree,” for the Austronesian languages. (After Kirch 1997a.)





The linguist Robert Blust, who has made a life’s work of studying the historical relationships of the Austronesian languages and reconstructing their early culture history, summarizes the implications of the Austronesian family tree as follows:

In accordance with the “principle of least moves” it follows that the most likely homeland of the AN [Austronesian] languages was on Taiwan, although it was not necessarily confined to that island. From Taiwan population expansion into the northern Philippines had begun by perhaps 5500 B.P. . . . From the southern Philippines the linguistic evidence strongly suggests a split into two major population segments, a western one ancestral to Western [Malayo-Polynesian], and an eastern one ancestral to Central [Malayo-Polynesian]. [Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian] in turn evidently split into two streams, Central [Malayo-Polynesian] (CMP) moving southward into the central Moluccas and then westward through the Lesser Sunda Islands, and Eastern MP (EMP) moving eastward around the north coast of New Guinea and then splitting into South Halmahera–West New Guinea (SHWNG) and Oceanic (OC), the latter moving on into the insular Pacific, where it is associated archaeologically with the Lapita culture complex in the Bismarck Archipelago by at least 3600 B.P. (1995:458)

Archaeological evidence reveals that these expanding Austronesian peoples were horticulturalists, had domestic animals, knew how to fish the inshore and offshore waters, made red-slipped earthenware pottery, used ground-stone and shell adzes, and had a variety of other tools and implements in shell. Lexical reconstructions of the Proto Austronesian (PAN) and Proto Malayo-Polynesian vocabularies by linguists such as Blust have greatly expanded our knowledge of early Austronesian cultures. For example, these people had words for such important Indo-Pacific crops as taro (PAN *tales),10 coconut (*niuR), banana (*punti), and breadfruit (*kuluR), and for the domesticated pig (*beRek), chicken (*manuk), and dog (*asu). They lived in dwellings called *Rumaq sometimes raised on posts (*SadiRi), and their settlements included other house types, one of which (*balay) was an open-sided building used at times for public gatherings. Significantly, given their rapid expansion over island Southeast Asia, the Austronesians were canoe builders and navigators. Linguists Andrew Pawley and Medina Pawley (1994, 1998) have reconstructed early Austronesian terms for canoe parts and sailing, finding that speakers of these languages had outrigger canoes (*wagka) with planks (*papan), washstrakes (*[q]oRa), and possibly carved end-pieces (*ijug), and with platforms (*patar) between hull and outrigger (*saman). Such canoes had masts (*kayu-tuqur) and were propelled by sails (*layaR), or paddled (*pa-luja), and they were captained by expert seafarers (*tau-tasi[k]).

These seafarers—who appeared on the landscape of island Near Oceania in the mid–second millennium B.C.—were a branch of the Austronesian peoples. Their outrigger canoes must have been a novel sight in Pacific waters, and they established stilt-house settlements fringing the beaches of Mussau, New Ireland, and New Britain. Yet they were not the first inhabitants of these islands; on the beaches of Near Oceania we must envisage a meeting of cultures, between the immigrant seafarers who spoke an Austronesian language that we call Proto Oceanic and the diverse indigenous inhabitants who spoke not one but a plethora of Papuan (or Non-Austronesian) languages and who were culturally and biologically quite varied. From these encounters—no doubt tentative and cautious at first—would come a cultural synthesis that changed the face of “Old” Melanesia.

The pottery excavated from the earliest Lapita sites in the Bismarck Archipelago is undeniably related to ceramics from contemporary or slightly older sites in Halmahera, Talaud, Sulawesi, and the Philippines (Kirch 1995). Yet the Lapita decorative style itself seems to be an innovation in Near Oceania, one of several traits that allow us to define Lapita as a “cultural complex” that emerged in the Bismarck Archipelago, out of a fusion of intrusive Austronesian and indigenous Papuan cultures. From the older indigenous occupants of Near Oceania the Lapita peoples may have borrowed the concept of the earth oven; they quickly adopted the cultivation of local tree crops, including the Canarium almond. Intermarriage between the intrusive Austronesian speakers and the long-resident populations of Near Oceania is indicated by the incorporation of certain markers into the gene pool, particularly an α-thalassemia deletion that confers resistance to malaria.11 Recognizing these and other indications of interaction between the immigrant Austronesian speakers and the indigenous Papuan-language speakers of Near Oceania in the mid–second millennium B.C., Roger Green (1991b) proposed the “Triple-I” model of immediate Lapita origins. “Triple-I” stands for the terms intrusion, innovation, and integration, recognizing that all three processes played a role in the emergence of the Lapita cultural complex within the Bismarck Archipelago.12





LAPITA ACROSS TIME AND SPACE


The geographic extent of Lapita across space and the temporal span of Lapita in various archipelagoes are both more accurately defined now than when the first edition of this book was published. More than 230 sites bearing dentate-stamped pottery—the sine qua non of Lapita—have now been recorded, from the Bismarcks to Samoa (map 7).13 A selection of the most important sites in the Bismarck-Solomons region is enumerated in table 4.1.




MAP 7 The distribution of Lapita sites in Near and Remote Oceania.





TABLE 4.1

Selected Lapita Sites in the Bismarck Archipelago, New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands





Hundreds of radiocarbon dates from Lapita sites ranging geographically from the Bismarck Archipelago to Samoa and Tonga allow us to track the chronology and rate of population spread.14 The calibration and interpretation of these dates has recently been subject to adjustment through more precise AMS dating, with greater attention to marine reservoir effects (the ΔR factor) for shell samples and the use of Bayesian calibration. It is increasingly evident that Lapita represents one of the most rapid population expansions across geographic space known anywhere in world history.

Roger Green (1979b) was the first to suggest formal subdivisions within Lapita. He combined the Fijian and Tongan (and later Samoan) Lapita sites into an Eastern Lapita group and designated the Eastern Solomon Islands assemblages as Western Lapita (also including sites in Vanuatu). When later fieldwork of the Lapita Homeland Project uncovered numerous sites in the Bismarck Archipelago—again exhibiting unique regional characteristics—it became necessary to distinguish those assemblages as Far Western Lapita (Summerhayes 2000a). In my 1997 synthesis of Lapita, I proposed a Southern Lapita province for sites and their ceramic assemblages in the Loyalty Islands and New Caledonia (Kirch 1997:72–73; Sand 2000b, 2001, 2010). Most recently, David et al. (2011) have proposed a South Papuan Lapita province based on their late Lapita finds at Caution Bay.


FAR WESTERN LAPITAThe earliest dates for sites with the distinctive Lapita style of dentate-stamped decoration, from several locations in the Bismarck Archipelago, range between 1410 and 1290 B.C. (Denham, Ramsey, and Specht 2012).15 Among the most significant early Far Western Lapita sites are those of Talepakemalai in the Mussau Islands, Tamuararai on Emirau just to the east of Mussau, Komgot on Anir Island, and several sites in the Arawe Islands off the southwestern coast of New Britain. The Talepakemalai site was extensively excavated in 1985–88 (fig. 4.5), yielding a large collection of pottery, shell artifacts, and assemblages of faunal remains and anaerobically preserved plant materials (Kirch, ed., 2001). Talepakemalai and the Arawe sites, and probably others as well, were stilt-house villages standing over shallow lagoons or tidal flats at the time they were occupied. Their ceramic assemblages include flat-bottomed dishes, bowls supported on pedestals (ring-feet), cylinder stands, and large carinated jars, often elaborately decorated with dentate-stamped (and less frequently, incised) motifs, many displaying human faces (fig. 4.6). Among the nonceramic artifacts are a wide array of shell artifacts, as well as obsidian flakes from sources in both the Admiralty Islands and on the Willaumez Peninsula of New Britain.




FIGURE 4.5 Excavations in progress at the waterlogged Lapita site of Talepakemalai in the Mussau Islands in 1986. The anaerobic conditions at this early Lapita site preserved the bases of wooden stilt-house posts as well as thousands of seeds and other plant remains. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 4.6 A selection of reconstructed ceramic vessels from the Talepakemalai site, showing the intricate decoration typical of Far Western Lapita pottery. (Drawing courtesy of Christophe Sand.)





Around 1100 B.C., a phase of long-distance exploration and colonization commenced, with Lapita groups rapidly breaking through the invisible boundary of Near Oceania (at the southeastern end of the main Solomons chain), which for 30,000 years or more had marked the limits of human existence in the Pacific. Lapita canoes began to ply waters where no humans had gone before, first to the islands of the Santa Cruz group, 380 kilometers southeast of Makira, where they established small settlements along the coast of the main island of Nendö (and on its adjacent off-shore islets) and on the small coral islands of the Reefs. A lingering question, however, remains whether Lapita groups “leapfrogged” over the main islands of the Solomons, as Sheppard (2011) has argued. While later Lapita sites have been discovered in intertidal locations in the New Georgia group, the remainder of the Solomons are thus far devoid of Lapita settlements.16 In my view, this absence of evidence may simply be a consequence of the spotty nature of archaeological research throughout this large archipelago rather than actual evidence of absence. Future fieldwork on such islands as Malaita and Makira will ultimately resolve this question.


WESTERN LAPITALapita sites in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands were first investigated by Roger Green during the Southeast Solomon Islands Project in the early 1970s, with additional work on Nendö by McCoy and Cleghorn (Green 1974b, 1976b, 1978, 1979b; McCoy and Cleghorn 1988). Among the most important sites are Nenumbo (RF-2) in the Reefs and Nanggu (SZ-8) on an islet off the coast of Nendö. Based on a reexcavation at Nanggu and Bayesian calibration of all radiocarbon dates from both sites, Sheppard, Chiu, and Walter (2015) conclude that Lapita movement into this region did not commence before 1050 B.C. (table 4.2).


TABLE 4.2

Selected Lapita and Related Ceramic Sites in Remote Oceania





TABLE 4.2 (continued)





Other Lapita groups rapidly moved south, through the Banks Islands and into the main Vanuatu Archipelago, and were well emplaced by 1000 B.C. A number of Lapita sites are known in northern Vanuatu, mostly on small islets off the coasts of Santo and Malekula (Sand and Bedford, eds., 2010:122–37).17 Among these are Makué, on Aore Island off of Santo, and Vao, on an islet near Malekula. At Vao, Bedford (2006) recovered sherds from a remarkable pot, which after firing had its dentate-stamped designs covered over with bands of red clay and white lime.

In central Vanuatu, on the large island of Efate, the discovery in 2004 of a Lapita cemetery at Teouma has revealed hitherto unknown aspects of Lapita society, and of the Lapita people themselves through analyses of the skeletal population.18 The site sits on a river terrace, which was probably nearer to the sea at the time it was occupied. Extensive excavations over five field seasons exposed at least eighty inhumations (fig. 4.7), as well as a midden deposit that postdates the cemetery. The mortuary practices at Teouma were complex: “mortuary ritual appears to have been a multifaceted and lengthy process rather than a single one-off event” (Sand and Bedford, eds., 2010:155). Corpses were manipulated before burial and during the early stages of decomposition. Skulls were typically removed during these mortuary rituals; in one case a cranium was found inside a carinated Lapita pot, which in turn was covered over by a flat-bottomed dish (fig. 4.8). In another instance, three skulls were placed across the chest of an adult male whose cranium had been detached. Dentate-stamped vessels appear to have marked burial sites; more than seventy-three decorated vessels have been reconstructed. All of these mortuary practices suggest a society that practiced ancestor worship. Radiocarbon dating of Teouma indicates that the cemetery began to be used between 970 and 920 B.C. and was abandoned by 920–800 B.C. (Petchey et al. 2015).




FIGURE 4.7 Excavations in progress at the Teouma Lapita cemetery site on Efate Island, Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy of Stuart Bedford, Australian National University.)





FIGURE 4.8 A human cranium was interred in a ceramic vessel at the Teouma cemetery site in Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy of Stuart Bedford, Australian National University.)





SOUTHERN LAPITAThe Lapita diaspora proceeded rapidly down through Vanuatu to the upraised makatea islands of the Loyalty group (where at least seven Lapita sites are now recorded) and on to discover La Grande Terre of New Caledonia (Sand 2010). On La Grande Terre, Lapita sites are concentrated mostly along the southwestern coastline, including the eponymous site of Lapita at Koné, although a few are also known from the northeastern coast.19 One site (Vatacha) occurs on the Île des Pins off the southern tip of New Caledonia. Numerous radiocarbon dates bracket Lapita colonization of the island between about 1100 and 1050 B.C. The Lapita phase proper, with sites containing classic dentate-stamped pottery, ended by 800–750 B.C., after which time new forms of paddle-impressed and incised pottery make their appearance (see chap. 5).


EASTERN LAPITAVirtually at the same time that the Lapita expansion proceeded down through Vanuatu to New Caledonia, other explorers undertook awe-inspiring voyages due east from either the Santa Cruz or northern Vanuatu Islands, sailing upwind against the prevailing trades and currents to cross 850 kilometers of open, trackless ocean, with no stepping-stone islands in between, arriving in the Fiji archipelago.20 The earliest dates from Fiji, from Bourewa and other sites, come in at about 1070 to 910 B.C. (Nunn and Petchey 2013; Petchey et al. 2015). At least thirty-five Lapita sites have been reported from various islands in the Fiji group.

From Fiji, there was rapid exploration eastward, via the numerous small islands of the Lau Archipelago21 on to Tongatapu and ‘Eua. The earliest known site on Tongatapu, Nukuleka, has been precisely dated using the U/Th method on coral abraders to 888 ± 8 years B.C. (Burley, Weisler, and Zhao 2012; Burley et al. 2015). The decorated pottery from Nukuleka exhibits similarities to the Western Lapita style of the Santa Cruz Islands (fig. 4.9). Lapita colonists moved rapidly northward through the Tongan archipelago, via Ha‘apai to Vava‘u (ca. 855 B.C.). Isolated Niuatoputapu, where the Lolokoka Lapita site is located, was probably settled from Vava‘u. The Lolokoka site on Niuatoputapu contained not only dentate-stamped pottery, but an array of shell, stone, and sea urchin tools and implements (fig. 4.10). Futuna and ‘Uvea, between Fiji and Samoa, were also discovered and settled in roughly this same period.




FIGURE 4.9 Decorated potsherds from the Nukuleka site on Tongatapu Island. (Photo by David Burley, Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University.)





FIGURE 4.10 Artifacts from early Lapita contexts on Niuatoputapu Island: a, b, Turbo shell fishhooks; c, Conus shell ring; d, Conus shell bead; e, sea urchin spine abrader; f, g, volcanic glass flakes; h, i, Tridacna shell adzes; j, hammerstone with pecked finger grip.





For the large Samoan archipelago, the only site with actual dentate-stamped pottery is Mulifanua, a submerged deposit under a capping of reef rock, fortuitously discovered during offshore dredging for a ferry berth. Mulifanua is dated to 930–800 B.C. (Petchey 2001). The absence of other Lapita sites in Samoa has been attributed by Cochrane et al. (2015) to the lack of suitable coastal plains some 3,000 years ago; a more likely explanation is simply the rapid geological subsidence of Samoa and probable drowning of other Lapita sites, as in the case of Mulifanua. In the small Manu‘a Islands, at the extreme eastern end of the Samoan chain, sites such as To‘aga on Ofu, which has thin, fine-ware pottery lacking dentate-stamped decoration, date to around 750 B.C. (Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1993; J.T. Clark et al. 2016). The Tonga-Samoa chain of islands comprises the region known ethnographically as Western Polynesia, hence the initial human colonization of these islands by Lapita peoples is key to establishing Lapita as ancestral to later Polynesian cultures and societies (see chap. 7).


SOUTH PAPUAN LAPITAThe discovery of a late variant of Lapita at Caution Bay along the southern coast of New Guinea (the region known as Papua) has prompted the definition of another Lapita “province,” called South Papuan by David et al. (2011; see also Skelly et al. 2014). The oldest of these Lapita deposits has been dated to 950 B.C. Preliminary reports describe a coarse, “open” form of dentate-stamped decoration on “low-fired, thick-walled carinated and sometimes collared vessels,” which rapidly gives way to “shell valve end-impressed dentate designs” (McNiven et al. 2011:4). This discovery suggests that Lapita sites will ultimately be found in the intervening Massim region as well.

The Lapita expansion out of Near Oceania into Remote Oceania—as far south as New Caledonia and as far east as Tonga and Samoa—was accomplished in less than three centuries, and probably closer to two hundred years. To put the Lapita dispersal in directly human terms, these small groups of seafarers explored an ocean realm stretching across 4,500 kilometers during the course of just ten to fifteen successive human generations (taking 20 years as the length of a reproductive generation). Without a doubt, the Lapita colonization of Remote Oceania ranks as one of the great sagas of world prehistory.

These were not merely voyages of discovery by itinerant sailors who came for a brief period and then returned to a homeland in the western Pacific. Quite the contrary, these were purposeful voyages of discovery and colonization. The earliest Lapita sites are permanent habitations, not temporary camps. The Lapita expansion involves successive groups of settlers, each in its turn founding a new colony on a previously uninhabited island. Within a generation or two, descendants of the group repeated the scenario, setting out to find yet another new island. This sequence of island colonization raises fundamental anthropological questions, both demographic and social.

Demographically, this process of expansion—which established new, permanent settlements and yet continued to bud colonizing daughter populations—required a high net population growth rate, presumably achieved by a combination of high fertility and low morbidity. Otherwise, there would not have been sufficient demographic momentum to keep the process moving. Even so, colonizing populations were small, resulting in genetic bottleneck effects that are evident in genetic variation among Polynesians (Flint et al. 1989; Martinson et al. 1993). Socially, we must ask, what motives impelled these people to keep exploring southward and eastward into the unknown waters of the Pacific? It could not have been the sometimes-cited “population pressure” of overcrowded islands, for many of the newly discovered lands were vast and uninhabited; it would take centuries before large islands such as Efate or Viti Levu were densely populated. Rather than a push factor, we must invoke pull factors to understand the Lapita expansion. Initially, one kind of pull incentive that brought Austronesian speakers from Southeast Asia into the Bismarck Archipelago might have been a search for new trading opportunities (e.g, obsidian). However, once the Lapita peoples left Near Oceania and ventured into uninhabited “oceanic outer space,” trade seems an unlikely explanation.

Lapita social structure may have played a key role in driving the engine of exploration and colonization. Linguistic reconstructions of Proto Oceanic words for kinship, social statuses, and the like reveal that these peoples put great emphasis on birth order.22 Older and younger siblings were ranked, and inheritance of house sites, garden lands, and other kinds of property, as well as such intangibles as ritual privileges and esoteric knowledge, passed from parents to firstborn offspring. As I have written elsewhere, “In such societies, junior siblings frequently adopt a strategy of seeking new lands to settle where they can found their own ‘house’ and lineage, assuring their own offspring access to quality resources” (Kirch 1997a:65). Rivalries between older and younger brothers are a frequent theme in the oral traditions of Polynesians,23 the direct descendants of one branch of the Lapita peoples. Peter Bellwood (1996a) has argued that such a “founder-focused ideology” is inherently characteristic of Austronesian-speaking peoples and that discovery and settlement of a new island (or later, a new valley or part of an island) served to enhance founder rank. Of course, we cannot underestimate the importance of new voyaging strategies (such as upwind search-and-return voyages) and of improved watercraft, which provided the technological basis for such expansion (Irwin 1990, 1992).





LAPITA IN LINGUISTIC AND BIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE


The arrival of pottery-making, seafaring peoples in the Bismarck Archipelago around 1300 B.C.—from whom the Lapita culture arose out of a synthesis of intruder and indigene—correlates closely with the inferred movements of the easternmost branch of the Austronesian language family, the Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian.24 The Oceanic subgroup includes virtually all of the approximately 450 modern languages spoken by island peoples in Polynesia, Micronesia,25 and all of the Melanesian islands within Remote Oceania (i.e., Fiji, Vanuatu, the Loyalty Islands, and New Caledonia). In Near Oceania, most of the languages of the Bismarcks and Solomons and many languages along the coast of New Guinea belong to the Oceanic subgroup. Map 2 shows the distribution of the Oceanic languages; the distribution of Lapita sites is depicted in map 7. The Lapita region forms a sort of core, out of which populations speaking Oceanic languages expanded centrifugally.

Some archaeologists are skeptical of linking archaeological sites and cultures with specific ethnolinguistic categories such as “Oceanic.” In the case of the Oceanic languages and Lapita, however, such a linkage is particularly well supported (Green 1997; Pawley 2007; Pawley and Green 1973, 1984).26 Decades of careful linguistic work have yielded a well-attested phylogeny or subgrouping model for the Oceanic languages and their position within the larger Austronesian family. The Oceanic branch of Austronesian has no deep history of successive language “splits” as would be expected had speakers of these languages been present for a long period in Near Oceania (as is the case with the highly diverse Papuan languages). Rather, the first-order branches or subgroups of Oceanic form a chainlike linkage (fig. 4.11). To linguists, this implies that the Proto Oceanic speech community moved rapidly into the area east of Halmahera and as far as the Solomon Islands, quickly forming a dialect chain, along which communication continued for some time. Differentiation eventually occurred as links in this chain were severed, leading to the four or five major first-order subgroups of Oceanic witnessed in the area today.27 This linguistic model resonates well with archaeological evidence for the rapid intrusion of a new population coming out of island Southeast Asia around 1400–1300 B.C. and rapidly setting up new communities through the Bismarcks and Solomons.




FIGURE 4.11 The subgrouping of the Oceanic languages. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





When we turn to Remote Oceania, the linkage between Lapita and Oceanic languages is more ironclad, because these are foundation cultures and foundation languages, respectively.28 There is no evidence for any human occupation prior to Lapita, and virtually all of the languages in this vast realm (with the exception of Chamorro and Palauan on the Western Micronesian fringe) are exclusively Oceanic.29 We have no evidence for any language replacement, or for any other kind of intrusive population, within the Remote Oceanic area.

Linking the Oceanic branch of Austronesian languages with the Lapita cultural complex does not mean that there were not complexities in the ways that Proto Oceanic and its early first-order branches evolved over time into the sometimes stunning linguistic diversity found in parts of Remote Oceania, especially in Vanuatu and New Caledonia. Vanuatu has 138 distinct languages, constituting the “densest linguistic landscape in the world” (François et al., eds., 2015:8). The processes of linguistic polygenesis are succinctly summarized as follows:

In sum, the linguistic diversity observed today in Vanuatu results from three millennia of diversification from what was once a single language spoken across a vast social network—in a way similar to the fragmentation of Latin into a multitude of Romance languages and dialects. During the centuries following its initial settlement, Vanuatu formed a vast dialect continuum in which communalects remained in constant contact through trade, interisland marriage and other forms of alliances. Every time a linguistic innovation emerged somewhere in the network, it would diffuse to a more or less extended portion of the network. . . . The modern outcome is an entangled web of linguistic linkages: a long chain where languages get gradually different as one travels across the territory. (François et al., eds., 2015:12)

The linguistic picture for the Solomon Islands exhibits other kinds of complexities, such as extensive interaction between Oceanic and Non-Austronesian or Papuan speech communities in the northern part of this long archipelago. According to Pawley (2009:536), the linguistic diversity of the northwest Solomons must be explained by a process in which “in each locality small populations of immigrant Oceanic speakers came into contact with established populations of non-Austronesian speakers, leading to extensive intermarriage, bilingualism and lexical borrowing from non-Austronesian languages.” In the southeast Solomons, however, the situation was quite different, as there apparently were few if any Papuan-language speakers present when the Proto Oceanic (i.e., Lapita) communities arrived and a distinct southeast Solomonic subgroup began to form. Furthermore, the linguistic evidence from the southeast Solomon languages “weighs strongly against” Sheppard’s (2011) hypothesis that Lapita voyagers “leapfrogged” past the islands from Guadalcanal to Makira (Pawley 2009:536), because as a distinct subgroup, the languages of the southeast Solomons have obviously been in place as long as those of other Oceanic subgroups. This reinforces my view that the absence of Lapita sites in the southeast Solomons is a problem of archaeological “visibility” that calls for more intensive fieldwork in the region.

Historical linguistics can also help us to construct more robust culture histories than are possible through archaeology alone. Archaeologists are rarely able to offer nuanced reconstructions of social organization, ritual practice, or ideology. Through careful lexical and semantic reconstruction, on the other hand, linguists can offer much detail regarding kinship, social structure, the names of gods and spirits, the parts of such items of perishable material culture as canoes, and other nontangible categories (Ross, Pawley, and Osmond, eds., 1998). Working collaboratively, archaeologists and historical linguists can produce far more sophisticated culture histories.30

The rapid movement of Austronesian-speaking populations from island Southeast Asia into Near Oceania and then on into Remote Oceania is also reflected in the pattern of human biological variation in the Pacific. Human geneticists have long insisted that the movement of the Austronesian speakers into the Pacific left a “genetic trail.” For instance, there is a high degree of correspondence between a particular 9-base-pair deletion characteristic of island Southeast Asians, Polynesians, and Austronesian-language-speaking populations in island Melanesia.31 Lum and Cann (1998:116) examined a large sample of Oceanic individuals for mtDNA variation, observing “significant correlations between genetic and linguistic distances when geographic distances are controlled.” However, intermarriage and gene flow between the Austronesian speakers and the indigenous Papuan-language speakers of Near Oceania are also indicated in these genetic markers.32 According to Martinson (1996:185), molecular data indicate both that “a major component of the Polynesian gene pool was until recently located in island Southeast Asia” and that as the pre-Polynesian population expanded into island Melanesia there was “enough exchange with the existing inhabitants of the region, for that population to acquire a 30% component of Melanesian nuclear markers.”

Recent work on nonrecombining Y-chromosome DNA variation, however, showed that the dominant Y haplotype in Polynesians is likely to be of Near Oceanic origin (Kayser et al. 2000; Hurles et al. 2002, 2003; Su et al. 2000). The apparent contradiction in the mtDNA and NRY evidence can be resolved with a model of matrilocal residence in the early Oceanic-speaking (i.e., Lapita) populations, whereby Melanesian men were recruited into Lapita communities (Hage and Marck 2003; Jordan et al. 2009; Kayser et al. 2006, 2008). Thus, according to Kayser et al. (2008:1362), “Polynesian ancestors originated from East Asia but genetically mixed with Melanesians before colonizing the Pacific” (see also Vilar et al. 2008). A period of sustained gene flow between ancestral Polynesian and “Melanesian” populations is also evidenced by the presence of the α-thalassemia deletion, which must have been transferred to the ancestral Polynesian populations in Near Oceania before their dispersal to Remote Oceania (Hill et al. 1985; Martinson 1996).

The Lapita cemetery at Teouma in Vanuatu has provided a unique opportunity to biologically analyze an early Lapita population, both through classical morphological methods (describing and comparing their phenotypes) and through sequencing of ancient DNA extracted from their bones. Valentin et al. (2016) compared twelve adult crania from Teouma with samples from East Asia, Western Micronesia, island Melanesia, Australia, and Eastern Polynesia, looking at various measures of craniofacial shape. Their results “clearly point to a Lapita–Asian biological connection . . . [with] little or no affinities between the Teouma cranial series and the modern Australian and Melanesian cranial series but strong similarities to Chinese, Western Micronesian, and especially Polynesian cranial series; in other words, the Teouma individuals fit into the Asian pole and not into the Australo-Melanesian pole” (2016:295). This conclusion was reinforced by Skoglund et al. (2016), who extracted DNA from three Teouma individuals and one individual from the Talasiu site on Tongatapu (all females), sequencing their genome-wide DNA. Their results show that these four individuals “are similar to indigenous Taiwanese populations such as the Ami and Atayal as well as to populations from the Philippines such as the Kankanaey, who have no detectable Papuan ancestry” (2016:2). They conclude that “the Papuan genetic signature appeared in many Remote Oceanian populations only subsequent to initial settlement” (2016:3).

The new molecular methods have also been applied to other organisms as proxies for human movement into the Pacific. The Pacific rat (Rattus exulans) was carried by voyagers from Near Oceania into Remote Oceania, either as a food item or as an inadvertent stowaway. mtDNA phylogenies of R. exulans show the presence of three major haplogroups, the distributions of which are consistent with the “Triple-I” model of Lapita origins in Near Oceania (Matisoo-Smith and Robins 2004). Recent genetic analysis of a human bacterial parasite, Helicobacter pylori, showed two distinct populations: (1) an hpSahul population with an estimated divergence of age of 23,000 to 32,000 years, which is confined to Near Oceania; and (2) hpMaori, which is believed to have accompanied Austronesian expansion out of Taiwan at about 5,000 years ago (Moodley et al. 2009).





THE LAPITA CERAMIC SERIES


The distinctive pottery first led E.W. Gifford, and then Jack Golson, to affirm the significance of the Lapita cultural complex. Lapita ceramic assemblages are not uniform; there were rapid changes in manufacture, in vessel forms, and especially in decoration over time as the Lapita peoples expanded into Remote Oceania. Nonetheless, there are commonalities to all Lapita ceramics, which can be grouped under the rubric Lapita Ceramic Series.

Lapita pottery consists of handmade earthenware, manufactured without the aid of a wheel but often using slab building and a paddle-and-anvil method of vessel wall thinning. The potting clays had beach or river sand added as temper.33 We have no evidence of kilns; pots were presumably fired in simple open blazes of coconut shells and wood, as is still done in some Oceanic societies (fig. 4.12). Due to this method of rapid, low-intensity firing (with temperatures in the range of 600°–700°C), the interior walls of Lapita vessels are often incompletely oxidized, leaving a telltale “sandwich” filling of dark, unfired clay, while the outer surfaces are usually a reddish-brown color.




FIGURE 4.12 Lapita pottery was probably fired using an open-air method, as is still practiced in Fiji. This firing sequence was observed by the author in the Sigatoka Valley, Viti Levu. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Lapita vessels take a range of shapes, as shown in figure 4.13 with examples from early Lapita assemblages in New Caledonia. Early Far Western Lapita assemblages from sites such as Talepakemalai in Mussau, Komgot on Anir, and some in the Arawe Islands are dominated by open bowls supported by pedestals or ring-feet (a typically Southeast Asian vessel form), by flat-bottomed dishes with flaring sides, by large carinated jars with everted rims, and by globular jars with restricted necks and flaring rims. The bowls and flat-bottomed dishes, along with the carinated jars, are decorated with elaborate dentate-stamped designs; the globular jars are often plain, or decorated with simpler incised designs.




FIGURE 4.13 The varieties of Lapita vessel forms occurring in early Lapita sites in New Caledonia. (Diagram courtesy Christophe Sand.)





Although all Lapita ceramic assemblages include both decorated and plain wares, the decorated pottery has especially captured the attention of archaeologists.34 Lapita potters used several techniques to decorate the surfaces of bowls, dishes, and jars. Most often the leather-hard clay was impressed with stamps that had series of finely carved teeth; the process was thus referred to as dentate-stamping. The stamps, which have not been archaeologically recovered, may have been carved in wood, bamboo, or possibly turtle shell (Ambrose 1997). Less frequently, Lapita potters incised motifs into the clay with a finely pointed tool and also modeled and carved vessel surfaces. But it is the dentate-stamping that gives Lapita decoration its distinctive and unique character. The individual stamps each constitute a single design element, which were combined in highly regularized patterns to form larger motifs and design fields. The stamps were applied by the Lapita potters according to a set of artistic rules, constituting a “grammar” of Lapita design. We will never know how the potters themselves thought or spoke of these designs, or the cultural rules for making them, but we can analyze and write a formal grammar of Lapita design using a linguistic or structuralist approach (Mead et al. 1975; Sharp 1988, 1991). Such formal studies, and comparisons of motif catalogs from different Lapita sites, provide archaeologists with powerful tools for determining degrees of similarity between different Lapita ceramic assemblages.

That all Lapita ceramics share the same basic design code (which underwent various changes and transformations over time and space) is prima facie evidence that the peoples who made and used these vessels shared a common, culturally encoded aesthetic system. Although archaeologists are cautious about equating pots with people, in the case of Lapita a common culture is strongly indicated, at least for the earliest stage. Once the various descendant Lapita populations had expanded into Remote Oceania, becoming increasingly isolated from each other, local and regional changes gradually led to cultural differentiation.

The most complex and finely executed decorated pottery occurs in the oldest sites, especially in the Bismarck Archipelago, but also in the earliest sites in Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, and Tonga. In all of these archipelagoes, there was rapid simplification of the design system and range of motifs within just two or three centuries following initial Lapita settlement, leading to a virtual loss of dentate-stamped decoration across the entire southwestern Pacific by no later than 750 to 700 B.C. The elaborately decorated vessels (which required considerable labor to produce) almost certainly played a socially significant role in Lapita society; they were not simply utilitarian objects. Indeed, temper and chemical analyses of the clay reveal that decorated vessels were exchanged between Lapita villages and thus may have been objects that circulated between communities whose members were linked by social and economic ties. Such linkages would have been critical in the early phase of Lapita expansion and island colonization, when it would have been advantageous for small daughter populations to maintain connections with kinsfolk on “homeland” islands, both for marriage partners and for material support (Kirch 1988b).

Further evidence that the early, decorated pottery played a strongly social role in Lapita society comes from an analysis of the motifs. In the earliest assemblages, recovered from such sites as Talepakemalai and Teouma, a large number of the motifs on Lapita bowls, dishes, and other kinds of vessels represent human faces.35 The most figurative of these anthropomorphic representations have almond-shaped eyes, an elongated nose, curved upraised arms with five digits, a kind of “flame” headdress, and subsidiary emblems or motifs flanking the face (fig. 4.14). Other examples are more geometrically figurative, and over time there was a progression to highly stylized representations, such as rows of eye motifs or stylized noses. But even these stylized transformations depicted human faces that would have been evident to participants within the cultural system.




FIGURE 4.14 An anthropomorphic face design on potsherds from the Talepakemalai site in the Mussau Islands. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





What did these human faces on bowls and dishes signify to the Lapita peoples? Possibly they were representations of ancestors, the vessels functioning within a ritual system or cult of ancestors, as well as constituting objects of reciprocal exchange among related kinship groups. As noted earlier, the extensive manipulation of burials and the complexity of funerary rites at the Teouma burial ground are strongly suggestive of ancestor worship. This would be in keeping with what historical linguists have reconstructed for Proto Oceanic societies, with an emphasis on founder ideology and birth-order rank. Indeed, a Proto Oceanic word for “ancestor” (*tumpu) can be reconstructed, derived from the word *tumbuq, meaning “to grow.” As Jim Fox (1995) and other ethnographers have argued, the Austronesian peoples have deeply rooted concepts of “origin structures” and conceive of their social groups as growing and expanding like a tree or bush, with ancestors at the base or trunk. (Interestingly, this indigenous concept turns the anthropological notion of “descent” groups on its head, for Austronesians see themselves as having “ascent” groups.)

Chiu (2003, 2005) has proposed that the intricate designs expressed on Lapita pottery, including the anthropomorphic motifs, can be understood in the broader context of “house societies,” a form of social organization characteristic of Austronesian societies (Fox 1995), in which groups are organized around a named house linked to land as well as nonmaterial possessions (genealogies, origin stories, etc.). Human pottery, in Chiu’s view, formed a “category of house heirlooms that were used not only to differentiate houses and social status, but also as a symbol of unity between houses or among an entire community” (2005:5). Drawing on ethnographic analogy with the Tsimshian people of British Columbia (also a “house society”), Chiu suggests that the Lapita face motifs functioned as “house crests” and were regarded as “signs of history.”

It is likely that the decorated vessels in some way represented or memorialized ancestors. Furthermore, the act of decorating the pots may have been analogous to the tattooing of human bodies (Kirch 1997a:141–44). We know that the Lapita peoples practiced tattooing, for tattoo chisels have been found in some sites, made up of rows of fine teeth, probably similar to the stamps used to decorate Lapita pottery.36 It does not require much of a stretch of the imagination to find the origins of the Lapita decorative style in the transference of an aesthetic system from one medium (the human body) to another (clay), especially since Oceanic art is of the pervasive (as opposed to partitive) type, in which the same motifs and rules are applied to a diversity of artistic media.37 Ambrose (pers. comm. 2016) has alternatively suggested that the elaborate geometric designs found on many Lapita pots could be transfers from complex weaving patterns.

At the eponymous site of Lapita (WKO-013A) at Koné, New Caledonia, Christophe Sand in 1995 discovered the eroding remnants of a pit containing two large, virtually intact Lapita pots and large sections of at least nine other vessels (Sand 1998a; Sand et al. 1998). These large carinated jars, intricately decorated (some with anthropomorphic face designs), were purposively interred in the pit, perhaps at the conclusion of some ceremony. Both of the intact pots had pierced bases, which suggests some sort of ritual “killing” of these vessels. The Lapita “pottery pit” is thus far unique, but it hints at the social role of the decorated component of Lapita ceramics.

Not all Lapita pottery was decorated; in many sites the majority of potsherds are of plain ware. These plain wares are of vessel shapes mostly different from the decorated pottery: primarily globular jars with flaring rims or simple open bowls. Such vessels were likely used for storage, since there is little evidence that they were used for cooking over open fires (they lack the fire clouding and carbonized remains that would have resulted). One possibility is that the larger globular jars with narrow necks were used to hold “flour” derived from the pith of sago (Metroxylon) palms. When kept dry, sago flour will keep for extended periods, and this food may have been essential to colonizing groups while their horticultural systems were being established.





LAPITA SITES AND SETTLEMENTS


One fundamental similarity among Lapita sites is that they are all found along coasts, usually on beach terraces (Dickinson 2014). At the time of Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania, sea levels in the southwestern Pacific were about 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present (Dickinson 2003). Many Lapita middens are situated on beach terraces that formed at that higher sea stand; such terraces are often now found some distance inland from present coastlines. In Samoa, on the other hand, the Lapita site of Mulifanua lies beneath 2 meters of seawater and is capped by a cemented reef platform, because the island of ‘Upolu has undergone rapid submergence.38 In the Bismarck Archipelago, Lapita stilt-house villages built over reef flats either have been covered with prograding sands (but remain waterlogged) or exist as palimpsests scattered over reef flats (as at Kreslo on New Britain and the Roviana and Marovo Lagoons in the western Solomon Islands).

That beaches and reefs were the favored location of Lapita settlements speaks to several aspects of their culture. Certainly they had a maritime orientation, as most sites are located across from or near a major pass in the adjacent reef, permitting ready canoe access to the open sea. Lapita sites are also typically situated close to fresh water and to good gardening land (Lepofsky 1988). By situating their hamlets and villages on the beach—at the interface between land and sea—the Lapita peoples took full advantage of both terrestrial and marine resources. There is also the possibility, at least for the Near Oceanic area where stilt-house settlements may have been the norm, that they were trying to avoid undue exposure to the swarms of malaria-bearing mosquitoes that inhabit the rainforest.

Lapita settlements also vary in size; spatial data on area from about thirty-six sites (Sheppard and Green 1991) show that the majority are smaller than 5,000 square meters, while another eight sites fall into the range between 9,000 and 15,000 square meters. There are three quite large sites in the sample, the most extensive being Talepakemalai (82 hectares or more). Translating these numbers to a human scale, the smaller sites would be characterized as hamlets, generally with fewer than ten dwelling houses and in some cases with only one or two dwellings.39 The midsized settlements could have accommodated between fifteen and thirty dwellings and as many households, and thus they would begin to approximate what we could think of as a modest village. A very large site, such as Talepakemalai, could have incorporated as many as 150 households, although it is not certain that this entire site was ever occupied simultaneously, so the Talepakemalai village may have always been smaller. At any rate, we are for the most part referring to small-scale communities, a significant clue in assessing the nature of Lapita society.

Lapita settlements were constructed of wooden posts and rafters, with thatch probably made from sago leaf or Pandanus leaf—all materials that do not normally preserve in the archaeological record of the humid tropics. At Talepakemalai and some of the Arawe Islands sites, the waterlogged, anaerobic deposits preserved the bases of wooden house posts or stilts (fig. 4.15), while the house platforms and thatched superstructures have disappeared. These Lapita sites in Near Oceania consisted of clusters of houses constructed over reef flats or the shores of lagoons, with stilts or pilings driven into the sand and coral rubble. Once Lapita peoples expanded into Remote Oceania, they abandoned such pile dwellings and constructed their houses directly on the sandy beach terraces. One such house cluster at Nenumbo in the Reef Islands was extensively excavated by Roger Green, revealing details of the household layout (fig. 4.16).40 A main house lay at the north end of the site, near a large earth oven. In the southern sector a mass of smaller post molds and food storage pits delineates cook sheds; a deep pit nearby may have been a well dug to tap the coral islet’s freshwater lens. Decorated ceramics were concentrated in the area of the main house; in the cook shed area the pottery consists primarily of plain ware, especially large globular jars. The artifact distribution pattern also reflects spatial differences, with concentrations of obsidian and chert tools around the main house and fishbone and shellfish remains in the cook shed area.




FIGURE 4.15 Excavations at the waterlogged Talepakemalai site in the Mussau Islands exposed the anaerobically preserved bases of wooden posts, once supporting stilt houses over a shallow reef flat. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 4.16 Plan of the Nenumbo Lapita site in the Reef Islands, excavated by Roger C. Green. (After Kirch 1997a.)





Drawing on archaeological as well as historical linguistic evidence, Green and Pawley (1998) have traced some key transformations in the houses and settlements of the Lapita peoples (or, linguistically, the speakers of Proto Oceanic and its descendant languages). The original form of their main dwelling houses, probably raised on stilts as at Talepakemalai, would have been called *Rumaq, a term that is found throughout island Southeast Asia and that persists in Near Oceania as well as in Micronesia. In the Fiji–Western Polynesian region, however, we find that the dwelling house is called by variants of the Proto Oceanic word *balay (e.g., Samoan fale). Originally, the *balay was some kind of open-sided building, built directly on the ground. When Lapita peoples moved eastward into Remote Oceania, they abandoned the stilt-house style and adapted the *balay for their dwellings (reflected in later, descendant languages by words such as Fijian bure and Hawaiian hale). Thus the older term *Rumaq dropped out of the vocabulary of these Remote Oceanic people.





LAPITA SUBSISTENCE ECONOMIES


In resource-rich Near Oceania—with its abundance of marsupials, reptiles, birds, and wild plant foods as well as shellfish and inshore fishes—small groups of people made a living as hunters and gatherers for tens of thousands of years. Not so in the biogeographically impoverished and faunally depauperate islands of Remote Oceania. While wild populations of birds and fish were plentiful in lagoons and on reefs in Remote Oceania, and on some islands there were terrestrial tortoises and crocodiles (Hawkins et al. 2016; White et al. 2010), these fragile resources could be quickly decimated. Moreover, the central Pacific islands lacked wild plants with edible seeds, fruit, or tubers suitable for gathering, let alone for domestication. Thus an essential part of what made the Lapita peoples so successful as oceanic colonizers was not just their seafaring technology and navigational abilities but also their subsistence economies.

Wherever they sailed in Remote Oceania, Lapita groups came fully equipped to establish permanent settlements, carrying with them domestic animals and planting stocks of tuber, fruit, and tree crops, as well as a sophisticated knowledge of horticulture and plant manipulation. They transported and established the biotic and cultural components necessary to re-create in each new island the kind of managed landscape they had just left behind. The ethnobotanist Edgar Anderson (1952) coined the phrase “transported landscapes” to refer to the ensemble of crops, weeds, animals, vermin, and other biota that accompany all human populations but especially agricultural peoples as these expand into new territories. The transported landscapes of the Lapita peoples were a fundamental part of what made them—and in due time their descendants—able to settle virtually every speck of habitable land in the Pacific Ocean. The consequences for the island ecosystems of Remote Oceania were irreversible (see chap. 2).

In the early years of Lapita studies, archaeologists vigorously debated whether Lapita populations subsisted merely by exploiting marine resources, moving rapidly from island to island like some manner of oceanic “strandloopers.”41 With improved analytical methods, the evidence has gradually accumulated—ranging from the permanent nature of settlement sites to plant-food preparation equipment to the bones of domestic animals to the direct botanical remains of crop plants themselves and, most recently, microscopic and isotopic data—to falsify this scenario. In addition, the evidence of historical linguistics provides us with an extensive Proto Oceanic vocabulary, not just words for crop plants, but also terms for swidden garden and various aspects of horticultural practice.42 Everything we know tells us that the Lapita people entered the new realm of Remote Oceania fully equipped to replicate their horticultural and domestic animal subsistence regimes.

The roster of crop plants cultivated by Lapita gardeners—and successfully transported by them from island to island—runs to twenty-eight species (Kirch 1997a:table 7.2), of which at least fifteen are attested by archaeobotanical remains and the rest by linguistic or other inferential evidence.43 The list includes root and tuber crops such as taro (Colocasia esculenta) and yams (Dioscorea alata and other species), coconut (Cocos nucifera), bananas (Musa hybrids and Australimusa), and a wide variety of tree crops, bearing nuts (e.g., Canarium almond, Terminalia almond, Tahitian chestnut [Inocarpus fagiferus]), starchy fruit such as breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), and fleshy fruits (e.g., Vi apple [Spondias dulcis], Malay apple [Eugenia malaccensis]). As described in chapter 3, some of these plants—domesticated in Near Oceania—were among the cultural elements contributed by the indigenous Papuan-speaking populations to the synthesis we call Lapita. Other crops, such as the greater yam (D. alata) and the Eumusa bananas, are of island Southeast Asian origin and were probably carried into the region by the intrusive Austronesian speakers.

The waterlogged sands of Talepakemalai in Mussau yielded more than ten thousand well-preserved plant remains. Similar finds came from the Arawe Island sites excavated by Chris Gosden.44 While soft, fleshy plants such as taro tubers or bananas were not preserved, we did find abundant remains of virtually all of the hard-shelled nuts, especially the delicious Canarium almonds whose shells had been cracked open and discarded by the hundreds around the Talepakemalai stilt houses. Coconut shells, husked and cracked in half to extract the meaty flesh, were common in the anaerobic midden deposits; one coconut shell bore distinct traces, on its inner surface, of a serrated shell implement used to grate the meat. Grated coconut meat was most likely squeezed and strained to produce coconut cream, an essential ingredient of Oceanic cuisines. Another unique find was the fleshy key of a Pandanus fruit with impressions of a row of human incisors on its proximal end, where the edible pulp had been stripped away.

How the Lapita people cultivated their crops and what gardening techniques they used are questions that are hard to answer by means of direct archaeological evidence. Gosden believes that erosional lenses of clay at the base of a hillslope on Pililo Island in the Arawe group are the telltale traces from clearing of the rainforest to make swidden gardens.45 The linguistic evidence for Proto Oceanic reveals at least sixteen reconstructed words that apply to horticulture (Osmond 1998), including terms for a garden (*quma), for yam mounds (*ta[p,b]puki) and planting stocks (*[m]pula[m]pula), and for various kinds of horticultural activity, such as clearing (*poki), planting (*pasok), weeding (*papo), and harvesting (*sapu[t]). The main horticultural implement was presumably the dibble or digging stick of wood (*waso), a tool virtually ubiquitous among ethnographically documented peoples in Oceania.

Lapita horticulture combined permanent orchard gardens of perennial tree crops (quite likely situated in and around the villages themselves) with swiddens or shifting cultivations cut annually in the rainforest (or from second-growth forest once this was established) for the root and tuber crops. We have no evidence that complex systems of water control (irrigation or drainage) were used, although naturally swampy areas might have been planted in hydrophilic aroids such as Colocasia and Cyrtosperma. Large-scale valley or hillside irrigation systems developed independently and later in the Pacific, not as a result of agricultural “diffusion” out of Asia (see chaps. 5 and 7).46 Nonetheless, the Lapita horticultural complex encompassed all of the essential crops and agronomic strategies that laid the foundation for the more elaborated horticultural and agricultural economies of later Oceanic societies.

The Oceanic peoples are ethnographically characterized as keeping a triumvirate of chickens, dogs, and pigs (Oliver 1989:217–28). These are all of Southeast Asian origin, part of the contribution of the early Austronesian speakers to the Lapita complex.47 Pig bones are present (usually in small numbers) in some Lapita sites, but they are often outnumbered by chicken bones; dog bones are rare but present. Although they were not major components of the Lapita diet, these animals were an important part of the Lapita “transported landscape.” In later societies that descended from Lapita colonists, one or more of these animals (especially pigs) would at times become major prestige foods.

The Lapita peoples were hardly exclusively focused on the land. Theirs was a dual economy, reflected in their choice of beaches for settlements, and they extensively harvested the resources of reef, lagoon, and open sea. Most Lapita sites are dense middens full of a diversity of mollusk shells along with the bones of fishes, sharks, rays, and turtles.48 At Talepakemalai, each cubic meter of deposit yielded on average 30 kilograms of mollusk shells, including a diversity of clams and oysters, cones, spider conchs, cowries, and many other species. The fish bones are predominantly from inshore and reef-edge species, such as parrotfish, wrasses, surgeonfish, triggerfish, eels, and emperors, which is not surprising considering that the greatest biomass concentration on tropical reefs is in these inshore microhabitats. Bottom-dwelling (benthic) fishes, such as squirrelfish and groupers, are also represented. And although not common, the bones of large pelagic, carnivorous fish such as tunas (Scombridae) are present in Lapita middens. Shark teeth and the bony vertebrae of sharks or rays, along with the plastron bones of the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), are frequently present. At Talepakemalai, we recovered numerous porpoise bones; the little “Lapita god” was carved from one of these (did it thus represent a deity of the sea?).

This diverse range of marine foods was doubtless obtained through a variety of methods and fishing strategies, including simple hand gathering and collecting on the reef but also using nets, spears, fishhooks, and probably plant poisons.49 Fishhooks manufactured from the stout shells of Trochus niloticus (or from Turbo setosus) have been found at a number of Lapita sites (fig. 4.17). These include one type of hook for bottom fishing and another for open-sea trolling, as well as diminutive hooks of pearl shell probably intended for hand-line fishing on reefs.50




FIGURE 4.17 Unfinished and finished fishhooks of Trochus shell from the Talepakemalai Lapita site. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





Although the sea yielded the greatest range and quantity of their flesh foods, Lapita peoples also used such wild food resources as they could obtain on land. Their middens yield bones of sea- and land birds, particularly plentiful on central Pacific islands, such as in the Ha‘apai group of Tonga. In New Caledonia, they found a large, flightless megapode bird (Sylviornis neocaledoniae) to hunt, as well as an endemic terrestrial crocodile (Mekosuchus inexpectatus). In Vanuatu and Fiji, there were large tortoises (Meiolania damelipi), and in Tonga, iguanid lizards.51 Terrestrial crabs were also available on most islands, especially the highly prized coconut robber crab (Birgus latro).

New analytical methods have allowed us to gain additional perspective on Lapita diets. Kinaston et al. (2014; Valentin et al. 2010, 2014) used the ratios of stable isotopes of carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen (δ15N) in the bones of sixty-eight burials at Teouma to assess the protein component of the diet of this colonizing Lapita population. The isotopic evidence indicates “a mixed subsistence strategy which included broad-spectrum marine resource foraging, the consumption of wild animals, especially fruit bats, and animal husbandry” (Kinaston et al. 2014:15). Kinaston et al. suggest that while horticulture was surely a component of the diet, there may have been less reliance on plant foods during the earliest settlement phase, before gardens and tree crops were well established. A different approach to diet has been pioneered by Tromp (2016; Tromp et al. 2016), who extracted plant microfossils including phytoliths and starch granules from the dental calculus adhering to teeth in the Teouma burials. These microfossils provide significant evidence for the plant component of the Lapita diet, including the consumption of coconut, breadfruit, several kinds of nuts (Canarium, Barringtonia, and Inocarpus), the Malay apple, bananas, giant taro, yams, Polynesian arrowroot, and probably sugarcane (Tromp 2016:189).

Lapita subsistence economy, based on a strategy of transported landscapes and on the intensive exploitation of naturally available resources, can be viewed from two perspectives. From the human viewpoint, this highly successful and adaptive strategy permitted Homo sapiens to expand into a vast empty sector of the globe and to establish viable communities even on tiny coral islands. From the perspective of the naturalist, however, the Lapita expansion was not without its irrevocable impact on the biota and ecology of these islands. Although Lapita populations were not initially large, they frequently had a significant impact, especially on the smaller islands and islets. In Lapita sites throughout the Tongan archipelago, indigenous and endemic land birds, including parrots, rails, pigeons, and fruit doves, were swiftly exterminated after human arrival, through a combination of direct predation for food and feathers and forest clearance to make way for gardens (Steadman 2006). Also in Tonga, an endemic iguana was soon hunted to extinction, and in the Manu‘a group of Samoa an endemic flightless megapode bird was similarly extirpated from the natural biota. Even on the vast island of New Caledonia, the large flightless Sylviornis megapode, the terrestrial crocodile, and the horned tortoise did not persist past the end of the Lapita period.52 To chronicle these changes is not to impute some inherently destructive ethos to the Lapita people; probably it could not have been otherwise if they were to convert these oceanic islands to sustainable human habitats. In the existential game between humans and nature, there are always trade-offs, and the myth of l’homme naturel is precisely that—a myth.





EXCHANGE BETWEEN LAPITA COMMUNITIES


One of the most fascinating aspects of the Lapita is the extensive and elaborate exchange between their communities. Ethnographically, Oceania is famous for the diversity and complexity of its many exchange networks (Hage and Harary 1991, 1996). It now seems that the genesis of many of these historically documented systems may ultimately be traced to systems of exchange that were first developed by the Lapita peoples.

Exchange is, fundamentally, a social phenomenon and in its purest form consists of the exchange of marriage partners, often in some formal symmetrical or asymmetrical pattern. But much exchange also involves a material component; social and material manifestations are often complexly interwoven, as in some well-known Oceanic systems (e.g., the kula exchanges of the Massim, or the red feather money exchange network of the Santa Cruz group).53 For the archaeologist, social aspects of prehistoric exchange must be inferred, usually only with difficulty, but at least some components of material exchange can be directly determined through the sourcing of raw materials, as well as through technological analysis of specialized production. For Lapita sites, it has been possible to source (or at least to characterize source variability in) the following kinds of materials: obsidian, chert, metavolcanic adzes, pottery (including clay and temper), and oven stones. Some shell objects also functioned as exchange valuables, based on evidence for their specialized production.54 Some of these objects traveled long distances, particularly obsidian, which has been found as far as 4,500 kilometers from its quarries. This is the extreme case, however; most exchanges were conducted over shorter distances, ranging from a few tens of kilometers up to 300 or 400 kilometers.

The large village site of Talepakemalai, in Mussau on the northern periphery of the Bismarck Archipelago, provides a case study for Lapita exchange. Talepakemalai was occupied for something like four to five centuries, and over this time we can track a number of significant changes and realignments in external exchange.55 During the earliest phase (ca. 1300–1000 B.C.) the occupants of Talepakemalai received a significant range of materials originating outside the Mussau Islands. Obsidian was imported from two source areas in roughly equal quantities: from the Manus group to the west and from the Willaumez Peninsula on New Britain. Pottery, especially decorated vessels, originated in at least twelve different localities (or at least using twelve different clay sources), whose precise identities we have not been able to pin down but may include Manus, New Ireland, or some of the islands off the northern New Ireland coast (e.g., Tabar, Lihir, Ambitle). Significant quantities of basalt and andesite rocks, for use in the village’s earth ovens, were probably coming in by the basketload. In lesser quantities, chert (for flake tools) and metavolcanic adzes were also imported to Talepakemalai. Based on evidence for high-volume manufacture and on a high ratio of discarded and unfinished rejects to finished artifacts, we also know that the Talepakemalai people made Trochus shell fishhooks and various kinds of rings, beads, and other “shell valuables” from Conus, Spondylus, and other mollusks (fig. 4.18). These shell objects provided at least one kind of export that balanced the numerous imports to Mussau. This exchange network—of which Talepakemalai was just one node—was quite complex, with much content diversity, encompassing many individual nodes, and with multiple, high-volume flows in and out of Mussau.




FIGURE 4.18 Carefully prepared sections of Conus shell, with holes drilled for line attachment or suspension, were among the various kinds of shell “exchange valuables” manufactured at the Talepakemalai Lapita site in the Mussau Islands. (Photo by Thérèse Babineau.)





In a later phase at Talepakemalai (ca. 1000–800 B.C.), the picture of exchange relationships is quite different. Obsidian was still imported but now primarily from the closer Manus source. The number of foreign ceramic sources had dropped to perhaps six. Oven stones were still being imported but probably not chert and metavolcanic adzes. On the export side, there is little evidence for the kind of high-volume shell object manufacture of the earlier period. In short, the network in which the Talepakemalai community participated had been reduced in its content and diversity, as well as in the number of nodes to which it was connected; the overall volume of exchange seems to have declined as well.

These changes at Talepakemalai reflect a simplification and perhaps a shrinking regionalization of long-distance exchange, a pattern repeated in other spheres of the Lapita world. This may be because exchange between Lapita communities was an essential social aspect of their colonization strategy, maintaining linkages between homeland and daughter communities (Kirch 1988b, 1997a). Over time, as new settlements grew and became more independent and less reliant on contacts back home, the need for external exchanges—sometimes maintained by means of rather arduous voyages over open sea—would have waned. In their place, localized exchange networks sometimes developed, such as those in New Caledonia or in the Fiji group (see chap. 5).





ANCESTRAL OCEANIC SOCIETIES


For anthropologists, exchange leads logically to the question, what were Lapita, or more properly, Ancestral Oceanic, societies like?56 Using the data of archaeology, combined with insights from historical linguistics, it is possible to pose a few hypotheses. Archaeological settlement size tells us that these were small-scale societies, in which individual communities ranged from perhaps only two or three households up to 150 households at the most. Although they incorporated relatively small numbers of people, they were not egalitarian. Reconstructions of early Austronesian and Proto Oceanic kinship terms make it clear that there were critical distinctions based on gender, birth order, age, and affinity (marriage). The birth-order distinction between older and younger siblings of the same sex is noteworthy, for this suggests a key element of ranking within Lapita societies.

Linguistic reconstruction, augmented by comparative ethnography, also allows us to infer that the Ancestral Oceanic peoples organized themselves into sets of social groups they called *kainanga (Hage 1999; Kirch and Green 2001; Pawley 1982). These were unilineal descent groups, comprising people who traced their origins back to a founding ancestor and who had rights of access to land by virtue of group membership. Historical linguists have reconstructed two key social status terms: Proto Oceanic *tala(m)-pat, meaning “big, great person,” and *aq adiki, meaning “oldest or firstborn child.”57 This correlates with a widespread and hence presumably ancient Austronesian emphasis on “origin structures,” reflected in a term for “ancestor,” *ta(m)pu, which is based on the root term *tu(m)pu, “to grow.” All this is a part of the founder ideology characteristic of Austronesian cultures in general (Bellwood 1996a). Here then is further evidence for the importance of genealogical order and connectivity to ancestors, additional elements that contribute to a hypothesis of Lapita societies as ranked.

The archaeological evidence is consistent with such a reconstruction. Great emphasis was placed on the laborious decoration of certain ceramics that had a social function, and indeed most likely represented ancestors. This pottery was exchanged among Lapita communities, along with a diverse assortment of other goods. In addition to such functionally useful items as obsidian, chert, and oven stone, exchange goods included a range of shell “valuables,” artifacts of a kind known in ethnographic contexts to have circulated asymmetrically between exchange partners seeking to increase their relative prestige and rank.

What emerges is a picture of Ancestral Oceanic societies as being, in anthropological terms, “ranked” but not sufficiently complex or elaborated as to be “stratified” or “hierarchical.” It may be best to use the term heterarchical for Lapita social organization.58 In a heterarchical society, the fundamental social units (probably extended households)59 are in economic competition with each other, emphasizing minor distinctions in prestige or wealth, particularly as these are played out through formalized exchange. Some groups may achieve higher rank than others, leading to a situation in which incipient chiefship—based on hereditary ranking principles—can readily emerge. The Lapita groups who expanded into the islands and archipelagoes of Remote Oceania were the founding populations from which the later, more complex societies of this vast region ultimately developed. Lapita social structure, as we currently conceive it, contains the necessary germs of ranking, and of intergroup competition based on economic exchanges, from which the diverse array of complex societies of Micronesia, Polynesia, and island Melanesia later emerged.

There is no clear-cut “end” to the Lapita period in Oceanic prehistory. In most archipelagoes, the distinctive dentate-stamped decoration ceased to be practiced within two to three centuries following colonization. The appearance of new ceramic styles—on which archaeologists classically define their cultural sequences—necessitates new labels. In fact, there was continuity between the founding Lapita populations in Remote Oceania and those societies and cultures that follow them on archaeological time charts. Within Near Oceania there was continuity too, but here the matter was more complex, for the Lapita peoples continued to interact—and intermarry with—the older, indigenous Papuan language–speaking peoples. These post-Lapita transformations in both Near Oceania and Remote Oceania are the subject of chapter 5. What may be fairly said of Lapita is that its legacy is the modern ethnographic diversity of Oceania.





FIVE


