IN THE “SEA OF LITTLE LANDS”



Hidden in the jungle along the shores and in the well-watered interior lowlands of Guam are double rows of upright monuments associated with caps and accompanied by burials, potsherds, and stone and shell implements. These monument sites are called latte or casas de los antiguos by the natives, who believe that they are haunted by Taotao Mana (people of beforetime).

The natives carefully avoid these sites.

L.M. THOMPSON, Archaeology of the Marianas Islands (1932)





MICRONESIA—ONE OF THE THREE divisions of Oceania originally proposed by Dumont d’Urville—encompasses about 2,100 islands, most of which lie north of the equator but below latitude 20° N (map 10). From west to east, the main archipelagoes are Palau (also known as Belau), the Marianas, the Carolines, the Marshalls, and Kiribati (formerly the Gilbert Islands). Tuvalu (formerly the Ellice Islands) lies between Kiribati and Fiji and is considered here in relation to the early settlement of atolls, although its occupants speak Polynesian languages. Despite the great number of islands in Micronesia, in aggregate they total a mere 2,700 square kilometers of land; Guam alone accounts for 582 square kilometers. For this reason an early explorer of Micronesia, F.W. Christian (1899), dubbed it the “sea of little lands.” Many Micronesian islands are atolls, diminutive and low-lying islets encircling a lagoon (see chap. 2). The Marianas chain and some of the Palau group consist of upraised makatea, but outside these western archipelagoes there are only a few high volcanic and makatea islands. Yap, Chuuk (formerly Truk), Pohnpei (formerly Ponape), and Kosrae (formerly Kusaie) are high volcanic islands. Isolated Nauru and Banaba are upraised makatea islands, as are several of the Marshalls.




MAP 10 The islands of Micronesia.





The traditional cultures of Micronesia reflect different origins in Western and central Eastern Micronesia, as well as distinctive environmental adaptations, not to mention the underlying contingencies of history.1 All Micronesian peoples speak Austronesian languages, but not all of these belong to the Oceanic subgroup, a clue to their diverse origins. In contrast to Polynesia, Micronesia does not form a monophyletic cultural group, although its history is shallower and less complex than that of Near Oceania.

Despite important early archaeological work before and soon after World War II, Micronesia has been less studied than Polynesia or Melanesia.2 Alexander Spoehr (1957) excavated in the Marianas in 1949–50, and E.W. Gifford made his third and final Pacific expedition to Yap in 1956 (Gifford and Gifford 1959). These pioneering studies, along with Osborne’s (1966) survey of Palau, all focused on high islands. Until Davidson’s (1967b) excavations on Nukuoro showed otherwise, archaeologists simply assumed that the atolls lacked stratified deposits. Although periodic cyclones do destroy substantial segments of the archaeological record,3 atolls have nonetheless often proved to have rich and surprisingly deep stratigraphic sequences. Beginning in the mid-1970s, Micronesia saw a resurgence of archaeological work, primarily the result of cultural resource management (CRM; see chap. 1). Unfortunately, only a few CRM archaeologists have been diligent about publishing their results in scholarly journals (e.g., Athens 1980, 1984b; Athens and Ward 1995; Butler 1994).4 A list of selected archaeological sites in Micronesia is provided in table 6.1.


TABLE 6.1

Selected Archaeological Sites in Micronesia





TABLE 6.1 (continued)





COLONIZATION AND EARLY SETTLEMENT IN MICRONESIA


Both archaeology and historical linguistics contribute evidence regarding the origins of Micronesian peoples and the directions of early settlement and dispersal through the region. Almost all of the Austronesian languages spoken in the Pacific islands belong to its Oceanic subgroup.5 (See fig. 4.4 for the higher-order subgrouping of the Austronesian languages.) Significantly, however, two exceptions are found in Western Micronesia: Chamorro (in the Marianas) and Palauan.6 These belong to a different high-order subgroup of Austronesian, Western Malayo-Polynesian, which includes a large number of languages today spoken in the Philippines and Indonesia. Blust (2013:113) writes, “Palauan and Chamorro reached their historical locations from the west as a result of separate migrations out of insular Southeast Asia. In the case of Chamorro the movement was almost certainly from the central or northern Philippines.” Reid (1999) argues that Chamorro split off very early from other branches of the Austronesian family. His tentative conclusion is that “Chamorro is an Extra-Formosan language, but that it is a first order branch of the [Austronesian] family, separating from Proto-Extra Formosan, probably from the Northern Philippines, prior to the actual dispersal of the other branches of the family” (Reid 1999:49). In short, on linguistic evidence the origins of the Palau and Marianas islanders most likely are to be found in the Philippine archipelago.

All of the other languages spoken throughout the Caroline, Marshall, and Kiribati Archipelagoes belong to the Oceanic subgroup,7 correlated with the Lapita expansion (see chap. 4). All of the Micronesian languages except Yapese fall together into a single subgroup of Oceanic—Nuclear Micronesian—which has its “center of genetic diversity” in the eastern part of Micronesia, “in the region of Kiribati, Kosrae, Pohnpei, and the Marshalls” (Pawley and Ross 1993:439; see also Jackson 1986). The Nuclear Micronesian group must have split off following the breakup of the Proto Oceanic dialect chain, implying that the first settlement of central Eastern Micronesia was from the region of the initial Lapita expansion, between the Bismarcks and the southeastern Solomons-Vanuatu. Indeed, the Nuclear Micronesian languages share features with the languages of the southeastern Solomons or northern Vanuatu (Shutler and Marck 1975; but see Jackson 1986).

Subgroups within Nuclear Micronesian hint at the process of differentiation once Proto Nuclear Micronesian had split off from early Oceanic. Bender and Wang (1985) find five major branches of Nuclear Micronesian: Kiribati, Marshallese, and Kosraean (all single languages); a Pohnpeic subgroup with four languages; and a large Chuukic subgroup (centered on Chuuk) including perhaps sixty distinct speech communities, primarily on atolls. These five groups have been arrayed by Jackson (1986) and Rehg (1995) in a classic tree model, in which Kosraean, Kiribati, and Marshallese were the first to split off from a Proto Micronesian ancestor, while the Chuukic dialect chain and Pohnpeic both diverged from a Proto Chuukic-Pohnpeic ancestor.

Yapese long defied classification as either Oceanic or non-Oceanic Malayo-Polynesian (e.g., Bender and Wang 1985), but Malcolm Ross (1996a) marshaled evidence that Yapese is an Oceanic language, subsequently influenced by at least four periods of borrowing, two of these from non-Oceanic languages. Such borrowing reflects Yap’s key geographic position in Micronesia and concurs with archaeological evidence for the movement of people and things into Yap over long periods of time. Yapese is evidently a highly conservative Oceanic language, one that diverged early and whose closest relationships are probably with the Admiralty Islands language group. Blust (2013:113) says that Yapese “may have reached Micronesia from the Admiralty Islands soon after the breakup of Proto Oceanic.”

In short, the historical linguistic evidence points to a three-part sequence for the settlement of Micronesia, with people initially moving into the western archipelagoes of Palau and the Marianas directly from island Southeast Asia (most likely the Philippines), another group moving into Yap from the Admiralty Islands, and a third population (or closely related populations) moving up into the central-eastern Caroline Islands from the Solomons-Vanuatu region. The Proto Nuclear Micronesian speech community was rapidly emplaced on more than a single island; it may have constituted a dialect chain spanning at least the high islands (and probably some atolls) of central Eastern Micronesia. Further complexities arose later, for example, with Yapese, which (lying at the interface between western and eastern-central groups) borrowed significantly from Nuclear Micronesian, thus partially masking its Proto Oceanic origins. Having briefly stated the model as derived from historical linguistics, let us examine the archaeological evidence.


THE WESTERN ARCHIPELAGOESRainbird (1994:298) suggests that “the long curve of the [Marianas] archipelago perhaps provided a wide target for early navigators sailing eastwards” on voyages of discovery from the Philippines. In 1949–50, Spoehr excavated at Chalan Piao on Saipan Island in the Marianas, recovering an oyster shell dating to 1527 ± 200 B.C., demonstrating a long prehistory for Western Micronesia—one longer than many at the time were willing to accept, for the date was later repeatedly questioned.8 Renewed work at Chalan Piao in 1987, however, combined with the discovery of other early sites such as Tarague, Mangilao, and Ritidian on Guam, Achugao Point and Unai Bapot on Saipan, and Unai Chulu on Tinian, has produced numerous radiocarbon dates in association with ceramics and other artifacts dating to the initial period of Marianas settlement.9 Butler’s excavations at Achugao Point on Saipan revealed “an intact remnant of a very early occupation surface protected behind a section of raised fossil reef” (1994:15). Although initial dates suggested that the site might be as old as 1930–1630 B.C., Carson (2014:41) believes that the “earliest confirmable site-use” at Achugao Point is probably between 1392 and 1269 B.C. At Unai Bapot, Carson obtained “the oldest known secure radiocarbon dating of any site in the Marianas” (2014:38–40; see also Carson 2008); the dates, on three Anadara bivalve shells, gave a calibrated age range of 1612 to 1558 B.C. However, Petchy, Clark et al. (2016) have shown that the Unai Bapot Anadara shells were likely affected by “hardwater,” yielding dates that are too old. Additional dates on identified charcoal and the bone of an extirpated species of rail now make it clear that Unai Bapot was first occupied between 1250 and 1130 B.C. Thus, although Fitzpatrick (2014) claims that the Marianas were settled by 1550 B.C., there is at present no firm evidence for human occupation predating about 1300 B.C.

The early Marianas sites contain two kinds of ceramics, probably variants of the same ware. Spoehr (1957) labeled these Marianas Red and Lime-Filled, Impressed Trade Ware, although later work indicates that the second type was not a “trade” ware but locally manufactured. Amesbury, Moore, and Hunter-Anderson (1996:60–61) describe the Marianas Red pottery as a “thin-walled, often red-slipped or painted, calcareous sand-tempered [CST] pottery.” The decorated sherds are of the same or similar paste (also CST) and have distinctive designs (circles, lines) that were impressed (or sometimes incised) into the surface and filled with white lime after firing.

Butler (1994:23–33) defined two distinctive styles of “complex incised and stamped (impressed) decoration” at Achugao Point, which he labels Achugao Incised and San Roque Incised. The first exhibits rectilinear patterns, “with the zones between the major elements packed with tiny, delicate punctations” (Butler 1994:27). San Roque Incised sherds (of which only fifteen were found) consist of “bands of curvilinear garlands made by linking incised arches (half circles) with small stamped circles or large punctations placed at the junctions of the arch segments” (Butler 1994:27). According to Carson (2014:67), ceramic vessel forms at the Ritidian and Unai Bapot sites include a slightly restricted bowl or jar with everted rims (in two distinct sizes), a wider bowl with a distinct carination, and a flat-bottomed, shallow bowl or dish (fig. 6.1).




FIGURE 6.1 The earliest ceramic vessel forms from the Marianas Islands, reconstructed from potsherds excavated at the Ritidian site on Guam and the Unai Bapot site on Saipan. (From Carson 2014, fig. 6.14, courtesy of Mike Carson.)





As with Lapita, both Marianas Red and the lime-filled decorated variants most likely stem from a common, older tradition in island Southeast Asia (see Butler 1994:34; Carson et al. 2013; Kirch 1995). The Marianas pottery impressed designs differ from those of Lapita, yet are remarkably similar to motifs found on pottery in island Southeast Asia, such as that from the Sanga Sanga site in the Philippines (Spoehr 1973:184–91) and from the Kalumpang and Minanga Sipakko sites in Sulawesi (Van Heekeren 1972:184–90, fig. 46, pls. 101–2). The latter two assemblages, in particular, exhibit a style of incised designs with small punctations infilling spaces between the lines, similar to the pottery from Achugao Point. In addition, the vessel forms, use of red slip, and calcareous temper that typify Marianas Red are all consistent with Philippines ceramic assemblages of the early to mid-second millennium B.C. (Bellwood 1987a, 2017). Other artifacts found in association with this early pottery include Tridacna shell adzes, Conus shell beads and Conus bracelets, Cypraea shell beads, and rotating fishhooks of Isognomon shell (fig. 6.2). As noted above, the Marianas archaeological record is consistent with linguistic evidence that Chamorro is a Western Malayo-Polynesian language and most probably originated in the Philippines.




FIGURE 6.2 Stone and shell artifacts from early period sites in the Marianas Islands: A, Tridacna shell adz; B, C, chert flakes; D, carved coral pendant; E, Cypraea shell beads; F, Conus shell beads; Conus shell pendants; H, chert adz; I, Anadara shell artifact; J, Isognomon shell fishhooks; K, Conus shell bracelet fragments. (From Carson 2014, fig. 5.1, courtesy of Mike Carson.)





Paleoenvironmental evidence for early settlement of the Marianas comes from sediment cores in Tipalao Marsh (Orote Peninsula) and in the Pago Valley of Guam (Athens and Ward 1995; Ward n.d.).10 The Tipalao Marsh cores encapsulate a record extending back to 5600 B.C.; human arrival possibly as early as 1600 B.C. is signaled by the appearance of charcoal particles suggestive of human burning. By 500 B.C. significant forest clearance was under way, and by A.D. 550 extensive grasslands are evidenced in the pollen record. The Pago Valley core exhibits marked reductions in forest trees and increases in the fire-adapted fern Dicranopteris linearis, a classic signal of anthropogenic disturbance on oceanic islands. Notably, coconut (Cocos nucifera) pollen first occurs at the same time as the initial burning, hinting that this economic plant may have been a human introduction.

In Palau, the chronology of initial human settlement has been less clear. At Uchularois Cave in the southern group of limestone “Rock Islands,” Masse (1990:220) found early ceramics described as “a well constructed and heavily slipped and polished red-ware,” dating to around 50 B.C. The discovery of human burials in Chelechol ra Orrak rockshelter on Orrak Island pushed back direct evidence for settlement of Palau to at least 1050 B.C. (Fitzpatrick 2003:726). Clark, Anderson, and Wright (2006) argue from evidence at Ulong rockshelter, where the basal deposits yielded red-slipped, calcareous sand-tempered ceramics, that the southern limestone islands were settled by about 1150–950 B.C., if not slightly earlier. As Dickinson and Athens (2007) point out, however, geological evidence indicates that Palau is gradually subsiding, affecting archaeological site visibility, especially around the coastline of Babeldaob. Thus early sites on that large island may be buried under coastal sediments and mangrove swamps.

Ward, Athens, and Hotton (1998) recovered twenty-two sediment cores from sites dispersed around Babeldaob Island and analyzed three of them for pollen content and charcoal particle influx. All cores show evidence for “an apparently sudden increase in savanna/grasslands on Babeldaob Island by at least 3100 B.P., with some indication that the western side of Babeldaob may have experienced this change significantly earlier” (Ward, Athens, and Hotton 1998:5). Substantial increases in charcoal particles at the same time make it likely that this was an anthropogenic change. Moreover, pollen of two cultivated plants, coconut and betel nut palm (Areca catechu), appears as early as 2279 B.C. in one core. The authors argue that these data imply “the presence of humans on Palau at least by 3000 cal B.P., and possibly as early as 4200 cal B.P.” (1998:6).

In Yap, the oldest known archaeological assemblages date to about A.D. 1, at the Pemrang site tested by E.W. Gifford (Gifford and Gifford 1959) and later reexcavated by Jun Takayama (1982).11 But as in Palau, palynological and paleoenvironmental evidence (Dodson and Intoh 1999) indicates a likely human presence on Yap beginning around 1350 B.C., marked by “a major period of forest destruction, accompanied by fire.” Thus, as is the case on some other Pacific islands, the earliest part of the Yapese cultural sequence is probably yet to be archaeologically recovered. As Fitzpatrick (2014:5) avers, a “dedicated research effort that incorporates intensive archaeological investigation coupled with coring for paleoenvironmental data would surely be productive.”


THE HIGH ISLANDS OF THE CAROLINESWhereas in Western Micronesia people continued to make ceramics into the period of European contact, this was not so in central Eastern Micronesia, where pottery was entirely unknown. Archaeological work on Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae has shown, however, that pots were at one time in use on the high islands of the Carolines, where suitable clays are available. The later decline in pottery use, and its ultimate abandonment in the Carolines, parallels similar changes in parts of island Melanesia and in Polynesia (see chap. 7). The earliest ceramic assemblages from Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae along with associated material culture strongly suggest that one or more colonizing populations originated from late Lapita cultures in island Melanesia, most likely in the southeastern Solomon Islands.

Along the coast of Fefan Island in the Chuuk lagoon, deposits within the swampy intertidal zone (probably representing former stilt-house villages) yielded CST pottery along with Tridacna shell adzes and Conus shell ornaments (Sinoto, ed., 1984). Radiocarbon dates date these to around 120 B.C. The Fefan pottery consists of plain ware bowls or pots with constricted necks and slightly everted rims; the rims are sometimes decorated with crenations, while a few body sherds have incised lines. The Fefan pottery is similar to Kiki Ware from Tikopia, dated to 900–100 B.C., to plain ware on Anuta, Nendö, and the Reef Islands, and possibly to plain ware from Santa Ana, all in the southeastern Solomons. All these assemblages are associated with Tridacna shell adzes and Conus shell ornaments, strengthening the case for a close connection between Chuuk and the southeastern Solomons.

In Pohnpei, CST ceramics have been recovered from deposits underlying the artificial stone islands of Nan Madol; they have also been recovered from similar contexts at the Lelu site on Kosrae.12 In both cases, the peoples who used this pottery apparently occupied stilt-house settlements, for as on Chuuk the pottery-bearing deposits lie within the intertidal zone.13 Given the presence of Lapita stilt-house villages in Near Oceania, this is another connection between Lapita and early Caroline Islands cultures. The strongest evidence, however, is the CST pottery from levels dated to between 5 B.C. and A.D. 240 in Pohnpei (Athens 1990b:21) and between 108 B.C. and A.D. 244 in Kosrae (Rainbird 1994:299). Pollen cores from Kosrae date initial human disturbance to the island’s vegetation, as well as the introduction of cultivated plants, to the same time frame as the pottery (Athens, Ward, and Murakami 1996). Athens (1990b) identifies two main vessel forms at Nan Madol: globular jars with everted rims and small bowls. Again, the Pohnpei and Kosrae CST ceramics are closest to late Lapita plain wares in the southeastern Solomons (Santa Cruz group, including Tikopia and Anuta) or possibly in northern Vanuatu.14

In short, the archaeological evidence points to settlement of the central Caroline high islands directly from late Lapita pottery-using populations in the southeastern Solomons or immediately adjacent regions, corresponding well with the hypothesis predicted from the linguistic relationships. Athens, who has studied the early Caroline Islands finds closely, reached the same conclusion:

Regarding the origins of the Pohnpei settlers and, perhaps, those of Truk [Chuuk] and Kosrae, it appears that the best case can be made for a linkage with the late Lapita Plain Ware pottery tradition. . . . The chronology is consistent: it begins after 500 B.C. The pottery vessel shapes and decorative techniques are consistent: simple globular pots and bowls with perhaps some rim notching or punctation. Also, its location is consistent: late Lapita Plain Ware pottery is found in the southeast Solomon and New Hebrides Islands where linguistic data suggest the homeland for nuclear Micronesians is located. (1990b:29)

THE ATOLLS Turning from the high islands to the atolls of the central Carolines, Marshalls, and Kiribati, some key environmental factors must be taken into consideration. Evidence has steadily accumulated that the mid-Holocene sea level in the tropical Pacific ranged from 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present, reaching a peak around 2000 B.C. (Dickinson 2003).15 Sea levels began to rise rapidly around 8000 B.C., from their last glacial maximum low of 100+ meters below present level, and continued to rise unabated for the next six millennia, successively drowning many makatea islands that had been exposed by the lowered sea levels of the late Pleistocene. Before atolls could form on these newly drowned makatea reefs, it was necessary for sea levels to stabilize and to remain stable for some time. This did not occur until sea level fell to its modern position, as early as A.D. 1 in some parts of the Pacific but not until A.D. 800 or so in the Tuamotu Islands. Weisler, Yamano, and Hua (2012) dated foraminifera sands on Utrōk and Maloelap atolls in the Marshalls, showing that islets, or motu, began to form and stabilize between 800 and 450 B.C. The Micronesian atolls were in their initial stages of motu formation and stabilization when late Lapita populations began to explore the seaways north of the equator around two thousand years ago.

These newly formed atolls would have been tenuous environments for human colonization, having but the sparsest vegetation. Atoll vegetation is typically dominated by human-introduced plants, and human manipulation of these environments was necessary to render them suitable as permanent abodes. From high-island bases on Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae, pioneers may have seasonally exploited (or temporarily inhabited) atolls in the vicinity, introducing economically vital plants such as coconut and breadfruit and excavating cultivation pits to tap the freshwater aquifers (Weisler 1999). After generations of intermittent use, atolls might have yielded to permanent settlement, and the more far-flung islands could be inhabited.

While only a few Micronesian atolls have been thoroughly investigated by archaeologists, those with stratified sequences exhibit little evidence of use earlier than about two thousand years ago. In the Marshall Islands, sites on Majuro and Maloelap date to around A.D. 100.16 For both Maloelap and Utrōk, Weisler et al. (2012) show that human colonization occurred between A.D. 100 and 160, some 900 to 600 years after initial islet formation. Beardsley (1994:161–62) reports a calibrated radiocarbon age of 167–124 B.C. from an early cultural deposit on Kwajalein Atoll. Other atolls were not settled until later, such as Ngulu and Imwinyap where the earliest dates are A.D. 800, or Nukuoro at A.D. 713. In short, atoll colonization was probably continuous, with the full spectrum of Micronesian atolls not fully occupied until well into the last millennium.





CULTURAL SEQUENCES IN MICRONESIA


Spoehr (1957) based his cultural sequence for the Marianas Islands on ceramic chronology, with a quantitative change in pottery assemblages from those dominated by Marianas Red to later ones containing only Marianas Plain Ware. The later part of the Marianas sequence was also marked by the construction of limestone-pillar structures termed latte, dominantly associated with Marianas Plain Ware, which Spoehr attributed to the last 850 years.17

For Palau, Osborne’s speculative sequence was based on a dubious ceramic typology (1966, 1979) that proved to be of no lasting value. Masse (1990) outlined an alternative sequence beginning with a “Colonial” Period from A.D. 1 to 650, continuing with a “Resource Intensification” Period (A.D. 650–1200), followed by a “Rock Island Village” Period (1200–1450), a “Transition” Period (1450–1600), and finally a “Traditional” Period (1600–1914). However, work in the Rock Islands by Clark (2005) and Fitzpatrick (2003) demonstrates that settlement of these limestone islands commenced by at least 1000 B.C. Meanwhile, CRM work on Babeldaob shows that the main island was settled by at least 1250 B.C. (Liston 2009).18 A distinctive “thin blackware” type of pottery predates the ubiquitous thick-walled and grog-tempered later Palauan pottery, associated with an early phase of inland (ridgetop) settlement on Babeldaob. At the Ngerulmud Hill site in Melekeok State, sherds of this thin blackware were dated to 230 B.C. (Liston, Kaschko, and Welch 1998:59, 82). On Babeldaob, the interior ridges and hillsides were massively reworked with vast terrace complexes; these are discussed later in this chapter.

Sediment coring and pollen analysis suggest that the first third of the Yapese archaeological sequence remains to be uncovered (Dodson and Intoh 1999). While a rough ceramic sequence beginning with CST pottery and moving to a later Yapese “laminated ware” was demonstrated by Gifford and Gifford (1959) and confirmed by later work (e.g., Intoh 1988, 1990; Intoh and Leach 1985), a complete cultural sequence remains elusive. Yap has extensive stone architectural remains (Hunter-Anderson 1983, 1984; Pickering 1990), but there have been too few excavations to place the development of this architecture—let alone its significance for sociopolitical changes—in proper temporal perspective.

Chuuk’s extensive lagoon (2,125 square kilometers) encompasses a number of small high islands and smaller islets, totaling 120 square kilometers. Thus far, archaeological work has concentrated on Tol, Moen, and Fefan Islands.19 King and Parker (1984:415–41) attempted a synthesis of the Chuuk sequence but could define only two periods, with an intervening “period about which at present we know virtually nothing,” lasting from A.D. 500 to 1300 (see also Rainbird 2004:168–79). They named the early period the Winas Pattern, characterized by CST pottery (such as that recovered from the Fefan Island sites), as well as Tridacna and Cassis shell adzes, Conus shell rings, and other kinds of shell ornaments. Settlements were confined to coastal locations, possibly with stilt-house villages. The later Tonnachaw Pattern, from A.D. 1300 until European contact, lacks pottery but has many kinds of artifacts known from ethnographic collections, such as Cypraea shell breadfruit peelers, coral pounders, slingstones, and Terebra shell adzes. Tonnachaw settlement patterns incorporated not only coastal residential sites but also interior residential and cook-house sites, shell middens on ridges and hill summits, and stone-walled forts on high ridges or summits. The emphasis on ridgetop locations—whether deliberately fortified or not—speaks to the significance of warfare and raiding in the Tonnachaw Pattern (Rainbird 1996; 2004:168–79).

The best-defined sequence for any Micronesian island is that for Pohnpei, proposed by Ayres (1990) and summarized in table 6.2.20 However, Ayres’s speculative “Settlement and Adaptive Integration Phase” is not supported by archaeological evidence; human settlement on the island probably begins about A.D. 1. In material culture, important changes include (1) the decline in ceramic use and its abandonment by A.D. 1500, if not earlier; (2) the appearance of distinctive Terebra and Mitre shell adzes after about A.D. 1000;21 and (3) the development of compound trolling lures of pearl shell after about A.D. 1200. Of particular interest is the Nan Madol Phase, associated with the construction of this massive site, discussed at greater length later in this chapter.22


TABLE 6.2

The Pohnpei Culture-Historical Sequencea





A sequence for Kosrae has not been formally defined, but it might parallel that for Pohnpei. Among the similarities are an early phase with pottery, the later abandonment of ceramics, and the development of complex stone architecture (including a major chiefly residential center at Lelu), especially during the past 500 years. Athens, Ward, and Murakami (1996) trace the history of an intensive “agroforest” or arboricultural subsistence system over 2,000 years of human land use on Kosrae, with breadfruit as a dominant tree crop (see also Levin and Ayres 2016). The transformation of the island’s original vegetation into this agroforest occurred by A.D. 400–600, well before the later “rise of social complexity as evidenced by the Lelu megalithic ruins [that] was not accompanied by any perceptible change in cultigens or agricultural practices” (Athens, Ward, and Murakami 1996:845).

For the Caroline and Marshall Islands, sequences can be constructed for atolls where extensive excavations have been carried out, as with Majuro, Kwajalein, Maleolap, Utrōk, and Arno atolls in the Marshalls or Ulithi, Woleai, Lamotrek, and Mokil in the Carolines.23 For Utrōk, Weisler (2001a; 2001b:123–28, fig. 8.1) traces the culture history of the atoll over the course of two millennia, although he does not divide the sequence into named phases. The material culture, which included shell adzes (made from Tridacna, Cassis, Conus, and Lambis shells), Spondylus shell beads, Conus shell rings, and pumice abraders, remained stable over time. Single-piece fishhooks and trolling lures of pearl shell are known for the past 1,000 years and may date earlier. Inshore fishing and generalized shellfish gathering dominated marine subsistence, while on the coral motu there were gradual increases in swamp cultivation, aroid pit cultivation, and arboriculture. None of the atolls has substantial stone architecture (other than low house alignments), and settlement patterns were highly stable.

Some parallel trends and differences suggest themselves in these island sequences. One difference is the persistence of pottery in Western Micronesia and the abandonment of ceramics in the central-eastern islands. In both regions, specialized architecture developed in later time periods (Morgan 1988). Major architectural traditions are confined to the high islands, presumably because only on the larger landmasses did sizable populations (and population densities) arise. These architectural forms correspond to the rise of powerful and centralized chiefly polities, discussed shortly. In contrast, the atoll sequences display remarkable stability over time with little change, at least insofar as we can detect in their archaeological records.24





TUVALU AND THE POLYNESIAN OUTLIERS IN MICRONESIA


There are two exceptions to the generalization that all of the Micronesian islands east of Yap are inhabited by speakers of Nuclear Micronesian languages: the atolls of Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi, which lie to the south of the main Carolines, are inhabited by Polynesian speakers. These islands are therefore counted among the “Polynesian Outliers” located outside the Polynesian Triangle, of which the Melanesian members were discussed in chapter 5.

It was once thought that all of the Polynesian Outlier languages fell together into a single subgroup of Polynesian, known as “Samoic-Outlier” because it grouped the Outlier languages together with the Western Polynesian languages of Samoa and East Futuna (Pawley 1967). More recently, linguistic research suggests that while many if not all of the Outlier languages in the Solomons–Vanuatu–New Caledonia region are closely related to East Futunan, those of Kapingamarangi and Nukuoro fall into a different subgroup, closely related to the Ellicean language of Tuvalu (Marck 2000; W. Wilson 1985). Rather than having a single common origin, the Outlier populations probably had multiple origins; the Micronesian Outliers may have derived from populations originally located in the Tuvalu group of atolls.

Tuvalu remains almost unexplored archaeologically. Takayama and Saito (1987; Takayama, Eritaia, and Saito 1987) excavated at Temei on Vaitupu Island, finding “deeply stratified cultural deposits” containing pottery and two Turbo shell fishhooks, with an associated shell radiocarbon date of around A.D. 1080. The pottery, based on petrographic analysis by William Dickinson, is of Fijian origin and was probably a trade item.

Intensive archaeological studies have been made of both Nukuoro and Kapingamarangi.25 Davidson’s (1971) excavations on Nukuoro revealed well-stratified occupation deposits, rich in material culture and faunal remains, with initial occupation commencing at A.D. 658–768 (Davidson 1992). She recovered a large assemblage (697 specimens) of pearl shell fishhooks, with several forms that changed over time (fig. 6.3). Takayama and Saito (1987) point out that the two Turbo shell hooks from the Temei site in Tuvalu correspond to Davidson’s Nukuoro Type Ia, adding one bit of archaeological evidence in support of a possible Tuvalu origin for the Nukuoro population. The Nukuoro excavations also produced many other kinds of shell and bone artifacts, including adzes of Tridacna and Terebra shells.




FIGURE 6.3 The sequence of changes in shell fishhook types revealed by Davidson’s excavations on Nukuoro atoll. (From Davidson 1967b.)





Davidson (1992:297) is pessimistic “about the ability of archaeologists to identify Polynesian arrival on Nukuoro,” since she feels that “the point at which Nukuoro became a Polynesian Outlier is no closer to recognition.” However, in light of the revised subgrouping of Outlier languages, and the model for a first millennium A.D. expansion of Proto Ellicean speakers into Tuvalu, there is no reason why the Nukuoro sequence should not be regarded as “Polynesian” from bottom to top. None of the material culture in the Nukuoro sequence contradicts this hypothesis, especially since initial settlement would have been launched from a similar atoll environment. Such an interpretation eliminates the search for an elusive “point” at which Nukuoro became Polynesian.

Kapingamarangi Atoll has remarkably well-stratified cultural deposits, up to 4 meters deep on Touhou Islet, which was built up from a small sand cay to a substantial islet over about 700 to 1,000 years, partly by purposeful addition of sand and gravel retained by seawalls. The early part of the Touhou sequence reflects “transient occupation” much as suggested in the model of atoll settlement discussed earlier, with the formation of an “artificial islet” between A.D. 1300 and 1700, followed by a period of “intensive residential occupation” in the past 300 years (Leach and Ward 1981:53–55). The Kapingamarangi artifact assemblage is not as rich as that from Nukuoro, but a similar range of types is represented, including Tridacna shell adzes and one-piece shell fishhooks, as well as a massive form of trolling lure, possibly made from Tridacna shell.





ATOLL ADAPTATIONS


In 1980, I spent several weeks on Arno in the Marshalls, experiencing atoll life while supervising the first archaeological survey of that island (Dye, ed., 1987). One quickly becomes aware that the ocean is never more than a few meters—horizontally and, especially, vertically—distant. Walking across an atoll islet, from the calm lagoon beach with its powdery sands through the jungle-covered interior to the wave-battered seaward coast with its coral rubble ramparts thrown up by storm surges takes no more than a few minutes. The roar of the surf is incessant, particularly at night, after the sounds of the village have died down. Everything underfoot consists of coral: coral reef, coral boulders, coral sand. There is no other kind of stone. The atoll soil itself is formed of calcareous sand, enriched only with organic matter, including the detritus of human habitation.26

On such tenuous heaps of coral and sand rimming productive lagoons and extensive reefs, the early Micronesian colonizers worked out a set of cultural adaptations enabling them not only to survive but also to live a satisfying life. Obtaining freshwater is the single greatest challenge to atoll life, not only water to drink, but also water to sustain crops. Traditional atoll subsistence in Micronesia focuses on a few main plants: coconuts, essential for drinking fluid, nutritious “meat,” and leaves used for plaiting and weaving; and Pandanus for food and leaves. Both of these are naturally adapted to the coralline, halophytic (high-salt) environment of the coastal strand. Also common are breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) and giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis), neither of which is a strand plant in its natural state. Certain varieties of breadfruit can be grown on the larger atoll islets, where a substantial, rain-fed freshwater lens (the Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer) supplies the trees’ roots with water. Swamp taro, on the other hand, must be cultivated in artificial pits excavated down to this aquifer, mulched with leaves and other organic debris (fig. 6.4). This method of pit cultivation developed early in the sequence of atoll settlement, as Weisler (1999) demonstrated for Maloelap Atoll in the Marshalls (where pit cultivation is virtually contemporaneous with first settlement), and which Yamaguchi, Kayanne, and Yamano (2009) also showed to be the case for Majuro Atoll.




FIGURE 6.4 Excavation through the berm of a Cyrtosperma cultivation pit on Maloelap, Marshall Islands. The man is standing on the edge of the pit, with Cyrtosperma plants behind him. (Photo courtesy Marshall Weisler.)





Atoll islets are consummate man-made environments. In addition to digging Cyrtosperma pits, or on some atolls constructing seawalls for sand retention, humans have extensively modified both the physical and biotic environments of atolls. Atoll vegetation is dominated by plants purposively introduced by humans, and most of the terrestrial fauna (e.g., rats, snails, and geckos) is also synanthropic, or human-associated.27 Even atoll soils are anthropogenic. The richest soils on atoll islets are those that have formed on calcareous sands through centuries of continuous human habitation; they are essentially midden deposits that have been continually reworked through cultivation of abandoned house sites.

Lacking stone, atoll dwellers made extensive use of shell. The Lapita peoples had already developed a sophisticated shell technology (see chap. 4), which doubtless preadapted the first atoll colonists to survive without access to stone. But the range of material culture utilizing shell (and coral) expanded in atoll societies. Adzes were manufactured not just from giant Tridacna clams but also from Terebra, Mitre, and Cassis shells; a diversity of forms developed. Fishhooks were made from pearl shells, not only one-piece angling hooks, but also trolling lure rigs. Large helmet shells (Cassis cornuta) were adapted for use as containers (Dye, ed., 1987:362). Pestles and pounders for processing Pandanus were worked from coral heads or from reef limestone.

Equally essential to atoll existence were adaptations in social organization and in interisland relations and communications. In sailing and navigation, the Caroline islanders developed the most sophisticated outrigger canoe technology and star-compass systems known in Oceania (fig. 6.5).28 As Alkire (1965:171) points out, “Human survival on small islands often depends on a maximum exploitation of available resources. Emergencies [such as cyclone or tsunami damage, or drought] . . . may take large areas of the island out of production for extended periods of time.” Such conditions encouraged interisland contacts, and even the dispersion of social units across more than a single island. The Carolinean system of long-distance voyaging was one kind of adaptation to the environmental hazards of life on atolls.




FIGURE 6.5 A sailing canoe of the central Caroline Islands, as drawn by the early nineteenth-century French artist Louis Choris, who accompanied the Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue. (Collection of the author.)





LATER PREHISTORY IN WESTERN MICRONESIA


While questions of origins and cultural sequences have often dominated Micronesian archaeology, prehistorians are increasingly engaged in reconstructing prehistoric sociopolitical systems. One might suppose that the accounts of early Western observers and later ethnographers would be sufficient to understand traditional Micronesian societies, but such is far from the case. In the Marianas Islands, Spanish contact began with Magellan in A.D. 1521, and by 1668 a permanent Spanish settlement was flourishing on Guam. Over the following two decades, the indigenous Chamorro people were reduced to a mere fraction of their original population, their settlement patterns forcibly disrupted as they were resettled in villages formed around newly constructed churches; their culture was irrevocably transformed. Elsewhere in Micronesia, contact was not as early or always as brutal in its consequences, but successive Spanish, German, Japanese, and American mercantile, missionary, and colonial incursions exacted their toll. Thus ethnographic accounts such as the monumental German Südsee-Expedition (Thilenius 1913–36) document societies already transformed—sometimes radically—through decades or centuries of depopulation and sociopolitical upheaval. It therefore falls to archaeology to inquire into the nature of these societies prior to Western intrusion, and how they changed over the millennia.


LATTE AND SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN THE MARIANASScattered across the Marianas archaeological landscape are numerous double rows of three to seven hewn limestone columns or uprights each, the columns often surmounted by carved capstones; these structures are called latte in the Chamorro language (fig. 6.6). The columns and capstones, or capitals, were quarried from exposures of upraised reef limestone; quarry sites with unfinished columns and capstones in situ have been recorded. A few eyewitness accounts from the early Spanish period associate latte with dwellings, such as that from the Miguel de Legaspi expedition of 1565: “Their houses are high, well kept and well made. [They] stand the height of a man off the ground, atop large stone pillars, upon which they lay the flooring” (quoted in Morgan 1988:119). Latte drew the attention of early investigators like Hornbostel (Thompson 1932) and Spoehr (1957), and continue to attract archaeological work, figuring prominently in debates on Chamorro sociopolitical organization.29




FIGURE 6.6 The Tapony latte site on Guam, Marianas Islands. Note the row of standing uprights and the two large mortars in the foreground. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





Latte sites, found on all of the main islands in the Marianas group, vary considerably in form, size, and layout but consistently follow the same basic pattern of two parallel rows of upright columns with a rectangular plan. Based on a sample of 234 latte sets on Guam, Graves (1986b:table 5) showed that the number of columns ranges from 6 (3 per row) to 14 (7 per row), with the most common number of columns being 8 (152 sets, or 65 percent of the sample). Butler’s sample from the small island of Aguiguan is similar, although the mean number of columns there is 10 (1988:table 9.1). In both samples, there was only a single site with 14 columns. Other features, such as the height of columns and the area encompassed by the rows, also vary. Smaller latte have shaft heights of less than 1 meter, but heights in the 2- to 3-meter range are not uncommon; the impressive House of Taga site on Tinian has columns 5.33 meters high. The number of columns correlates with interior surface area, which ranges from about 18 square meters in small latte up to 61 square meters or more in the largest cases.

Latte sets typically occur in clusters, presumably representing hamlets or villages; Morgan (1988) illustrates several typical plans. Small clusters have only a few latte sets, whereas others such as the Mochong site have as many as 52 sets. The long axes of latte usually parallel the coastline, and there is some formality of community patterning. In the Taga site, the imposing House of Taga sits midway along a single alignment of latte structures, all parallel to the coast, and faces a single isolated latte seaward of it, the latter perhaps having some special function. At Mochong, the largest latte (a 14-column structure) is likewise centrally situated.

Excavations at latte complexes provide data on chronology and function. Graves (1986b) argues that latte are securely dated to as early as A.D. 1000–1100. For the northern and more marginal islands of Pagan and Sarigan, Athens (2011) suggests that latte construction did not begin until around A.D. 1300. The quantities of residential midden surrounding these structures—including Marianas Plain Ware potsherds, other artifacts, and shell and bone refuse—make it clear that they were habitations. Numerous burials are directly associated with latte, primarily of adults and with both sexes about equally represented. The nature of the perishable superstructures that latte supported is a matter of speculation, but some kind of A-frame structure seems likely. Figure 6.7 shows Morgan’s conjectural reconstruction of such a pole-and-thatch building atop the truly monumental House of Taga latte.




FIGURE 6.7 Reconstruction of the House of Taga latte site. (From Morgan 1988, courtesy of W. N. Morgan.)





Based on evidence obtained from excavation at two adjacent latte structures in northern Guam, where there were striking differences in the distribution of ceramics, faunal remains, fishhooks, and other artifacts, Bayman et al. (2012:267) argue that there was “an institutionalized system of gendered labor.” Further: “Differences in craft and subsistence activities at the two adjacent and contemporaneous latte buildings imply that their occupants were members of a single cooperative household” (267). Other work at latte sites by Dixon et al. (2006:67) showed “sharing of food preparation, cooking and storage, eating, tool manufacture and use, and human burial between habitations regardless of structure size or date of occupation.”

Latte provide significant archaeological evidence for the development of Chamorro social complexity during the last millennium. The nature of Chamorro society is debatable, with Thompson (1945) arguing for a three-class status hierarchy and other scholars such as Cordy (1983) suggesting that only two classes (chiefs and commoners) were present. Early contact-period records are so vague as to permit either argument. Graves (1986b:149) inferred that latte were the residences of “high-ranking members of kin-based corporate groups, . . . [who] could have best afforded the expenditure of resources in support of the additional labor required to construct latte sets, labor most likely drawn from low-ranking families within the lineage as a form of solidarity and support.” Certainly such a model fits with known ideological uses of monumental architecture to differentiate social strata in other Oceanic societies. Drawing on ethnographic data on the cultural significance of height in Oceanic societies (greater height correlates with higher rank or with sacredness), Graves (1986b:153) suggests that the construction of particularly large and high latte sets such as the House of Taga may reflect “the elaboration of another level of status ranking among a limited set of communities on Tinian and Rota.”

Graves’s model was challenged by Craib (1986), who argued that all residences in the late prehistoric period were raised on latte and that the use of these structures was therefore not confined to an elite class.30 Indeed, Craib (1986:173) suggests the archaeological pattern of latte is consistent with “a society lacking a centralized authority and . . . instead, organized on a local autonomous level.” Following Craib’s lead, the concept of heterarchy, or horizontal differentiation among local corporate groups—each competing with the others through ritual exchange—might provide a better model for late prehistoric Chamorro society than one of hierarchy. Moreover, Hunter-Anderson and Butler (1995:35) suggest that latte may have served “more than one function, simultaneously and over time.” They argue that latte sets, when not used to support dwellings, may have been material symbols legitimizing land claims or places in which to bury deceased lineage members. We have not heard the last word on this debate, which may require further fieldwork such as extensive, fine-grained horizontal excavation to resolve.


THE TERRACED LANDSCAPES OF PALAUNowhere else in the Pacific does one encounter such totalizing transformations of volcanic landscapes as in Palau, where entire ridges, hills, and valley slopes were completely reworked and shaped. In 1976 I spent a few days conducting a reconnaissance survey of several terrace complexes in the Airai region of southern Babeldaob. Slashing my way through tall savannah grass, then scrambling up 3- or 4-meter-high terrace facings, I was astounded by the sheer scale of these marvelous architectonic works (fig. 6.8). While the statues of Easter Island and the artificial islets of Nan Madol are often called the greatest monumental constructions in the Pacific, these pale in comparison to the Palauan earthworks. The enigmatic puzzle posed by the terraced landscapes of Palau have finally begun to yield their secrets to archaeology.




FIGURE 6.8 The terraced landscape at Airai, Babeldaob, Palau, showing a crown-and-brim arrangement surmounting a series of terraces; the scale is indicated by the author at the base of the first terrace. As is typical of these terraced landscapes, the dominant vegetation consists of swordgrass and scrub Pandanus. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The Palau terraces cover extensive areas on the principal island of Babeldaob (fig. 6.9), many of which were initially surveyed, and some later tested, by Osborne (1966, 1979). Osborne describes the characteristic form of the upper hilltop terraces as follows:

At many of the larger sites is found an arrangement of the penultimate and ultimate terraces which conforms to a widespread pattern. The two superior terracings resemble a hat, and I have adopted the descriptive terminology therefrom. The final terrace remnant I have called the crown, and the next to the final one the brim. . . . A few crowns possess a central depression or pond which could have served as a water storage reservoir, or as a semisubterranean defensive or other structure. At one end of the crown is often seen the peak, a small embankment which runs the width of the crown. . . . They appear to be defensive, a small redoubt embankment or breastwork. The brim and crown terraces contribute a spectacular quality to the Babeldaob skyline: when viewed from a distance they have the quality of Mexican pyramids. (1966:151)




FIGURE 6.9 Aerial photograph of a terraced landscape at Aimeliik, Babeldaob, Palau. Note the double crown surmounting the terraces. (Photo courtesy Jolie Liston.)





Significant advances in our understanding of the chronology and function of these massive earthworks have come from CRM archaeological investigations associated with the construction of the circum-island Compact Road on Babeldaob (Liston 2009, 2013). Excavations at a number of earthwork complexes, augmented by an impressive 213 radiocarbon dates and an extensive program of coring wetlands to obtain paleoenvironmental records, have allowed a four-phase sequence of earthwork construction to be defined for Babeldoab. Initial human use of the island’s interior for shifting cultivation begins around 1250 B.C. and continues until about 450 B.C., when the first earthworks appear on the landscape. Liston succinctly summarizes the ensuing “Earthwork Era” in terms of three phases:

This approximately 1200-year long era is divided into three loosely bounded phases. The Early Phase (ca. 2400–2150 calBP) refer to a period of growth and development of a variety of earthwork shapes and functions. The Middle Phase (ca. 2150–1500 calBP) saw the advent of monumental architecture in the form of massive earth structures and large expanses of modified terrain. The Late Phase (ca. 1500–1200 calBP) marks the decline of the powerful interior districts accompanied by the comparatively minor construction of inland earthworks beyond the old district boundaries. (2009:69)

The final period in Palau’s sequence is called the Stonework Era (ca. A.D. 1250–1800), during which “the population returned to a coastal settlement pattern and a subsistence economy based on pondfield cultivation” (Liston 2009:69).

What purposes these massive earthworks served has been vigorously debated. Potsherds lie everywhere on them, as I observed during my Airai survey, but often these are in reworked contexts such as terrace fill. Most likely, the terrace complexes had multiple functions and internal spatial differentiation. Many terraces—especially those cascading down hillsides—may have had an agricultural function; the disposal of residential refuse from habitation terraces (perhaps as mulch?) could account for the widespread distribution of potsherds. The crown-and-brim arrangements seem to have had some defensive function, or possibly they were centers of ritual activity. Liston (2009:67) reports that “whole or almost complete ceramic vessels” have been recovered in earthworks where they “are found between burial pits, on small pavings potentially associated with interments, on prepared surfaces and in caches beneath earthwork construction fill,” as seen for example in figure 6.10.




FIGURE 6.10 Whole pots on a prepared surface under earthwork fill in a terrace complex at Roismelech, Babeldaob, Palau. (Photo by C. T. Emesiochel, courtesy of Jolie Liston.)





The history of human occupation of the interior of Babeldaob Island, which begins with low-intensity shifting cultivation around 1250 B.C., then moves through phases of increasingly intensive cultivation and massive earthworks, and ends with abandonment of the interior and a move back to the coastal margins of the island around A.D. 750 seems to represent a classic “boom and bust” cycle. Intensified cultivation of the interior apparently led to the degradation of inland soils, which may in turn have precipitated a population decline. Meanwhile, erosion and alluvial deposition along the coastal margins created new opportunities for pondfield cultivation. As elsewhere in the Pacific, dynamic coupling of human activities and the natural environment on Babeldaob played out in a reciprocal feedback manner.

Although less pervasive than the ubiquitous terraces, a second category of monumental architecture in Palau also commands attention: anthropomorphic stone monoliths (fig. 6.11), distributed primarily on Babeldaob but also on Oreor (Koror) Island.31 These range from small uprights only 40 centimeters in height to larger ones, reaching 2.93 meters; they are generally made of andesite. A variety of human face designs are represented, including an “owl” face, a “fanged mouth” face, and a “quadruped-face” combination. At Melekeok on the east coast of Babeldaob a group of nine stone sculptures is known as the Great Faces. The single most impressive megalithic complex is Bairulchau near the northern tip of Babeldaob. Here, situated on a leveled plaza south of a large terraced crown, are fifty-two megaliths (fig. 6.12). Twenty-five of these are arranged in a colonnade extending over 70 meters. These colonnaded stones have shallow grooves on their top surfaces, seemingly to receive horizontal wooden beams for some kind of immense structure. Morgan (1988:16) and Osborne (1979:178–80) both suggested that the Bairulchau colonnade represents an early version of the traditional Palauan bai, or village council house. Also present on the Bairulchau site are six large carved Great Faces with rather demonic appearances. Osborne excavated at Bairulchau but obtained only two radiocarbon dates with widely differing ages, 1800 ± 80 and 285 ± 80 B.P., leaving the chronology of the site unresolved.




FIGURE 6.11 An “owl”-face stone sculpture at Ngereklngong, Ngeremlengui State, Palau. (Photo courtesy J. Van Tilburg.)





FIGURE 6.12 The Bairulchau site on Babeldaob, with its megalithic carvings. (Photo courtesy J. Van Tilburg.)





The chronology of the Great Faces and other megaliths and their function(s) within prehistoric Palau society remain conjectural and speculative. Oral traditions suggest they may be guardian deities, and one category of megalith is termed chesuch, “owl”; other names have sexual connotations. Van Tilburg (1991:57) sees the Palauan sculptural tradition as “an integrated expression of local artistic concepts demonstrating formal and symbolic continuity as well as [a] transformation over time.” She believes that there are stylistic and iconographic connections between the megaliths and the designs found on ethnographically documented bai.


THE “YAPESE EMPIRE”Yap occupies an ambiguous position in Micronesian culture history. The Yapese language long defied classification as either Western Malayo-Polynesian or Oceanic, because it has extensively borrowed from both of these groups (Ross 1996a). This linguistic ambiguity is not surprising, for ethnographically Yap was the hub of an amazing long-distance communication network, referred to as the “Yapese Empire” (Hage and Harary 1991:17–18, 105–8; 1996:30–35). To the southwest, Yap was connected with Palau, where aragonitic limestone quarries produced the famous stone “money” essential to internal exchange relationships in Yap (Fitzpatrick 2001, 2007; Gilliland 1975). The quarrying of these stone discs evidently began in precontact times but was greatly elaborated after Western contact, partly due to the introduction of metal tools. A period of “hyperinflation” followed, with the stone discs becoming larger and larger (fig. 6.13). Fitzpatrick (2007:137) writes, “Exchange between Yap and Palau (and the extension of these interactions with Outer Islanders and Europeans) appears to have developed as a means to enhance prestige in the competitive political environments of both island societies and maintain social (and probably kin) relationships. . . . [T]hese relationships were not asymmetrical, but bilateral and mutually beneficial and involved two-way movements of material goods, cross-cultural marriage, and alliance formation.”




FIGURE 6.13 A Yapese stone “money” disc of aragonitic limestone in a village plaza. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





To the east of Yap, an elaborate communication structure linked Yap’s Gagil District with a succession of fourteen Carolinean atolls, stretching from Ulithi all the way to Puluwat and Namonuito, a total distance of 1,200 kilometers. This exchange system, the sawei, has been described as “a bicultural system of tribute offerings, gift exchange, and disaster relief” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). It also resulted in considerable “male-based gene flow,” as Lum (1998) showed by analysis of molecular genetic variation in central and Eastern Micronesia. Further long-distance exchange relations linked the Carolinean atolls with the Marianas archipelago (and thus indirectly with Yap).

The “Yapese Empire” was simultaneously a system of areal integration and a prestige-goods exchange network, in which certain elite groups on Yap controlled the flow of goods necessary for their social reproduction. As Hage and Harary, who have studied the system from a graph-theory point of view, describe it:

In the Yapese tribute system, 14 low, coral, islands and atolls stretching some 1,200 kilometers eastward were joined to the Gagil District of Yap by three types of gift relation. In the pitigil tamol relation, the low islanders paid tribute to the highest-ranking matrilineal chief of Gagil. In the sawei relation, individual low island matrilineages paid “rent” to individual Gagil patrilineages that owned (at least nominally) individual districts of the low islands. In a symbolic replication of intercaste relations, the low island tenants stood as “children” to their Yapese landlords and “fathers.” In the mepel relation, low island matrilineages made religious offerings to Yapese ancestral ghosts. Tribute gifts consisted of woven fiber cloth, mats, coconut-fiber rope, and shell valuables. The sawei gift was reciprocated by “optional” Yapese gifts of food, including taro, yams, sweet potatoes, and bananas, craft goods, and raw materials such as basalt, timber, and turmeric, all of which were scarce or unavailable on the low islands. (1996:31)

The navigation and sailing technology enabling the sawei was controlled by the atoll dwellers. The system had advantages both for the Gagil people of Yap, who used the externally obtained prestige goods to enhance their status locally, and for the atoll dwellers, who needed access to high-island resources. What were the origins of this remarkable long-distance network? How long has it been in place, and has its configuration changed over time? Data from excavations on a number of atolls within the ambit of the “Yapese Empire” are beginning to provide tentative answers, although much more work is required.

On Ngulu Atoll between Yap and Palau, Intoh (1984) tested deeply stratified cultural deposits, the earliest of which predate A.D. 300. Connections with both Palau and Yap are indicated by potsherds of Palauan Ware, Yapese Early Calcareous Ware, Yapese Unlaminated Ware, and Yapese Laminated Ware. The Yapese pottery predominates, but a phase of regular contact with Palau between A.D. 800 and 1400 is also indicated. Intoh (1991, 1996) excavated as well on Fais Atoll to the east of Yap, where she found stratified deposits dating to around A.D. 300. She found a direct connection with Yap in about a dozen pieces of greenschist, a rock type occurring within the Micronesian area exclusively on Yap. The settlement of Fais was presumably from Yap, as a high-island origin is indicated by the presence of pig bone. Continuous contact with Yap is indicated by more than eight hundred potsherds of Yapese origin, including CST and later laminated wares.32

On Mogmog Islet of Ulithi Atoll, Descantes (2005) found evidence for the importation of Yapese ceramics into Ulithi, beginning as early as the seventh century A.D. Using mineralogy and chemical composition analyses, Descantes sourced the Yapese ceramics to the Gachpar area. He also suggests that exchange contacts between Yap and Ulithi intensified around A.D. 1400.

Additional evidence from within the “Yapese Empire” network comes from Faraulep, Woleai, and Lamotrek Atolls located farther to the east. Fujimura and Alkire (1984) test-excavated on these islands in 1975–76. Faraulep and Woleai produced only shallow deposits, suggesting a late protohistoric settlement, but Lamotrek had well-stratified deposits, with radiocarbon dates to A.D. 1000–1100 and possibly earlier. Pottery of both Yapese and Palauan origin was recovered from the Sabaig and Polipi sites on Lamotrek (Dickinson 1984). In the excavators’ words, “Ceramic and stone materials, obviously of foreign origin, indicate that voyaging and trading ties have long existed . . . between Lamotrek and Yap, Palau, and Truk. Ties to all of these volcanic islands appear to be of equal antiquity, dating to at least A.D. 1200” (Fujimura and Alkire 1984:125).

Lingenfelter (1975) and Alkire (1980) offered explanations for the origins and function of the sawei system, seeing this alternatively as a matter of political power relations or as an economic system of tribute relations. Hunter-Anderson and Zan (1996) critiqued their models and suggested a new explanation. They see the sawei as having originated within Yap itself, where “competition over land . . . gave rise to a cultural regime characterized by warfare, shifting defensive-offensive alliances among socioterritorial units, and conventions by which socioterritorial units communicated their worthiness as alliance partners” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). By assuming sawei obligations with the atoll dwellers, the Gagil people purportedly strengthened their internal position in Yap, communicating their “worth as an alliance capable of supporting the large Carolinian dependency” (Hunter-Anderson and Zan 1996:1). While intriguing, Hunter-Anderson and Zan’s model is no more compelling than the alternatives. Indeed, Descantes’s work on the long-term history of exchange relationships between Ulithi and Yap highlights the need for a dynamic model, since the relations between these two modes clearly changed in nature over time, from “infrequent gift-giving” early on to a later “formal and intensive exchange system” (1998:264).

For Yap Island, our current archaeological knowledge is too embryonic to trace the internal sociopolitical or economic transformations linked to the external prestige-goods network. Labby (1976) advanced a model of changing modes of production (from initial shifting cultivation to intensified taro cultivation in swamps) linked to changes in social structure and land tenure that is worthy of archaeological testing through a study of changing settlement patterns.33 To date, however, work on Yapese settlement patterns has been entirely synchronic (ethnoarchaeological) or limited to minor tests of structures dating only to the proto-historic period (e.g., Hunter-Anderson 1983; Intoh and Leach 1985).

The Yapese landscape is remarkably structured, with elaborate stone constructions, including stone house platforms and stone-paved terraces with backrests that serve as meeting areas, linked by networks of paved trails connecting plazas lined with aragonite disc “money” (rai). In 1977 I had the pleasure of carrying out a reconnaissance survey in the Rull and Kanify areas on Yap Island. The density and complexity of structural remains encountered in my survey strongly impressed me with the potential for landscape archaeology on Yap. The built environment of stone constructions, and its integration with the textured mosaic of orchard gardens, swamp-taro cultivations, and grassland-savannas in the interior (the setting for clusters of burial mounds), would amply repay inves-tigation from a landscape archaeology perspective.





DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIOPOLITICAL COMPLEXITY IN THE CAROLINE HIGH ISLANDS


Across the Caroline archipelago, complex societies—marked by elaborate ranking or stratification and by economic specialization—developed exclusively on the high islands. This reflects the extreme resource limitations and restricted land area of atolls, which prohibited the buildup of sizable populations. In the Pacific islands generally, atoll societies—always ranging in the low hundreds of persons at most—never exhibited elaborate hierarchy, although some were involved in complex external exchange relationships like the sawei. But on high islands such as Pohnpei and Kosrae, populations numbering in the thousands were in place by the end of the first millennium A.D., if not earlier. The history of amalgamation and organization of these sizable—and very dense—populations under various forms of hierarchical and centralized control is a story now beginning to be tackled by archaeology.

Before turning to the specifics of sociopolitical evolution in the various islands of Eastern Micronesia, Glenn Petersen’s (2009:53–63) idea of a “breadfruit revolution” should be mentioned. Noting that breadfruit plays a fundamental role in the subsistence economies of this region, Petersen argues that it was the development of certain hybrid varieties (crosses between Artocarpus altilis and the seeded A. mariannensis) that underpinned this arboricultural “revolution.” Some of these varieties were salt-tolerant, permitting breadfruit to flourish on the atolls, while others were high-yielding and well adapted to high islands such as Pohnpei and Kosrae. Citing archaeological evidence from Chuuk, where pounders and other artifacts associated with breadfruit appear around A.D. 1200–1300, Petersen maintains that a new emphasis on breadfruit had far-reaching implications for Micronesian societies. Larger populations made possible by breadfruit’s high productivity “were successful enough to produce significant surpluses of a limited range of goods for exchange” (2009:63), leading in turn to systematic linkages across the Carolines and extending even to Yap and Palau. “Eastern Micronesian societies have become so dependent upon breadfruit that it seems fair to assume the hybridization of the two species that took place in east-central Micronesia was both a product of the peoples’ deliberate efforts and a source for profound transformation in their societies” (2009:63).


POHNPEI AND NAN MADOLAt 310 square kilometers, Pohnpei, the largest high island in central Eastern Micronesia, has a nearly circular plan, with rugged mountains rising 550 meters above sea level and a radial pattern of stream drainages. High rainfall and fertile soils supported an agricultural system based on orchards of breadfruit and other tree crops, as well as root and tuber crops (especially yams), and an extensive barrier-reef and lagoon system provided rich fishing grounds. As with most Pacific islands that suffered massive depopulation after first contact with Europeans, the maximum population of Pohnpei is not certain, but Ayres, Haun, and Severance (1979:table 17) estimate it to have been between 20,000 and 30,000, a size corresponding with many of the larger Polynesian chiefdoms. In early historic times, five independent districts (wehi) were under the control of a diarchy of sacred and secular lords (the nahmwarki and the nahnken, respectively).34 Each district was partitioned into smaller named land sections under the charge of lesser chiefs, who paid tribute to the dual paramounts through a seasonal round of feasts. A focus of these feasts was the competitive cultivation of giant yams (Dioscorea alata) using specialized techniques. While this hierarchical sociopolitical system compares favorably with many of the midrange chiefdoms of Polynesia (e.g., those of the Southern Cook Islands or the Australs), there is evidence—both in Pohnpeian oral traditions and in archaeology—for an older system in which the entire island was unified under a single dynastic rule. The seat of this ancient Saudeleur dynasty is Nan Madol, adjacent to the small islet of Temwen in the district of Madolenihmw (fig. 6.14).




FIGURE 6.14 Aerial view of part of the Nan Madol site on Pohnpei, with the Nandauwas islet and tomb complex visible in the foreground. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





William Morgan claimed that “no site in Oceania surpasses the dramatic beauty of ancient Nan Madol,” which because of its artificial islets and intervening canals has sometimes been called the “Venice of the Pacific.” Morgan wrote of how—despite having seen drawings and photos of the site beforehand—he was emotionally unprepared for the grandeur of the site when he first glimpsed it. The great tomb islet of Nandauwas (fig. 6.14), he said, is “powerfully conceived, sensitively sited, and skillfully executed. . . . Passing jungle-covered islets on both sides of the canal, we caught our first glimpses of Nandauwas’ southwest corner through the trees. A few moments later the canoe turned to the left, slowed, and stopped before the main entry landing of the west front. For several minutes I sat quietly in the boat, gazing at the magnificent west facade, the stately podium, the noble entryway, and the ascending steps that led to the interior courts, enclosures, and tombs” (Morgan 1988:68).




FIGURE 6.15 Perspective view of the Nandauwas tomb complex at Nan Madol, Pohnpei. (From Morgan 1988, courtesy of W. N. Morgan.)





Nan Madol covers 81 hectares of sheltered reef area off the southern side of Temwen Island and comprises no fewer than ninety-three artificial islets constructed of stone with coral and rubble fill, the entire complex bounded on the west, south, and east by massive seawalls or breakwaters, some of them also incorporating islets. The German ethnographer Paul Hambruch made the first accurate map of Nan Madol in 1910 (see Hambruch 1911, 1936); his cartography still forms the basis for modern surveys, which have added much fine-grained detail.35 Morgan (1988:66–67) provides a “provisional” map of Nan Madol incorporating Hambruch’s data and later information.36

Nan Madol is laid out formally, as seen in the site plan (fig. 6.16); although it developed over a long period, some degree of overall planning is evident. As the administrative center of the Saudeleur polity, the islets functioned primarily as the residences and burial facilities for members of the Saudeleur elite. Nan Madol was divided into two named sectors (this ethnographic information was obtained by Hambruch and other investigators): Madol Pah to the west (with thirty-four islets) and Madol Powe to the east (with fifty-eight islets). Four large, square islets dominate Madol Pah, a residential ward. Madol Powe, in classic binary structural opposition, was a ritual ward incorporating several large tombs as well as priestly residences. At the southeast corner of Nan Madol and dominating Madol Powe is Nandauwas, the massive royal mortuary compound of the Saudeleurs (fig. 6.17).




FIGURE 6.16 Map of the Nan Madol site complex by the German ethnographer Paul Hambruch. (From Hambruch 1911.)





FIGURE 6.17 View of the Nandauwas tomb complex from the adjacent canal. Note the distinctive style of construction using prismatic basalt columns. (Photo courtesy Steve Athens.)





Part of what makes Nan Madol so architecturally impressive—aside from its massive scale—is the use of large columnar basalt stones in wall construction. On some islets, the construction technique consisted of dry-fitting large basalt boulders; on others, a highly distinctive method of wall construction using columnar basalt slabs in a header-stretcher technique was employed. This latter technique was used in the Nandauwas tomb complex. Nandauwas islet has a base or podium measuring 79 by 63 meters; the outer enclosing walls, set back from the podium facing, rise 7.6 meters above the canal level. Within the enclosing walls are crypts, including a main central crypt, covered with columnar basalt lintel stones. M.D. McCoy et al. (2016:301) used pXRF to analyze the geochemical signature of a sample of building stones, finding that a significant quantity of the columnar basalt derived from a source on the opposite side of the island. As these authors remark, “The high transport cost of transporting PM [Pwisehn Malek] columnar basalt to Nan Madol makes it a good metric for the authority of the island’s first chiefs” (2016:301).

A tentative chronology for the construction of the Nan Madol complex has emerged from the work of Steve Athens, Bill Ayres, and others. Initial occupation at the site was coeval with human colonization of Pohnpei itself, around A.D. 1. This is possibly one reason that Nan Madol became such an important ritual center: it may be the “ur-settlement” of the island. It is conceivable that the first occupation at Nan Madol, which has been revealed by ceramic-bearing deposits within the tidal zone under artificial islet fill, consisted of stilt houses of Lapita type situated over the reef flat. By A.D. 900–1100 construction of artificially elevated islets had commenced, although this probably did not involve megalithic construction. A phase of truly megalithic building begins around A.D. 1200–1600, correlating with the Saudeleur period as recorded in Pohnpei oral traditions (Bath and Athens 1990). The central burial on Nandauwas islet was in use by A.D. 1180–1200, based on recent high-precision U/Th dating of branch coral in the building fill (M.D. McCoy et al. 2016). There was continued use of Nan Madol, and more construction, after A.D. 1650, but by the time Europeans visited in the mid-nineteenth century, the vast complex had been abandoned, with the Pohnpei people greatly fearing and respecting this sacred place.

Nan Madol is remarkable for its close correlations between oral traditions and archaeology.37 Pohnpei history is indigenously conceived as falling into four successive ages: the Age of People, the Age of Saudeleur, the Age of Nahnmwarki, and the Age of Foreigners (the period of historic contact with Europeans). Primarily associated with the Age of Saudeleur, Nan Madol is said to have been constructed by two brothers who, using supernatural powers, built it as their place of prayer. Tradition records a succession of eight Saudeleur rulers, who held supreme power over the entire island, with the different districts providing tribute. The Saudeleurs resided on Pahnkedira islet; they were interred in Nandauwas after death. Among the rituals enacted within the sacred sector of Nan Madol were ceremonial turtle sacrifice and the care of a sacred eel kept in a pond in Ideht islet. Excavations by Smithsonian Institution archaeologists in the 1960s in a mound of oven debris (the Ideht Mound) resulting from successive turtle sacrifices yielded three radiocarbon ages ranging between A.D. 1180 and 1430.

According to the oral traditions, the Age of Saudeleur and its dynasty came to an end when the last ruler, infused with arrogance, attempted to capture one of the gods, Nan Sapwe; the latter escaped to a place in the sky called Katau,38 where he inseminated a woman who bore him a son named Isokelekel. Isokelekel, after coming of age, voyaged to Pohnpei with a magical contingent of 333 warriors and engaged the last Saudeleur in battle, defeating him. Isokelekel is credited with instituting the modern chiefly system with its dual sacred-secular positions of Nahnmwarki and Nahnken.

Archaeological surveys in parts of Pohnpei outside Nan Madol, such as in the Awak Valley and the Kiti District, have added data on the distribution of megalithic “Nan Madol style” architecture of (e.g., using columnar basalt construction) and on the presence of administrative or ritual centers below the level of Nan Madol itself. Joyce Bath (1984a, 1984b) investigated the ridgetop center of Sapwtakai in the Kiti District, shown in perspective view in figure 6.18. Sapwtakai incorporates columnar basalt in its construction, with a major central tomb structure similar to that of Nan Madol. Radiocarbon dates indicate occupation at Sapwtakai from about A.D. 1325 to 1700, roughly the same time span as that for the major development of Nan Madol.




FIGURE 6.18 Perspective rendering of the Sapwtakai site in the Kiti District, Pohnpei. (After Bath and Athens 1990.)





Although the rise of complex sociopolitical structures on Pohnpei was largely a matter of internal processes, the possibility of external inputs or influences cannot be discounted. Ayres and Mauricio (1987) pointed to an unusual basalt adz from Nan Madol with closest parallels in Type I/III adz forms in Samoa, possibly an import from Western Polynesia. Pohnpei and Kosrae are the only two islands in Micronesia where kava is consumed. The Pohnpei term for this psychoactive plant, sakaw, is almost certainly a Polynesian borrowing (from te kava, with the article te being fossilized in the Pohnpeian loanword; Geraghty 1994). In short, contact between Western Polynesia (most likely Samoa) and Pohnpei seems likely, although determining its impacts is more problematic.

Several archaeologists have advanced models for the transformation of Pohnpeian society over the course of two millennia. Ayres (1990) and Bryson (1989) have explored “peer-polity interaction” theory, drawing on the concept developed by Colin Renfrew (1982). According to Ayres (1990:202), “The primary hypothesis is that Nan Madol’s development as a chiefly and priestly center reflects an evolving chiefdom that controlled a Pohnpei polity from ca. A.D. 1000 to 1500”; however, the significance of “religious motivation [i.e., ideology] versus commanded labor [coercion]” is unclear to him. Peoples inclines against a “functionalist” model in which chiefs increased their power through administrative control in favor of a coercive model: “Multilevel political structures evolved as a consequence of the geographic expansion of power of some local groups led by chiefs” (1990:299). Bath and Athens (1990), integrating Pohnpeian oral traditions with archaeological evidence, opine that there may have been a phase of centralized power (the Saudeleur period) with a four-level hierarchy that failed to sustain itself and collapsed back to a three-level system, with independent districts. Although Ayres and Haun (1985, 1990) have pointed to agricultural intensification as a significant aspect of the Pohnpeian economy, more information on the chronology of such intensification could provide critical evidence for interpreting the megalithic centers, as would better control over prehistoric population sizes and rates of change.


KOSRAE AND LELUSome 550 kilometers east-southeast of Pohnpei and closer to the equator lies Kosrae, a high island with rugged mountains (the highest peak is 629 meters above sea level), at 109 square kilometers somewhat smaller than Pohnpei. Fringing reefs encase its narrow coastal flats, but Kosrae lacks a lagoon. Fertile volcanic soils support an agroforest with breadfruit as the staple and significant plantings of giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis) under the orchard canopy.39 Politically, the island is divided into four districts, each corresponding to a major drainage basin. At initial contact with Europeans in 1824, a single paramount chief controlled Kosrae, under whom subchiefs managed individual land units called facl, which ran from the mountains to the reef. The contact population of Kosrae is debated. Most estimates have ranged around 3,000 persons, but these may underestimate the maximum population prior to the ravages of European-introduced disease. Ritter (1981) suggests that a figure of 6,000 may be more accurate, although Athens (2007a:276) doubts that the maximum population at the “time of the paramount chieftaincy formed in the fifteenth century” exceeded 3,000.

In 1824, La Coquille, under the command of Louis Duperrey, arrived off the eastern coast of Kosrae. The French explorers were taken to a remarkable stone-walled “city” situated on the point of a small islet named Lelu, capital and chiefly center of the Kosrae polity. In the words of First Officer Dumont d’Urville, “As we approached the shores of Lelu, a new scene presented itself to us: beautiful houses enclosed by high walls, well-paved streets, and on the beach was gathered the entire population of Lelu, at least 800 people, who had come to be present at our disembarkation” (quoted in Cordy 1993:54). The French could hardly believe the scale of construction, as remarked by the ship’s doctor, René Lesson: “We observed with total bewilderment a wall, composed of blocks, of truly cyclopean size, and we wondered how and why they had been able to erect such masses to a 15 foot height. The elegant houses of these islanders lined the streets on elevated mounds” (quoted in Cordy 1993:55). A view of these houses from a later Russian expedition is shown in figure 6.19.




FIGURE 6.19 A residential compound at Lelu, Kosrae, as recorded during the early nineteenth-century Russian visit of Lütke. (From Lütke 1835.)





Similar to Nan Madol in its construction on a reef flat, the presence of canals, and its megalithic construction, yet different in other important details, Lelu was the residence of the paramount Kosrae chief and of the facl subchiefs, who were required to live with him. Fortunately, much ethnographic information about Lelu and its occupants was obtained from the visits not only of La Coquille but also of later European ships, such as that of the Russian explorer Fyedor Lütke in 1827.40 By the late nineteenth century, Kosrae was severely depopulated, the traditional sociopolitical structure had collapsed, and Lelu had become an abandoned ruin.

In its newly ruined state, Lelu was visited by F.W. Christian (1899), who drew the first map of the site. In 1909–10, when the German Südsee-Expedition explored Kosrae, Paul Hambruch (1919) accurately mapped the ruins and excavated in several tombs, and Ernst Sarfert (1919) obtained a great deal of additional “salvage” ethnographic material. These early studies have been expanded with a thorough survey by Cordy (1985, 1993) and deep stratigraphic excavations by Athens (Athens, ed., 1995), which yielded early CST pottery at the base of several residential compounds. Morgan (1988) described the site from an architect’s viewpoint.

The ruins of Lelu, covering 27 hectares, are made up of a series of walled compounds, most of which were residential but some of which contain tombs. A canal traverses the center of the site: “Navigable throughout at high tide, the canal system gave maritime access to many of the compounds and numerous boat landings. Tribute of food and goods from the land sections on Kosrae were brought by boat to Leluh daily” (Morgan 1988:97). Cordy and Athens outlined a construction sequence for Lelu based on radiocarbon dates they obtained, as shown in figure 6.20. Initial occupation or use of the area around the first century A.D. is indicated by the early pottery; it is possible that there was a stilt-house village in this vicinity. However, construction of the artificial islets and walled compounds did not commence until about A.D. 1250–1400, in the Finlas sector. From A.D. 1400 to 1600 there was a major building effort, with two components. One set of compounds (the Finbota to Katem area) was built using stacked prismatic basalt walls, and a western extension was built on the north end of the island. Walls enclosing the Kinyeir and Lurun compounds rose to heights of 6 meters. This left an open space in the middle of the site, which was filled in during the next phase, from about A.D. 1600 to 1650. A change in construction style ensued, incorporating rounded basalt boulders, with walls constructed to heights as great as 4 to 5 meters. Finally, the remaining compounds were constructed from A.D. 1650 to 1800, using mixed coral stones and with low wall height (1–1.4 m). Recent U/Th dating of corals used in the construction of three tombs at Lelu yielded ages between A.D. 1310 and 1387 (Richards et al. 2015).




FIGURE 6.20 The construction sequence for the Lelu site, as determined by Ross Cordy. (After Cordy 1993.)





Lelu, which required a great deal of labor to build and which also evinces centralized planning, holds a key to understanding the development of a complex chiefdom polity on Kosrae. Cordy (1993) proposed a model for the evolution of Kosraen society in which an older (pre–A.D. 1000) system with only two social strata (local chiefs and commoners) was first transformed through district-level unification and the addition of a third tier. Finally, through islandwide consolidation, a fourth tier was imposed, that of the island paramount. Cordy links this final change to the period of greatest construction at Lelu, between A.D. 1400 and 1600. He sees population growth leading to resource imbalance combined with competition between district-level polities as key processes underlying these sociopolitical changes. In his words:

I suggest that certain areas included more land (e.g., a larger valley) enabling the growth of a larger population center and thus providing more warriors. Such areas would have advantages in competing society situations and could eventually incorporate neighbors (through conquest, marriage, etc.). As geographic area would increase, local chiefs needed to supervise (to collect information for the ruler and to disseminate information for the ruler). This need for a lower decision-making level would lead to three strata (ruler, local chief, and commoner).

I suggest some of these “district” society areas would also have more contiguous flat, fertile land, enabling greater populations to build up. Lelu and Utwe particularly fit this pattern. Population imbalances among the competing “district” societies would in turn be critical factors in war. I suggest they tipped the balance in favor of Utwe and Lelu, and finally in favor of Lelu. With island-wide conquest, territorial and population sizes would increase requiring three decision-making levels (king, high chiefs controlling many [facl], their managers controlling individual [facl]). Accordingly, four [social] strata would form. (Cordy 1993:259)

Cordy calls his model a “competition hypothesis” in which “population imbalances” are the key variable leading to territorial conquest, a model in many respects similar to one proposed by Peoples (1990). Ueki (1990:fig. 2) advances a similar model for the evolution of Kosraen society and social stratification, in which population increases triggered changes in the system of land management as well as increased competition over rights to land and sea. The latter in turn led to conflict and territorial conquest, and ultimately to the emergence of a new class of managers.

A definitive test of the Cordy-Peoples-Ueki model requires evidence from sites other than Lelu itself; a broad settlement-pattern approach throughout Kosrae is necessary. Ueki (1990:311–12) discusses some limited evidence of this kind, based on a survey in the Utwa Valley, where he identified the Nefalil site as a district-level center dating to between A.D. 940 and 1470. Athens’s landscape archaeology approach also provides evidence to test the Kosrae model (Athens, ed., 1995; Athens 2007b), with evidence for population growth and for agricultural intensification and changing patterns of land use. Based on 109 radiocarbon dates from Kosrae Island, Athens derived a cumulative frequency plot of the calibrated age probabilities (fig. 6.21). While such a graph does not directly track human population numbers, it may reflect general occupation density over a landscape. Athens (1995:27) observes that “the earliest inflection point [in the curve] just after 500 A.D. is interpreted to represent the first indication that population is starting to grow on the main island. This rate of growth continues, with perhaps something of a spurt about 800 A.D., until about A.D. 1200. At A.D. 1200 the frequency of radiocarbon dates increases sharply, suggesting a rapidly growing population.” The fit between this proxy population curve and the Lelu construction chronology is remarkably good, with the major inflection in the curve and the onset of megalithic construction both occurring around A.D. 1200–1300. This finding offers strong support for population growth playing an important role in the transformation of Kosrae society.




FIGURE 6.21 Radiocarbon frequency distribution for Kosrae Island. (After Athens 1995.)





External influence possibly affected the course of sociopolitical evolution on Kosrae. Several scholars have pointed to similarities between Nan Madol and Lelu, suggesting that there was a connection between the two groups of people responsible for their construction. For example, the mythical Isokelekel—overthrower of the Saudeleur dynasty of Nan Madol—has been identified in some sources as coming from Kosrae. But the name used for Isokelekel’s homeland in the Pohnpei traditions is “Katau,” which refers to a mythical “sky world” and not to any particular island. Indeed, Goodenough (1986:562) suggests that if anything the direction of influence may have been the other way around: “If the massive stone structures at Lele on Kosrae have any connection with those of Nan Madol on Ponape, the direction of influence must have been . . . from Ponape, perhaps along with the introduction of kava drinking.” Now that construction chronologies have been archaeologically determined for the two sites, this scenario seems more likely, since the major construction phase at Lelu lags behind that at Nan Madol by one to two centuries. Hence in addition to demographic and social pressures within Kosrae itself, external connections between Kosrae and Pohnpei may have played some role in Kosrae’s history of sociopolitical transformation.


CHUUKThe third high island within the Carolines, Chuuk, poses a striking contrast to Pohnpei and Kosrae; it exhibits none of the megalithic architecture or other material manifestations of stratified, complex chiefdoms found in the latter two islands. Ethnographically, Chuuk society was not strongly hierarchical and had a low degree of political integration. Peoples (1990:294) points out that the typical autonomous political unit in Chuuk was small, about 0.8 square kilometer in area and containing perhaps 100 people; there were many such units distributed throughout the islands of Chuuk Lagoon. Archaeological evidence supports the idea that this kind of system also was in place in prehistory. As King and Parker (1984:456) write, “We see no evidence in the archaeological record known thus far to indicate that efforts to impose a three or four strata society in Truk, if they occurred, were ever successful.” What one does clearly see in the Chuuk archaeological record is the pervasiveness of raiding and interpolity warfare, manifested in numerous forts and in residential sites situated in naturally defensive positions (Rainbird 1996).

Why did Chuuk society not follow the same kinds of pathways of sociopolitical change leading to increasing integration and hierarchy that we see in Pohnpei and Kosrae? Peoples (1990) suggests that the answer lies in Chuuk’s geography of many small, dispersed islands rather than one larger island, which permitted defeated groups simply to flee to another island. “The warring ‘mini-chiefdom’ stage persisted on Truk because no [one] chiefdom was in a position to permanently incorporate and subordinate its neighbors. Losing groups had other choices as well as a chance to acquire allies on other islands for a reconquest” (Peoples 1990:298). Moreover, due to the small size and resource limitations of the individual Chuuk high islands, none ever amassed a critically large population base.





SEVEN


Polynesia


