Big Structures and Large Processes in Oceanic Prehistory



Historically grounded huge comparisons of big structures and large processes help establish what must be explained, attach the possible explanations to their context in time and space, and sometimes actually improve our understanding of those structures and processes.

CHARLES TILLY, Big Structures, Large Processes,

Huge Comparisons (1984)





SOMETIMES, THE MERE telling of a history is sufficient. Much satisfaction and pleasure may be had from teasing out the tiny dramas of human existence, as well as the grand sweep of the longue durée. In this sense, the preceding chapters stand fully on their own, requiring no further summation or exegesis. But an anthropological history carries the weight of a proud tradition of comparative analysis. Anthropology’s history (as opposed, with much deference to the late Greg Dening, to “history’s anthropology”)1 can have no special claim on historical understanding without comparison. And so, in this final chapter, I offer some observations on the long run of Pacific history, observations not tied to any one time or place, because indeed there are trends and movements that transcend the particular. It is in these “big structures” and “large processes” that any deeper insights may be discovered. They invite us to embark on a voyage beyond time to see—in the common experiences of human existence—some larger truths that might in small ways enlighten us.





VOYAGING AND THE HUMAN “CONQUEST” OF THE PACIFIC


The history of the Pacific is more than anything a history of voyages, and all that word entails: curiosity, courage, skill, technique, stamina, doubt, hope, and more. In their initial expansion out of Africa, commencing perhaps 100,000 years ago, our ancestors—modern Homo sapiens sapiens—moved on foot, spreading into the Near East, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and Asia. Their expansion paused, for a time, on Asiatic shores now drowned beneath the warm waters of the Sunda Sea. But neither curiosity nor ingenuity could be kept in check forever; in due course some of those coastal-dwelling people invented the means to begin moving out beyond the continental margins, into the island world of the Pacific. In reality, we know next to nothing about this earliest phase in the history of seafaring technology, other than that it had developed at least by 47,000 years ago. But the explosive appearance of human populations throughout Sahul and Near Oceania at this time can only be explained by the existence of some forms of simple watercraft. Bark-boats, rafts, simple dugouts—all of these are possibilities; to say more is sheer speculation. Whatever the technology, it was sufficient to move people across water gaps of 90 kilometers or more. In most cases, the voyaging targets were visible from the starting shore: the object loomed above the horizon, enticing them with promises of a rainforest rich in edible marsupials, birds, and reptiles, or of pristine reefs where mollusks and sea urchins teemed.

Further development of voyaging technology and skills was painfully slow. Twenty thousand years after the first humans moved into the Bismarck Archipelago and the Solomons, we have the simplest hints of advances in voyaging (or at least in the frequency of movement between islands). The evidence is indirect and highly inferential: the appearance of obsidian hundreds of kilometers beyond its source and of animals “translocated” from their endemic homes. But something more profound is hinted at, a subtle difference in the way that people were beginning to perceive their island environments as well as themselves. As Chris Gosden observed, rather than always moving themselves to new resources, people began to apply voyaging technology to the movement of resources. The idea seems simple, almost trivial, but it underlies all that would come later, for the “conquest” of Remote Oceania could never have been accomplished without the ability to transport an arkful of biotic resources, from dogs and pigs to taro and breadfruit seedlings.

Transport distances in Remote Oceania are an order of magnitude greater than those within the Near Oceanic “voyaging nursery.” They could never be successfully crossed with the simple technology we infer for early humans in the Pleistocene, or even the early Holocene. Sophisticated open-water craft were called for; insofar as we can reconstruct its history, the sailing outrigger canoe complex emerged in the relatively calm waters of island Southeast Asia, perhaps between 4000 and 2000 B.C. The early Austronesian voyaging canoe, the *wangka, which we reconstruct largely from linguistic and comparative ethnographic evidence, was a marvel of “neolithic” technology. Its hull was probably a simple dugout (perhaps with greater freeboard achieved by lashing on separate washstrakes); the addition of the outrigger float gave it both stability and the possibility of carrying added cargo (on platforms lashed to the outrigger booms). The lanteen sail made of plaited mats harnessed the wind, freeing the canoe from mere drifting currents. The sailing outrigger canoe became a sharp instrument of exploration, discovery, and colonization, in the space of a few short millennia propelling people to the farthest ends of the Pacific Ocean.

The great expansion of Austronesian-speaking voyagers into Remote Oceania, after about 1200 B.C., was underwritten by more than just new and vastly improved technology. There was as well a new ideology, a different way of looking at the ocean, of envisioning lands the eye could not see but which the mind could populate with generations of descendants. This was the vision not of hunter-gatherers always moving on to new resources but of horticultural people tied to the land, for whom cultivated territory provided the fundamental basis of social life. This was, moreover, an ideology bound to a particular kind of social structure, one in which siblings were ranked by birth order and elder brothers became founders of descent lines, claiming the best lands and other resources as their own. Thus while the human settlement of Oceania is often thought of in maritime terms, as constituting a succession of great voyaging feats, these voyages were also the means to an end: the discovery of new landscapes that could be claimed, named, divided, planted, managed, and inherited.

Islanders were not content to always sit at home and tend their crops, or fish the reefs and lagoons of the inshore waters. In exploring and populating the Pacific, they gradually built up another ideology, one of the sea as highway, with myriad routes connecting one’s own island to many others. Sometimes these highways were so long and the voyages necessary to traverse them so arduous that the desire or ability to keep up contacts with one’s relations on other islands gradually waned. Thus the most remote islands and archipelagoes of the Pacific (such as Rapa Nui and Hawai‘i) after a time became isolated worlds unto themselves. But throughout much of the Pacific, a complex network of interconnections developed, maintained by seafarers and wayfinders who became transportation specialists, keepers of esoteric knowledge of star paths and wind compasses, such as Tupaia, who met Captain Cook in Tahiti, or the modern Satawal navigator Mau Piailug. These networks were not random; indeed, they became highly regularized through repeated economic and social transactions. By the time Europeans entered the Pacific, most (but not all) of its islands were connected to at least some other islands through intermeshed networks.

Yet the reticulate grid of complex voyaging networks linking many Pacific islands in late prehistory should not mislead us to conclude that things were always in flux, that the deeper history of cultural, linguistic, and biological differentiation among Pacific peoples had been wholly swamped by a frenzy of social (or, for that matter, sexual) intercourse. Contact was important, for trade and exchange, and sometimes for marriage partners. Most often, contact was with nearby islanders who shared a common history and who were closely related—linguistically, biologically, and culturally. Thus Tongans voyaged to Samoa and Fiji; the people of Nendö interacted mostly with those of nearby Utupua, Vanikoro, and the Reef Islands; the Yapese went to Palau or the closer atolls of the central Carolines. Moreover, interisland connections, although frequently valorized in song and myth, were the purview of a privileged few; most members of Oceanic societies commanded neither the skills nor the physical equipment (voyaging canoes were expensive items of property) to make overseas voyages themselves. Further, would-be voyagers were not always welcomed at their intended destinations: the Mangaians, for one, aggressively repulsed efforts at contact. A great deal of linguistic, cultural, and biological distinctiveness was thus maintained—and often consciously enhanced—by the peoples of the many Pacific islands.





HISTORY WRITTEN IN THE PRESENT: CORRELATIONS BETWEEN LANGUAGE, BIOLOGY, AND CULTURE


Despite the fundamental tenet of twentieth-century anthropology that race (i.e., human biological variation), language, and culture are independent, it has long been evident to historical anthropologists that for many regions of the world, and for certain periods of time, biology, language, and culture have significantly covaried. In a pioneering application of phylogenetic models in anthropology, Kimball Romney argued:

Physical type and language, we would say, have no causal relationship; there is no functional reason why a given physical type should occur with a given language family. Therefore, when these two variables do show significant concordance in their distribution this may well represent an important historical fact, namely that the explanation for their concordance can be traced to a common point somewhere in the past. A demonstration that these two factors are also uniquely accompanied by a systemic culture pattern . . . would strengthen the belief in a common origin. (1957:36)

Romney called this kind of concordance between biological, linguistic, and cultural patterns a “segment of cultural history,” arguing that the Uto-Aztecan-speaking peoples of North America constituted just such a segment.

Whether or not such segments of cultural history (or, as I have called them in this book, “phyletic units”) can be identified in the Pacific and, if so, what they have to tell us about human history in Oceania have invoked controversy and debate for more than a century. The greatest agreement focuses on the Polynesians, whose linguistic and cultural unity was observed well before anthropology became an academic discipline, and whose biological homogeneity has been extensively documented. The many Polynesian societies and cultures together form a robust phyletic unit—all speaking historically related languages, with common cultural patterns and a high degree of biological similarity—who descended from a common ancestral group. The application of a phylogenetic model to Polynesia is therefore not particularly controversial.

When it comes to other regions within Oceania, the degree to which biology, language, and culture are correlated has at times been hotly contested. The debate centers on the issue of whether the patterns of distribution and relationship among the Austronesian and Non-Austronesian languages of Oceania correspond, in any significant manner, with patterns of human biological variation, and with systemic cultural patterns, particularly as these are reflected in archaeological cultures.

Many pioneering ethnographers and linguists who worked in the western Pacific thought that they could detect such correlations. W.H.R. Rivers, who attempted a historical reconstruction based solely on comparative ethnography (a Pacific archaeological record did not exist in Rivers’s day), was well aware of the “great variety of physical characters of the Melanesian people,” opining that they displayed “a greater variety than the peoples of Europe” (1914, 1:582). Rivers explained this variation largely as a “result of mixture of peoples differing widely from one another in physical character.” Likewise, he recognized that language and biology can have radically different outcomes in the course of interaction between two groups, as in the case of a large local population adopting the language of a small (but socially dominant) immigrant group, yet having “relatively little effect on the physical appearance of those among whom they settled” (Rivers 1914, 1:594). His particular narrative of an ancient “dual people” who were successively influenced by new immigrant groups (the “kava-people” and the “betel-people”) may strike us as quaint, yet given his limited comparative data Rivers’s speculative “history” makes considerable sense; when its antique terminology is recast in modern terms, his sequence bears much in common with modern syntheses. The German linguist Otto Dempwolff (1934–38) developed similar ideas. He thought that the initial spread of Austronesian language speakers could be correlated with certain biological populations, although he argued that where malaria was rife, the malaria-resistant genes of the original, “darker-skinned and frizzy-haired” populations tended to dominate. Dempwolff, Rivers, and others of their day were greatly constrained in their ability to refine and test their theories, both by the lack of an archaeological record and by the “typological” (indeed, sometimes racist) approach then dominant in physical anthropology.

Some scholars argue that efforts to correlate biological, linguistic, and cultural patterns of variation in Melanesia or elsewhere in the western Pacific merely perpetuate an outdated paradigm of anthropology (e.g., Terrell 1986:63; Terrell, Hunt, and Gosden 1997). But new and more powerful analytical and comparative tools than were available to Dempwolff, Rivers, or their peers allow us to test phylogenetic hypotheses that “segments of cultural history” can be delineated in Melanesia. The results indicate that even in Melanesia—where the degree of biological, linguistic, and cultural variation is enormous—historically meaningful patterns of covariance do exist and can be detected.

Compelling evidence for correlations between language groups and biological variation in Melanesia has come, for example, from the long-term Solomon Islands Project (Friedlaender, ed., 1987, 2007), which examined patterns of human variation among eight populations including both Austronesian and Non-Austronesian speakers. Summarizing a wealth of detailed biometric and genetic evidence, Friedlaender (1987:354–57) drew several noteworthy conclusions. First, the large island of Bougainville, which includes Non-Austronesian language groups, and which “from a biogeographical perspective, is a logical place for relic populations to persist,” exhibits the greatest range of variation, with a “very distinctive biological population.” Second, the biological diversity of Bougainville, and to some extent that of its nearest neighbors, “suggests that the pre-Austronesian settlements in island Melanesia are very old, and possibly are the result of a number of separate migrations, and subsequent significant differentiation in situ of a lesser magnitude.” Third, the “Austronesian-speaking populations in Melanesia tend to show biological similarities in spite of their strong resemblances to immediately neighboring groups.” For example, there are virtually perfect correspondences between the presence or absence of certain Gm alleles and the distribution of Austronesian and Papuan languages. Likewise, fingerprint patterns show clear-cut distinctions that correlate with these major language distinctions (Froehlich 1987); and again, tooth sizes (odontometric patterns) “lend strong support to the . . . interpretation that [Non-Austronesian]-speaking peoples of Bougainville Island have an origin and history in Oceania significantly different from that of the more recent [Austronesian]-speakers” (Harris and Bailil 1987:259). Thus Friedlaender (1987:356–57) concludes that in Melanesia, “although the correspondence is hardly perfect, biologic and linguistic variation are often reflections (sometimes sharp, sometimes dim) of migrational histories.” Friedlaender modestly says that he is simply “restating a now obvious truth of anthropology,” yet it seems that such truths need to be periodically revalidated with empirical evidence for each new generation of anthropologists.

The big structure here is that the cultural, biological, and linguistic patterns characteristic of Oceania (and not just of Polynesia) are far from random. They are, rather, highly structured and, despite the complexities of their patterning, display regular correlations and concordances. This is precisely because they reflect a real history of human movements or migration into the Pacific, of dispersal or diaspora over its many islands. That such movements must have occurred, and were responsible for regularities in cultural patterning, was only roughly grasped by the pioneering ethnographers and linguists of the early twentieth century. What they lacked were the more sophisticated methodologies at our disposal today and—even more critically—a direct archaeological record. They struggled to infer a “migrational history” solely from synchronic patterns of variation, from history written in the present. It has been the contribution of archaeology to provide the properly diachronic evidence of human history in Oceania, against which the synchronic patterns in language, culture, and biology can be more fully interpreted. Knowing as we now do that the history of Near Oceania runs deep indeed—well into the Pleistocene—we can finally explain the great genetic and linguistic diversity that already existed in this region when the Austronesian-speaking peoples voyaged into the Bismarck Sea around 1300 B.C. The discovery of the Lapita cultural complex as well provides the archaeological signature of that particular human diaspora, which not only added to the heterogeneity and complexity of Melanesia but also was responsible for the peopling of the vastness of Remote Oceania.





THE ROLE OF DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITIONS IN OCEANIC HISTORY


I turn now, in Tilly’s phrasing, from large structures to big processes, commencing with an essential demographic cycle that backgrounds the histories of a great many (possibly the majority of) Oceanic societies. First, however, we must revisit a critical contrast between the population structures of Near Oceania and those of Remote Oceania, a striking difference demanding a historical explanation. According to their ethnohistorical and archaeological records, the large archipelagoes of the Bismarcks, Solomons, and Vanuatu never supported high-density human populations, other than in very local areas. Vast parts of these islands remained in climax rainforests, which, although hardly pristine (for low-density human settlements are dispersed within them), remained largely untransformed by human activities, despite thousands of years of human presence. The absence of large populations in these fertile islands—even after indigenous food production systems arose in the Holocene—poses a puzzling contradiction. In Remote Oceania beyond Vanuatu the situation is reversed. Human populations again and again reached high density levels over relatively short time spans, even on such large landmasses as New Caledonia and Fiji.2 Moreover, these dense populations wrought enormous and often irrevocable changes in vegetation and other aspects of their ecologies.

Why this difference in population structures between the large archipelagoes of the western Pacific and those of Remote Oceania? What could possibly account for the disparity in population densities? Malaria—probably combined with other kinds of parasitic and infectious diseases. The geographic distribution of malaria in the Pacific corresponds closely to the distribution of the population structures just observed: it is found in lowland and midaltitude Near Oceania and within Remote Oceania only in the Santa Cruz Islands and Vanuatu. The effects of this disease, which one expert in the field claims has “probably resulted in more mortality in human populations than any other disease” (Livingstone 1984:413), are not to be underestimated. The one place in Near Oceania where malaria is absent—the New Guinea Highlands—is also the only region in which large and dense human populations did arise following the development of intensive agricultural production. In short, on a broad canvas the demographic history of Oceania has been intimately linked with the history of disease, especially malaria.

Once they entered Remote Oceania, human populations found themselves in a significantly healthier environment. While some Plasmodium parasites would at first have been carried in their bloodstreams, there were no Anopheles mosquitoes to act as vectors; the chain of malarial transmission was broken. These more isolated islands also lacked the diverse intestinal protozoa, bacteria, hookworms, and other disease-causing microorganisms of Near Oceania. Key conditions that had held human growth rates in check in Near Oceania were now lifted. In addition, the new islands discovered by the Lapita colonizers and their descendants were devoid of other human occupants; there were no others to fight with over territory. Rich in natural food resources (especially birds and seafoods), the high islands were well suited to planting food crops. In addition to the lack of epidemiological or environmental constraints on population increase, there were strong cultural pressures favoring high reproduction rates. With founding populations on new islands being initially small (in many cases probably consisting of the complement of but a single voyaging canoe), the risks of extinction were substantially lessened with each new birth.3 In short, conditions prevailing during the initial phases of human expansion into Remote Oceania—both environmental and cultural—almost ideally favored high rates of population increase.4

Many years ago, I put forward a model for human demographic transitions on Polynesian islands (Kirch 1980, 1984a), equally applicable throughout Remote Oceania (except Santa Cruz and Vanuatu, which lay within the malarious zone, and the temperate, nonagricultural cases of South Island and the Chathams). In the early stages of island colonization and settlement, the lack of constraints on population growth, reinforced by the obvious social advantage of increasing one’s own population (and economic production) base, favored a high intrinsic growth rate (symbolized in demographic equations by r) complemented by relatively low mortality. After some time, however (and this would vary depending on local conditions, especially island size and resources), Remote Oceanic populations typically increased to the point where human numbers began to exert various kinds of pressure (although these populations need not have reached the theoretical level of maximal “carrying capacity,” symbolized by K). The most immediate pressure would be that on food supply, although this might often be offset by intensifying production. The social marking and claiming of all available territory brought to bear another kind of pressure. That is to say, people may begin to perceive population pressure due to such socially and culturally defined criteria well before any absolute biological limits of food supply (K) are reached. In any event, during the later time periods on many Polynesian and Remote Oceanic islands, human populations clearly reached quite large numbers (in the hundreds of thousands on larger islands and archipelagoes) and—more significantly—high densities per area of arable land. Population densities frequently reached or exceeded 100 persons per square kilometer; in some cases, such as Tikopia, densities were much higher (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007). Under these conditions, high intrinsic rates of population increase (r) could not be sustained or tolerated, and cultural controls on population growth were implemented. As ethnographically documented, such controls included means of reducing fertility (celibacy, contraception, abortion), as well as of increasing mortality (infanticide, suicide voyaging, war, expulsion of certain groups, ritual sacrifice, and even cannibalism).5 The later stages in the demographic cycle of most Remote Oceanic islands are thus characterized by a reduced rate of population increase, in many cases probably oscillating around periods of growth and decline. In at least some cases there seems to have been dramatic decline following an actual overshoot of a diminishing or degraded resource base.

This kind of demographic cycle is sometimes referred to as an “r to K” transition, and in classical evolutionary ecology is described by a sigmoidal or S-shaped curve (the logistic), in which high initial r gradually declines as population approaches carrying capacity. MacArthur and Wilson (1967) argued that such r to K transitions were common in the evolutionary histories of island biota. More recently, the theory of “panarchy” has characterized entire ecosystems and the human social systems with which they are dynamically coupled as undergoing such r to K phase transitions (Gunderson and Holling, eds., 2002). As new models developed by the Hawai‘i Biocomplexity Project suggest, however, these demographic cycles can best be explained in terms of food availability and its effects on mortality and fertility (Kirch et al. 2012; Puleston and Tuljapurkar 2008). In the early stages of island colonization, when the population was small, available labor rather than land was the key limiting variable. Once large populations had built up, usually after at least three to four centuries, agricultural land became the limiting factor, as labor was abundant but food often in increasingly short supply. With persistent hunger—exacerbated by environmental perturbations such as drought, cyclones, or tsunamis—came damping of the population growth rate due to increased mortality (especially of infants and older people) and depressed fertility.

Some form of demographic transition—with initial high population growth rates followed by lowered rates in response to periodic food shortages as populations began to reach or oscillate around carrying capacities—seems to have been the case on most Remote Oceanic islands, even though there must have been innumerable variations on this overall theme (see Green 1993:229–30). A demographic shift from high-growth, “density-independent” to lowered-growth, “density-dependent” populations is one of the big processes underlying the histories of hundreds of Oceanic societies. I am not, however, asserting that the demographic histories of individual islands were completely identical, for everything depends on local conditions of founding group size, land and resources, elapsed time, and particular cultural and social behaviors in which reproduction and death are embedded. But I am more than ever convinced that the underlying cycles were frequently similar and had structurally similar consequences and outcomes. Among these were heightened competition for land and resources, technological and social measures to increase production, and increased impacts on the natural biota and landscapes of islands.

In highlighting an r to K population cycle as a big process of Oceanic history, I nonetheless emphatically reject a simple demographic determinism, or a unicausal explanation for the transformation of Oceanic societies. Population growth can never be a sufficient prime mover to explain cultural change; what it offers is a necessary condition without which other kinds of social, technological, ideological, or political changes are highly unlikely to occur. Here I draw insight from Ernst Mayr, whose clearheadedness has more than once enlightened evolutionary thinking, and who observed that there are nearly always both proximate and ultimate causes for any given phenomenon. What is more, “many famous controversies in the history of biology came about because one party considered only proximate causations and the other party considered only evolutionary [ultimate] ones” (Mayr 1997:67). In my view, the r/K cycle of population growth that has now been empirically demonstrated for a number of Remote Oceanic islands (and probably holds true for most others) is one fundamental kind of “ultimate” causation in the history of Oceanic peoples.6





OCEANIC POPULATIONS ON THE EVE OF EUROPEAN CONTACT


Douglas Oliver, a master of Oceanic ethnography, wrote that “estimating the number of pre-European inhabitants of Oceania is like trying to photograph a fast-moving train broadside, with a Brownie camera” (1989:27). Yet this did not stop historical demographers from “playing the numbers,” by reworking the estimates and rough census counts made by the early European explorers and missionaries. Demographers and statisticians such as McArthur (1968), Rallu (1990), and Schmitt (1968) expended much effort deriving estimates of Oceanic island populations at the time of initial contact with Europeans. Their estimates were based on a presumption that the earliest European accounts (usually made by explorers whose visits were fleeting) were typically inflated. They assumed that the depopulation that occurred following European contact (due primarily but not exclusively to the introduction of diseases to which the indigenous peoples had little or no resistance), while substantial, was not acute. Greater reliability was placed on the head counts made by missionaries who, unlike explorers, lived among their converts for extended periods and were often obsessed with quantifying the number of “pagan souls” to be saved. But in most island groups these missionaries arrived decades—and in some cases, a century or more—after initial contact with Europeans,7 leaving what happened during the intervening period a matter of dispute.8

As Pacific archaeologists increasingly turned their attention to the distribution of sites over whole landscapes and to paleodemography, these issues have come to the fore (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007). Consider the case of New Caledonia. Although the island was “discovered” by James Cook in 1774, the first attempt at census taking did not occur until 1887, with an estimate of 42,519 persons (Rallu 1990:272). Despite a total absence of data on what happened between 1774 and 1887, historical demographers were content to estimate the 1774 population of La Grande Terre at somewhere between 40,000 (Shineberg 1983) and possibly as high as 80,000 (Rallu 1990). Only the geographer Roux (1990), based on an evaluation of land and traditional subsistence practices, cautiously pushed the precontact population estimate as high as 100,000. The archaeologist Christophe Sand (1995:281–309), awed by the abandoned terraces that cover large expanses of the New Caledonian landscape, challenged the veracity of these estimates, suggesting that even the 100,000 figure was too low. He argued that the effects of epidemic disease were grossly underestimated, and that the demographic collapse suffered by the inhabitants of La Grande Terre after 1774 was truly catastrophic.

Spriggs (1997:253) echoed Sand’s comments for the rest of island Melanesia, pointing to the “archaeological evidence of massive population disruption and decline attendant upon European contact.” Among the archaeological signals of “catastrophic collapse” that Spriggs sees in the Melanesian archaeological record are “the abandoned village sites deep in the forests, the disused irrigation systems and other manifestations of once-intensive agricultural systems, and the marked discontinuity in settlement pattern often found between sites with European artifacts on them and those from the period immediately before contact” (1997:253–54). Such evidence occurs throughout Remote Oceania.

In Samoa, settlement pattern surveys reveal extensive and dense inland occupations, extending in some cases right up to the ridgetops.9 Yet the earliest missionary accounts of Samoa paint a landscape portrait of coastal villages with vacant interiors. Based on these vague accounts and on census counts made decades after first contact, McArthur (1968:115) suggested a maximum population for Western Samoa (‘Upolu and Savai‘i Islands) of no more than about 38,000.10 This figure represents a population density of just 13 persons per square kilometer on these fertile volcanic islands, an absurdly low figure given the high density of inland settlement revealed by archaeological survey. Ethnographically documented Polynesian subsistence agriculture regularly supported population densities of 100 persons per square kilometer; densities as high as 242 persons per square kilometer are recorded for favorable environments such as Tikopia (Kirch and Yen 1982:56). Thus it is hardly conceivable—especially in light of the archaeological evidence for dense inland settlement—that the maximum population of Samoa was less than 100,000; it might have been as great as 300,000 or more prior to European contact.11 To be sure, this hypothesis must be tested with further research.12

For no other Pacific archipelago has debate over the size of the indigenous population on the eve of Western contact become so intense as Hawai‘i. Lieutenant King, officer on Cook’s expedition at first contact in 1778–79, estimated 400,000 persons for the total population of the archipelago. Later demographic scholarship by Schmitt (1968, 1973) reduced this to 250,000 to 300,000, a widely quoted number. According to David Stannard (1989:27), however, “All the evidence available to us regarding the credibility of King’s 1778 population estimate points in precisely the opposite direction from that which most subsequent writers have alleged: King’s 400,000 estimate was, if anything, a serious under estimate of the actual figure. But how short was he?” Stannard answered his own rhetorical question by contending that the pre-1778 Hawaiian population reached a maximum of at least 800,000, and perhaps more than one million persons (1989:30). His argument turned largely on archaeological evidence, especially for dense inland agricultural field systems and settlements, and for a high windward regional population. Paleodemographic estimates of particular regions in Hawai‘i, such as Kahikinui on Maui and leeward Kohala on Hawai‘i Island (Kirch and Rallu, eds., 2007) have added empirical support for the claim that even in fairly marginal areas, the contact-era population of Hawai‘i was dense and large. Further research will be necessary before an acceptable estimate of the total population of the Hawaiian Islands at contact can be achieved. But that estimate will undoubtedly be much larger than the low numbers put forward by the late twentieth-century historical demographers.





THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DYNAMIC LANDSCAPES


If most Remote Oceanic islands were densely populated at the time of European intrusion in the sixteenth through eighteenth centuries, their landscapes had also been irrevocably transformed by generations of human effort. In Near Oceania, landscape transformation seems not to have been so pronounced (although the New Guinea Highlands, with their anthropogenic grasslands and intensively cultivated valley floors, are more like Remote Oceania in this regard), for as I have argued, population densities in the Near Oceanic region generally did not reach the levels seen in Remote Oceania. Even in the Bismarcks and Solomons, however, the hand of Homo sapiens left its mark in many ways, from the extinction of bird species to the translocation of the cuscus and other animals (even land snails) to the modification of lowland vegetation communities. But in Remote Oceania, impacts wrought by human populations on island ecosystems were often far-reaching and—if viewed from the perspective of the natural biota—frequently disastrous. The wholesale decimation and extinction of many species of sea- and land birds from these islands, the removal of vast tracts of indigenous forest and their replacement with pyrophytic grass- and fernlands (fig. 9.1), erosion and alluviation in valleys and along coastal plains—these and other impacts are now well documented for many islands (Kirch 2007a, 2007c; Kirch and Hunt, eds., 1997; Steadman 2006). Indeed, it can fairly be said that the island ecosystems of Remote Oceania exemplify what has recently been called the “Anthropocene Epoch” in geological history, an era in which humans have become the dominant force shaping the earth’s landscape, its biota, and even its climate (Rick et al. 2013).




FIGURE 9.1 The fern-covered hills of Mangaia Island, dotted here and there with scrub ironwood trees, typify the fire-resistant, degraded landscapes of many tropical Pacific islands. Note the coconut palms, which are restricted to the narrow valley bottom. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In part, such cultural modifications of the natural ecology of islands stemmed directly from the food-getting and food-producing activities of Pacific islanders, whether hunting birds or clearing forest for shifting cultivation. Other impacts were indirect and followed from the introduction of domestic plants and animals, and of “weed species” (like the ubiquitous Pacific rat). Cumulatively and incrementally, even small inroads to natural biotic communities had far-reaching effects over time. Islands such as Mangareva and Rapa Nui were largely denuded of all arboreal vegetation prior to European contact; even on large high islands such as Viti Levu the lower-elevation vegetation communities were thoroughly modified (Ash 1992). Once again, this is a big process, an ecological process with enormous consequences for island landscapes and for island cultures.

Establishing a paleoenvironmental record for the Pacific islands—one that includes the role of indigenous human populations as major players in the transformation of insular ecologies—has been one of the more significant contributions of Oceanic archaeology, in collaboration with the natural sciences, over the past four decades. Not only has Pacific archaeology overthrown the old ethnographic bias of “static” island cultures (in which change was seen to derive primarily from migration; see chap. 1); it has demonstrated that in the process of transforming themselves, island cultures forever changed their microcosmic worlds (Kirch 1997b).

The outcomes of ecological change on islands differ radically depending on whether these are viewed from the perspective of the natural flora and fauna or the people who initiated these changes. For a species of flightless rail or native lorikeet, or for an endemic lobelia or palm, the outlook after the arrival of humans on its island home was frankly bleak. It is no exaggeration to say that among the Remote Oceanic islands, the “biodiversity crisis” began not recently but 3,200 years ago with the Lapita expansion. It now seems certain that literally thousands of endemic species of plants and animals (especially birds, insects, and land snails, as well as vascular plants and ferns) underwent extinction or local extirpation as a consequence—direct and indirect—of the human “conquest” of the Pacific islands.

Viewed from the perspective of the human “conquerors,” the transformation of island landscapes was altogether different, for the most part a highly desirable series of modifications, improvements, innovations, and intensifications that quite literally made the islands habitable. For indeed, oceanic islands—despite their famously salubrious climates, lack of disease-inducing organisms, and physical beauty—were not naturally well suited to supporting dense human populations. True, many islands abounded in birds, fish, and shellfish, which offered ample supplies of protein (at least in the early phases of colonization when human numbers were relatively low, prior to the effects of “resource depression”), but vegetable foods—especially the staple starches on which every complex society has ultimately been built—were entirely lacking. It was essential, as human populations burgeoned on these islands, for their landscapes to increasingly undergo a transformation from natural to cultural, from merely extractive to highly productive resource bases.

On many islands, the process of creating a productive infrastructure of gardens and fields was remarkably successful, evoking admiration from anyone who has ever struggled to wrest food from the ground, whether in an urban backyard plot or on a grander rural scale. The agroforests, or “orchard gardens,” of Tikopia, Pohnpei, and Kosrae are marvels of “sustainable agriculture,” and the irrigated taro pondfields of Hawai‘i, Mangaia, and Rapa were so efficient and successful that they continue to be used by contemporary farmers virtually without modification. The development of these and other innovative and intensified production systems literally fueled the rise of large and complex societies throughout the oceanic world. Processes that could be so destructive to nature (in its “pristine” manifestation) were simultaneously the foundation of culture.

But not every experiment in the conversion of island ecosystems to productive economies was entirely successful.13 Rapa Nui has been held up by some as a case in which the anthropogenic transformation of an island went too far, in which initial success led to a population expansion that overwhelmed the island’s capacity to sustain it (Bahn and Flenley 1992; Diamond 2005). More recent research has questioned this doomsday scenario. While the island was undoubtedly deforested as a consequence of human actions (probably aided by the effects of the human-introduced Pacific rat), its islanders also developed innovative strategies—such as rock mulching—to counteract these effects and maintain horticultural production. Rapa Nui’s history is mixed in its successes and failures, including great artistic and cultural accomplishments (of which the statue complex is only one) combined with dark moments inscribed in the archaeological record of obsidian spearheads, fortified refuge caves, and toppled statues. Yet the Rapa Nui people inevitably survived all this (and even more terrible deeds done to them at the hands of Europeans after their isolated world was shattered); today they aspire to rebuild the greatness of their island culture. Similar narratives could be related for other island peoples, in which the endless struggle to produce and reproduce, to build a life rich in cultural meaning, has more than once embraced severe challenges. For most Mangaians in late prehistory, theirs was a world of lurking terror punctuated by fierce intertribal wars for control of land (Hiroa 1934; Reilly 2003, 2009). Other stories have yet to be told. Why were the vast sculptured landscapes of Palau abandoned centuries before European contact? What history of human effort gone awry in the face of environmental constraints might be encapsulated in those Miscanthus grasslands covering rank after rank of terraces? Such unanswered questions simultaneously chasten and challenge us.

Some historical trajectories were evidently greatly influenced by fundamental contrasts in island environments, such as those provided by different geological origins and ages or different climatic and seasonal regimes. One such underlying contrast is between “wet” and “dry” environmental zones, a structural aspect of environment with great significance for agricultural production, as Barrau (1965b) first recognized. Interactions between “the wet and the dry” in many islands constituted a dynamic cycle that fundamentally influenced the course of sociopolitical change (Kirch 1994). These contrasts played out on different scales and in different configurations, ranging from the windward/leeward distinctions that mark Viti Levu and many other islands to contrasts on the scale of an entire archipelago. The Hawaiian Islands offer a classic case, where the largest yet youngest islands had only limited possibilities for intensive irrigation, necessitating that their economies be based on intensive “dryland” (i.e., rain-fed) field systems (Ladefoged et al. 2009; Vitousek et al. 2004). In contrast, the older, westerly islands with valley topography and permanent streams enabled extensive irrigation works to be developed. The political economy of late precontact Hawai‘i, in which the leaders of the Hawai‘i Island and Maui kingdoms were frequently at war with each other—while both competed for control of irrigation-rich Moloka‘i, O‘ahu, and Kaua‘i—owes much to this fundamental wet/dry contrast (Hommon 2013; Kirch 2010). In these large environmental “structures” one seeks clues to certain big processes of political economy.

I hasten to add a caveat: to assert that the history of Oceanic cultures is intimately bound up with the historical ecology of island landscapes is emphatically not to espouse an environmentally determined model of change. Island environments posed constraints, some of which were impossible to overcome given the limitations of a “neolithic” technology; the “reversion” of South Island Maori to a hunting and gathering mode of existence is a case in point. Other constraints were hardly absolute. Productive landscapes could be created in many environments—given sufficient labor—often under the aegis of increasingly hierarchical social formations. Most often, Pacific landscapes were what people made of them. By the end of “prehistory” the Pacific world was a constructed world, an ocean full of thoroughly modified, transformed, anthropogenic islands. In this respect too the Pacific world offers a lesson for the larger history—and future—of our species.





INTENSIFICATION AND SPECIALIZATION IN ISLAND ECONOMIES


Peering back along the dim corridor of history’s longue durée, one glimpses other reflections of large structures and big processes; one is a proclivity for island economies to undergo both intensification and specialization over time. These are indeed big concepts in anthropology and archaeology. I cannot review here all of the nuanced theoretical arguments that scholars have advanced regarding such processes and their significance in prehistory.14 But no overview of grand patterns in Oceanic history would be adequate without at least some consideration of these trends.

Building on work by Boserup (1965), Brookfield (1972, 1984), Yen (1971, 1973), and others, the variety of changes in economic systems (and here we are concerned especially, though not exclusively, with agricultural systems) usually subsumed under the rubric intensification may be parsed into several kinds of rather different processes (Kirch 1994, 2006, 2007a). By “intensification,” we mean some increased level of output (usually crop yield), typically measured against a constant area of land. But increased yields per unit area can be achieved in many ways. For example, higher-yielding varieties of crops may be developed: this is not a phenomenon limited to modern plant breeders or genetic engineering. For thousands of years, gardeners and farmers improved their crops through the simple process of selection (sometimes called “Burbankian selection,” after the famed California orchardist Luther Burbank). This was certainly the case in the Pacific, with well-documented examples of selection for improved cultivars (e.g., Lepofsky, Kirch, and Lertzman 1998; Yen 1974a, 1974b). Yields may also be increased through improved technology or by new agronomic methods. While these changes result in higher yields, it may be best to think of them as innovations rather than as intensification proper (Kirch 1994:18–19, fig. 5).

Distinguishing innovation from intensification allows us to reserve the latter term for processes involving increased input of human effort—in a word, labor—to achieve the desired goal of increased yields. But even so, two significantly different kinds of intensification can be identified; both were operative in Pacific island economies. The first involves the construction of agronomic facilities, permanent modifications to the landscape that result in higher levels of agricultural production. Excellent examples are the irrigated pondfield terraces and canals constructed on many islands, such as Kolombangara, Aneityum, New Caledonia, Fiji, Futuna, Rapa, Mangaia, Hawai‘i, and elsewhere in Oceania (fig. 9.2). Less well known are the dryland field systems of Hawai‘i, New Zealand, and other areas, or the yam mounds of New Caledonia. The extensive nonirrigated terraces of Palau are yet another case. This kind of intensification has been called landesque capital intensification because it involves a permanent modification of the landscape (Blaikie and Brookfield, eds., 1987). Yet what is too frequently overlooked about landesque capital intensification is that while substantial labor inputs may be required to construct terraces, canals, field boundaries, or other facilities, once in place the labor required to maintain them is relatively low. This is especially true for pondfield irrigation of Colocasia taro, which produces significantly higher yields than dryland cultivation but does not require greater labor once the terraced pondfields have been constructed (Kirch 1994; Spriggs 1981, 1982).15




FIGURE 9.2 Irrigated taro pondfields of Tamarua Valley, Mangaia Island. Such intensive agricultural landscapes were developed in late prehistory on many Pacific islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Contrasting with landesque capital intensification is cropping cycle intensification, the classic Boserupian mode of intensification (Boserup 1965) through reduction of fallow length and increased application of labor, especially in such activities as weeding and mulching (Kirch 1994). Here labor is invested not in permanent improvements to an agricultural landscape but in seasonally repetitive activities, in order to gain increased yields per unit area. This kind of intensification was commonly present in Pacific island economies and is the sort of process we reconstruct for Rapa Nui and for the dry, leeward parts of Hawai‘i Island, to name just two cases.

Why did Pacific islanders undertake major projects of landesque capital intensification that even today leave their indelible marks on island landscapes? Why, when the construction of physical infrastructure was not possible due to environmental constraints or other reasons, did people feel compelled to invest greater and greater labor in agricultural production? Were these kinds of intensification linked to particular sorts of economic or social or political structures? These are big questions—and complex at that—but they go to the core of Oceanic cultural history.

The simplest explanation for intensification of island economies is surely demographic, invoking increased populations as the underlying “cause” for change, and indeed at a basic level population pressure was probably in most cases an “ultimate” form of causation (again, see Mayr 1997:67). As island populations burgeoned, increased food production was a necessary consequence. But to leave the explanation at this would both ignore the fact that population is not a wholly independent variable (for, after all, people have many cultural and social means for regulating population growth) and miss what is all the more interesting from an anthropological perspective: the linkages between production and power.

Here it is instructive to invoke Brookfield’s (1972) concept “social production,” as differentiated from “production for use” (i.e., that which is necessary merely to keep the population fed and healthy, and able to reproduce itself). Any complex social formation invariably places demands on the household economy that go beyond immediate production for consumption by its members. Contributions to village feasts (fig. 9.3), tribute offerings to chiefs, taro and pigs for religious ceremonies, production for external exchange—all of these combine to create an economy of surplus, or perhaps we should say, of the ceaseless extraction of surplus from individual households that otherwise might be thought of as intrinsically anti-surplus. As Marshall Sahlins (1972:82) put it, a “society’s economic destiny is played out in its relations of production, especially the political pressures that can be mounted on the household economy.” Moreover, “the development of rank and chieftainship becomes, pari passu, development of the productive forces” (Sahlins 1972:140). Brookfield noted this equation too, observing that throughout the Pacific islands the development of intensified agricultural systems always correlated with the creation of a surplus, which indeed seems to have been the principal objective. And furthermore, all these cases “seem to have been accompanied by social differentiation, if not also stratification” (Brookfield 1984:23). While increased population numbers provided a necessary condition for intensification (and also a requisite labor force that could be controlled by political leaders), and thus an ultimate form of causation, the more immediate, proximal causes of intensification were typically social and political. Power flowed from production and in turn encouraged greater efforts at intensification.




FIGURE 9.3 A katoanga, or village feast, in Sigave District, Futuna Island, in 1974. Each basket contains yams and a roasted pig. Note the rows of kava plants in front of the house, where the chiefs and lineage elders are assembled for a ritual kava ceremony. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Intensification too has its limits; long before these are reached the burdens of intensified labor can become enormously oppressive. It is in such considerations that the most significant relations of production in ancient Oceanic societies may be discovered. Consider once again the case of Rapa Nui. At some early stage in the island’s history, social groups were clearly able to produce sufficient surpluses to underwrite the enormous tasks of quarrying, sculpting, transporting, and erecting multi-ton statues that glorified collective ancestors and marked lineage territories. The island’s weathered volcanic surface and reasonably fertile soils favored the high-yielding sweet potato, cultivated in a short-fallow rotation. But as the island’s population grew ever larger, the margin between production and simple auto-consumption (what we call “surplus”) dwindled,16 even as chiefs and priests felt compelled to exhort their followers to undertake yet grander works. The people were pressed to produce an ever greater surplus—requiring increased labor inputs in a classic mode of cropping cycle intensification—at the same time that the ability of the island’s somewhat marginal environment to give up ever higher yields was pushed to its limit. Despite innovations in horticultural practice (notably the rock mulch gardens), the elasticity of the Rapa Nui system eventually reached its limit. Not all at once, presumably, but certainly within the span of a few short generations all statue carving ceased; Rapa Nui society was plunged into a period of endemic warfare, raiding, and social terror.

What of specialization, as distinct from intensification? During the early stages of Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania (as certainly in the long pre-Lapita period before it), specialist activities are likely to have included ceramic production as well as the manufacture of shell exchange valuables, and possibly other crafts such as weaving, featherwork, and tattooing. Some craft specialization at the village or hamlet level was present in Lapita communities, and we can infer that some communities were ceramic producers and others manufacturers of shell objects. Networks of exchange linked these specialized communities into larger systems of economic integration. Earle and Spriggs (2015) have suggested that control over such exchange commodities could have played some role in the Lapita political economy. But for the most part Lapita communities appear to have been self-sufficient, certainly as regards food production, if not the production of every manner of material goods.

When we turn to the ethnohistorical record of island societies at the time of early European contact, however, we find many examples of highly specialized economies, particularly in the western Pacific, where shorter interisland distances made communication and transport relatively feasible. This is the case with the specialized trading societies of the Papuan coast and the Massim, or the Siassi traders. In some cases, specialization of production resulted in significant dependence for food supplies on external sources. In late precontact Hawai‘i, another kind of specialization emerged with the production of elaborate feathered garments (cloaks, capes, and helmets) that were highly prized by the chiefly elites; indeed, possession of these symbols was essential to establishing one’s legitimacy as a member of the ali‘i class. As I have argued elsewhere (Kirch 2010, 2012) the emphasis accorded such featherwork along with other prestige items (fine bark cloth, mats, wooden bowls, etc.) created a “wealth economy” that was grafted onto the older agricultural (“staple”) economy of the islands. Archaeology has only begun to trace the specific and localized histories whereby such specialization arose; whether there are common conditions that might provide a convincing causal model for specialization only further work will tell. But specialization is certainly a big process within the history of island societies, one that will doubtless repay sustained research with added insight.





TRANSFORMATIONS OF STATUS AND POWER


I have already observed that social power is inextricably intertwined with economic production. But the transformation of sociopolitical structures in Oceania was surely more than just a matter of economics; the topic deserves closer consideration. It was once asserted that the sociopolitical structures found in Polynesia and Melanesia were of distinct types, chiefdoms in the former and big-man systems in the latter (Sahlins 1963). This dichotomy did not hold up to closer scrutiny, however, with the realization that much of island Melanesia as well as Micronesia was also characterized by various structures of chiefship (Scaglion 1996). Although we should be wary of replacing one outmoded overgeneralization with another, we might cautiously suggest that if there is a major distinction between political “types” in Oceania, it would be between the societies of the Austronesian-speaking peoples and the Non-Austronesian speakers. The former are characterized by principles of hereditary ranking, certainly an ancient aspect of Austronesian societies in general (Bellwood 1996a; Blust 1996; Fox 1994, 1995). The social structures of the Papuan speakers are more varied, but it is among them that classic big-man structures of achieved (rather than inherited) status are typically found.

The varied sociopolitical formations found throughout Austronesian-speaking Near Oceania and Remote Oceania can be seen as transformations of an original structure, which Friedman (1981) inferred to have been hierarchical and based on asymmetric exchange. That these societies should share fundamental structural features is not surprising, since they are almost all ultimately descended from the Lapita cultural complex. The nature of Lapita society itself is still debated, although I have argued that it may have been more heterarchical than hierarchical. But with some principle of ranking inherent, the basis for “status rivalry” (as Goldman [1970] called it) was presumably already present in Lapita society, between junior and senior siblings and more widely between junior and senior branches of a lineage. This was the structural germ that gave rise to hierarchy again and again once societies increased in size from small groups—in which everyone was known to each other, face-to-face as kinsmen—to larger groups of a few thousand up to tens of thousands, in which a small self-selected elite could gain control over a vast populace.

Historical linguistics has defined some of the lexically marked social groups, and status positions, that were present in Ancestral Oceanic societies, that is, those made up of speakers of Proto Oceanic language and reflected archaeologically by the Lapita cultural complex. One important Proto Oceanic term is *kainanga, which denoted an exogamous group made up of the descendants of an eponymous ancestor, who collectively controlled an estate of land (Kirch and Green 2001). Cognates of this word are found throughout much of Remote Oceania today, indicating the persistence of this kind of social unit over thousands of years. Also present in Proto Oceanic were specific terms for the leader of such a corporate descent group and for the firstborn son of this leader (*adiki), which implies a hereditary principle for succession of leadership (Lichtenberk 1986; Pawley 1982). (The Proto Oceanic term *adiki is reflected in later Polynesian languages by the widespread term ariki or aliki, meaning “chief.”) Through careful semantic reconstruction of such terms for social groups and statuses and by comparing these with later transformations in descendant societies throughout Remote Oceania, it is possible to gain insight into the changing nature of social organization in those cultures and societies that originally derived from the first Lapita colonists in Remote Oceania, such as that of Ancestral Polynesia (Kirch and Green 2001).

As with the processes of intensification, the growth of large and dense populations was linked to the rise of increasingly hierarchical and stratified societies. It is an empirical fact that the level of stratification in Polynesian chiefdoms is significantly correlated with both population density and the size of the maximal political unit (Kirch 1984a:98–99, fig. 26). But we know that a correlation is not necessarily a cause; it is probably best to regard the growth of large populations as a necessary condition for sociopolitical transformation—in Mayr’s terms perhaps an ultimate cause—but certainly not a proximal cause or determining factor.

What then can we posit as the immediate or proximal causes or mechanisms leading to the rise of hierarchical, stratified societies, not only in Polynesia, but also on many of the Micronesian high islands (especially Pohnpei and Kosrae) and in various parts of Melanesia (e.g., Fiji, New Caledonia, and the western Solomons)? Various explanations have been advanced by comparative ethnologists, such as Sahlins’s (1958) model of “redistribution” and chiefs as economic regulators, Goldman’s (1970) model of “status rivalry,” or Friedman’s (1981) model of an economic transformation from prestige-goods exchange to agricultural intensification. Indeed, each of these helps to explain certain aspects of particular historical sequences.

In chapter 8, I referred to Timothy Earle’s contention that “chiefs shape their positions from three primary power media—economy, military, and ideology” (1997:193); it may be instructive to reconsider this paradigm. Earle contends that elites or “ruling segments” use particular “power strategies” to achieve their political goals. The three main sources of power are “intertwined and interdependent” (Earle 1997:207); particular combinations were variously used by chiefs to create an economic surplus (thus fueling the political economy), to control labor or seize territory (by armed force), and to legitimate their position in society.

Fundamentally, all transformations in Oceanic sociopolitical formations had to be based on some form of control of economic production—on the extraction of a surplus—although the specific ways in which this was achieved varied endlessly. When environmental or other conditions set limits to such control, or to the continued ability of a system to yield sufficient surplus, chiefly power was undermined. When such conditions did arise, as in most of the “Open” chiefdoms of central Polynesia, a struggle for power ensued, with overt military power strategies becoming dominant. Military power was not exercised just in situations of ecological crisis, however. Territorial conquest was a major power strategy used throughout Oceania, a means for elites to capture that which was most essential to production: land.

Most interesting archaeologically—because it is strikingly manifested by monumental architecture—is ideological power. The ranking inherent in Austronesian social structures automatically placed senior lines “closer” to the sources of supernatural power, which initially were probably deified ancestors. (The whole mana [supernatural power] and tapu [sacred] ideological complex is an extension of this basic principle.) As some societies grew larger and senior lines increasingly distanced and differentiated themselves, ancestors became gods and chiefly elites the direct descendants of those deities. Such was the ideology used by the Hawaiian kings to legitimate their rule, and by other Oceanic chieftains as well (to greater or lesser degrees). But ideology is more powerful when it can be physically manifested—materialized—through symbolically charged architecture and objects. Much of the monumental architecture of Oceanic societies was constructed precisely for this purpose. The Tongan langi tombs, the Rapa Nui statue temples, the marae of the Society Islands, the Hawaiian heiau, and the tomb islets of Nan Madol are all reminders of the powerful role of ideology in the legitimation of a sociopolitical structure (fig. 9.4).




FIGURE 9.4 A human sacrifice being offered to the god ‘Oro on a marae, or temple, in Tahiti, Society Islands. Engraving after drawing by John Webber for the atlas of Cook’s third voyage. (Collection of the author.)





ON COMPARISON: A CLOSING COMMENT


Paradoxically, I have often found the act of ending a book the most difficult part of its making. Whether this stems from an inner hesitation to let the satisfying process of book-making come to a close or whether it is inherent in the structure of a book itself (how to succinctly terminate a complexly interwoven chain of assertion and argument?) I cannot judge; perhaps it is some combination of both. For this book, I close merely with a comment. It might have been relegated to a footnote did I not feel so passionately about its significance for historical anthropology.

I have long regarded archaeology and historical anthropology as explicitly “historical sciences” in the same sense that geology and biology (at least evolutionary ecology and paleobiology) are largely historical sciences, quite distinct in their epistemologies—as well as their modes of investigation and explanation—from the “experimental” sciences (Gould 1989; Mayr 1982, 1997). More particularly, I see comparison as essential to our historical science, for through comparison we move beyond the particular, the local, and the time-bound to what is generalizing and sometimes global. Comparison reveals similarity as well as difference, exposing patterns that lurk beneath variation. Ultimately, comparison yields general principles (not “laws”), principles that allow us to make of our historical narratives not merely “just so stories,” but robust explanations of historical phenomena.

Comparison is especially productive in contexts in which history has provided sets of parallel “experiments.” We cannot rerun the real experiments of history; therefore, we must look for the closest analogues history provides. Historical sociologists do this by comparing the contexts, processes, and outcomes of various social movements (revolutions, for example), seeking to hold one or another factor “constant” and thus gain insights into underlying causes (Tilly 1984, 1997). Evolutionary biologists do the same when they seek “natural experiments,” such as the defaunation and recolonization of landscapes created by glaciation or volcanic eruptions. Mayr (1997:28–29) writes that “much progress in the observational sciences is due to the genius of those who have discovered, critically evaluated, and compared such natural experiments in fields where a laboratory experiment is highly impractical, if not impossible.”

The Pacific islands provide precisely such fertile intellectual terrain, in which comparison is facilitated and deeper understanding possible. I am certainly not the first to recognize or say this. My early mentor, Ward Goodenough, made the point succinctly decades ago when he argued that Oceania “is the logical place to work out the problems of cultural reconstruction of related cultures” (1957:154). This analogy with the experimental sciences, this particular quality of Oceania—its suitedness for controlled comparisons—sometimes led researchers to write of the Pacific as a kind of “laboratory” for historical social science (e.g., Kirch 1984a; Vayda and Rappaport 1963). But the Pacific as “laboratory” is only an analogy, and some have taken exception to other possible connotations. A more current conception is of islands as “model systems” (Vitousek 2002) for understanding both natural and cultural processes. Semantics aside, what matters is that in the Pacific history has given us an unparalleled opportunity to compare what literally hundreds of societies have wrought, at times in highly similar environments, at other times in strikingly different ones. And it is not only the range of environmental variation among Pacific islands that enhances the possibilities for controlled comparison, but also the demonstrable fact that many of these societies had common origins. To be sure, we must not delude ourselves about the complexities; these are human societies after all, replete with every kind of messy complication. Nor was every island an isolated world unto itself. People moved about, they interchanged ideas, words, genes. But as Raymond Fosberg (1963b:5) once wrote, “Isolation . . . [is] basic to insularity.” The relative isolation of islands is what renders them such marvelous microcosms—such wonderful natural and cultural experiments—of history. Among these islands of history, Clio sets her course by the road of the winds.





