The Pacific Islands as a Human Environment



In no other ocean has it been as difficult for a bit of land to be entirely surrounded by water. In no other has it been as difficult for a piece of the earth’s crust to raise its head above the water to become an island. The wonder is not that most islands are small and scattered but that there are so many of them, for the Pacific Ocean contains more islands than all the rest of the world’s oceans combined.

W.L. THOMAS JR., “The Variety of Physical

Environments among Pacific Islands” (1963)





DURING A LIFETIME OF RESEARCH I have been fortunate to visit, explore, and simply spend time on myriad environmentally and ecologically diverse islands (Kirch 2015). These have included diminutive Anuta, less than a square kilometer in land area and just 80 meters high, yet the permanent home of some 160 Polynesians; the semi-atoll formed by Eloaua and Emananus, whose reefs and lagoon harbor an almost indescribable array of marine life; Mangaia, with its fortresslike escarpment of upraised pinnacle karst encompassing an ancient, highly eroded volcano; the vast, elongated island of New Caledonia, whose ancient rocks and metallic soils are remnants of archaic Gondwanaland; and Moloka‘i, whose majestic windward cliffs rise 1,200 meters from the sea, gapped by lush amphitheater-headed valleys with waterfalls cascading down their slopes (fig. 2.1). The contrasts inherent in just these five examples testify to the amazing diversity of Pacific island environments. Such contrasts stem from varied geological origins that have raised islands from the oceanic depths, from different ages, from the work of wind and water on landforms, and from biological processes of dispersal, colonization, and evolution that have cloaked Pacific islands in a rich flora and fauna, distinct from those of continents.




FIGURE 2.1 Dramatic sea cliffs along the windward coast of Moloka‘i were created by massive landslides. Deep amphitheater-headed valleys slice into the central mountain range. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In spite of tremendous diversity, some patterns and processes are common to all oceanic islands. Islands can be classified into several major geological types, and important biogeographic trends across the Pacific account for much of the variation in island biota. In this chapter I review these patterns, trends, and processes, providing a background for understanding the human settlement of the Pacific. The story of the movement of Homo sapiens, first out onto the larger islands and archipelagoes of Near Oceania, then in more recent times into the vast reaches of Remote Oceania, eventually to discover virtually every habitable speck of land, cannot be fully appreciated without some understanding of these key environmental variables. Winds and currents, along with island distances, have influenced the development of navigational methods and seafaring skills. Limitations in natural plant and animal foods helped to shape the subsistence economies of Pacific peoples. Variations in soil, rainfall, and climate necessitated adaptations to their horticultural practices. The availability or absence of natural materials—basalt, chert, obsidian, shell, plant fibers, and the like—played a role in the development of material culture. None of this is to say that the lifeways or cultures of Pacific islanders, any more than those of other peoples, were “determined” by their natural environments. On the contrary, humans everywhere actively modify and shape their world; in contemporary ecological jargon, they “construct” their own ecological “niches.” Yet they do so within certain constraints—and sometimes challenges—posed by the environments they inhabit.





ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE PACIFIC ISLANDS


The geological origins of the Pacific islands mystified scientists of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. The possibility that a great Pacific continent had formerly existed, only to sink beneath the sea, was entertained by various scholars and provided the basis for one of the more bizarre theories on the origins of Pacific peoples.1 The theory of plate tectonics is surely one of the great triumphs of later twentieth-century science, revealing that the earth’s crust consists of shifting plates separated by boundaries, themselves variously zones of spreading or subduction.2 Along the spreading zones, outpourings of magma continually create new crust, especially along the East Pacific Rise. At the subduction zones, as one plate thrusts beneath another, the oceanic crust plunges to great depths to be reabsorbed into the earth’s mantle, partly to reappear as molten lava on the surface through island-arc volcanism, such as along the Kermadec-Tonga Trench.

A tectonic map reveals the center of the Pacific basin to be a vast crustal sheet, the Pacific Plate (map 3). Originating along its eastern margin, the Pacific Plate extends from the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge up through the East Pacific Rise (on which Rapa Nui sits) and follows the western coast of North America. As new oceanic crust is created along this lineament, the Pacific Plate ever so slowly yet relentlessly moves toward the northwest (arrows on map 3). At its western margins the Pacific Plate is “consumed” by being downthrust into a complex series of subduction zones, marked by deep oceanic trenches. These include the Kermadec-Tonga Trench, the New Britain Trench, the Palau Trench, the Mariana Trench (notable for having the deepest spot in the earth’s oceans), the Japan and Kuril Trenches, and the Aleutian Trench. The sinuous line formed by these trenches has long been known as the Andesite Line, because the rocks found in islands to the west are predominantly andesitic, whereas islands on the Pacific Plate are dominated by basaltic lavas. To the west of these trenches lies not just one plate, but a maze of interlocking smaller plates.




MAP 3 A tectonic map of the Pacific basin. The heavy lines indicate major plate boundaries, and the general directions of plate movement are indicated by the arrows. (Adapted from Oliver 1989.)





Strings of island-arcs formed by a characteristic kind of volcanic activity define the western margins of the Pacific Plate. As the geographer Patrick Nunn describes the process, “The magma involved in island-arc volcanism derives from melting of subducted ocean crust. . . . The melting of the crust is the consequence of being heated through burial and from friction along the contact with the buoyant plate” (1994:34). Such plate margin volcanism has formed the extensive Tonga, Vanuatu, and Solomon archipelagoes. The complex geological history of island-arcs can include successive stages of active volcanism, erosion, subsidence, and formation of marine limestones and other sedimentary deposits, producing islands with complex structures of volcanic, metavolcanic, and sedimentary rocks.

The western margin of the Pacific also incorporates plate fragments derived from the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana, which began to break apart 100 million years ago. New Caledonia is one such Gondwanaland fragment, parts of New Zealand another; both broke off from Australia about 80 million years ago and began a slow, isolating drift to the east. Their origins in the ancient southern supercontinent account for unique aspects of the biota of these islands, including archaic conifer trees and many species of large geckos on New Caledonia.3 New Guinea too has a highly complex geological history—also reflecting its Gondwanaland origins—and contains rocks ranging in age from Cambrian or even older formations up to recent Pleistocene volcanics (Brookfield and Hart 1971:26–29).

Pacific Plate islands have a different origin mechanism from that of island-arcs. These midplate or intraplate islands typically originate from a “hot spot,” or thermal plume of magma arising from deep in the mantle. Such hot spots are stationary within the mantle, while the slowly migrating lithosphere of the Pacific Plate gradually moves over them.4 This movement is sufficiently slow that there is time for new islands to be created by successive extrusions of lava that begin with a rupture on the seafloor; the lava flows pile up, creating a volcanic mass that eventually rises above the ocean. In time, the new island moves off the hot spot as it is carried along by the conveyor belt of the crustal lithosphere. A new island then begins to form over the same stationary hot spot. Over a period of tens of millions of years, an entire linear chain of volcanic islands successively rises from the ocean depths. Midplate islands in such linear chains typically pass through the following evolutionary stages: (1) initial volcanism and shield building; (2) subsidence due to point-loading of the thin oceanic crust; (3) subaerial erosion by streams, waves, and wind; (4) often, a late stage of renewed volcanism, typically pyroclastic; (5) continued erosion and reduction of the island’s mass; (6) formation of extensive coastal reefs, if the island is within the tropical to subtropical regions; (7) complete erosion and subsidence of the volcanic cone, resulting in the formation of a coral atoll; and (8) eventual drowning of the island, forming a submerged seamount.

The textbook example of such a midplate linear island chain is the Hawaiian-Emperor Archipelago, extending from the island of Hawai‘i (where the originating hot spot is located), up through the main “high” volcanic islands such as O‘ahu, and continuing through the remnant volcanic pinnacles and coral atolls of the Northwestern Hawaiian chain (also known as Papahānaumokuākea) and finally to the submerged Emperor seamounts that end in Meiji Seamount, a total distance of 3,942 kilometers.5 The Hawaiian chain was created by a stationary magma plume situated in the southeast (where a new, submarine island, named Loihi, is being constructed today off the coast of Hawai‘i); eventually its submerged islands end their evolutionary cycle with subduction into the Kuril Trench. Based on potassium-argon dating of islands along this lineament, the entire life cycle of a Hawaiian island spans 75 million to 80 million years, during which it is above water for perhaps only the first 8 million to 15 million years.

Most islands on the Pacific Plate are oriented along such linear chains, including the Marquesas, Society Islands, Tuamotus, Australs–Southern Cooks, and Samoa. Where they lie in this evolutionary cycle determines the degree of weathering and landform development that occurs. For example, in the main Hawaiian Islands the new island of Hawai‘i (with surface rocks less than 0.3 million years old) has been weathered very little, most of its surface lacking streams or deeply developed soils. At the other end of the chain, Kaua‘i (about 5.1 million years old) is deeply weathered, boasting a valley topography with streams, rich soils, and a coastline protected by coral reefs. Such contrasting landforms were of great consequence to colonizing Oceanic peoples who, with their horticultural subsistence economy, preferred environments with ample water and good soils. Coral reefs and lagoons offered abundant fish and shellfish. The Oceanic peoples were keen observers of geological differences between islands, and they had their own folk theories about island origins. The Hawaiians, for example, recognized that their archipelago had originated progressively from the southeast, the abode of the volcano goddess Pele. The Pele-Hi‘iaka cycle of Hawaiian mythology (Beckwith 1970) describes Pele moving her home from Kaua‘i successively to the other islands, to end up at her present residence in the crater of Halemaumau on Hawai‘i.





TYPES OF ISLANDS


Different geological origins of island-arc and midplate islands provide one basis for classifying Pacific islands; another important variable is that of changes in an island’s landform resulting from submergence and the formation of coral reefs, or by later emergence of reefs. Geographers (e.g., Thomas 1963) have long used a simple four-part classification of Pacific islands that remains useful for understanding the varied island environments to which Pacific peoples adapted. The four island types are (1) island-arc islands; (2) high islands of midplate hot spot origin; (3) coral atolls, formed on volcanic masses that have subsided beneath the ocean’s surface; and (4) makatea islands, in which coral atoll or reef formations have been uplifted or have emerged through tectonic activity. The last three types of islands are illustrated in figure 2.2.




FIGURE 2.2 Examples of the principal geological types of islands. (After Kirch 1984a.)





ISLAND-ARC ISLANDSFormerly labeled “continental” islands because they sometimes incorporate ancient continental rocks, island-arc islands are among the largest islands in the Pacific, concentrated along the western margins of the Pacific basin.6 They include New Britain and New Ireland in the Bismarck Archipelago, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), New Caledonia, Fiji, and New Zealand. Often large in scale, such islands exhibit varied habitats. On large islands such as New Guinea and New Britain, one finds interior-dwelling peoples who have no direct experience of the coast or the sea, although they trade with coastal populations. Because of their complex geological histories, these islands offer a wider range of lithic resources utilized by ancient Pacific peoples to manufacture stone tools. Rhyolite, dacite, metavolcanic rocks, chert, and obsidian are to be found in such island-arc locations.7


HIGH ISLANDSHigh islands are of midplate hot spot origin still in the earlier stages of their evolutionary cycle, before subsidence and erosion have done their work. They will eventually sink beneath the ocean surface to become atolls or seamounts. Tahiti, Rarotonga, Tutuila, and Pohnpei are typical examples of high islands. Most high islands consist of basalt, a hard, dense stone extensively used by Pacific peoples to make adzes and other implements. These islands range considerably in size, from Hawai‘i at 10,458 square kilometers down to Anuta, only 0.8 square kilometer in land area (fig. 2.3). They also vary greatly in landform, depending to a large degree on age and hence extent of erosion. Geologically younger islands often lack watercourses, whereas older islands are deeply dissected by stream valleys. Some high islands, such as ethnographically famous Tikopia, consist of volcanic cones with lakes in their exploded craters.




FIGURE 2.3 Anuta Island in the southeastern Solomons group is one of the smaller high islands in the Pacific but nevertheless home to about 160 Polynesians. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





When they are still young, high islands lack developed coral reefs and typically have wave-cut cliffs along their shorelines. In time, reefs develop along the shores of high islands, first as fringing reefs and later, as the island continues to subside, in the form of barrier reefs separated from the main island by a lagoon (fig. 2.4). However, coral reefs are confined to tropical and subtropical waters, because reef-building corals will not grow north or south of about 24° latitude. Gaps in the reef exist wherever there is substantial freshwater runoff, as at the mouths of large stream valleys. These passes were important, allowing canoes to move between the sheltered lagoon and the open sea.




FIGURE 2.4 The high island of Niuatoputapu in the northern Tongan group is surrounded by an extensive barrier reef and lagoon. In the distance looms Tafahi Island, a young volcanic cone lacking reefs. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





ATOLLSCharles Darwin (1842) first described the stages in the formation of a coral atoll, although he was at a loss to account for the geological mechanism of subsidence, now explained by plate tectonics. As islands migrate westward on the relentlessly moving Pacific Plate, they gradually subside and, in combination with erosion by wind and water, are slowly reduced. Reefs begin to develop around the island’s margin, so that in time an older high island will have a small volcanic core (or sometimes several small islets) surrounded by a lagoon and barrier reef, as with Aitutaki, Mangareva, and Chuuk. This stage of atoll formation is sometimes called an “almost atoll.” Eventually the remnant volcanic peak also becomes submerged, leaving only a ring of coral reef above the ocean. The coral continues to grow upward in the photic zone of the ocean; in time, coral heads and sand generated by storms and biological processes accumulate to form islets, called motu after their Polynesian name. The stages in atoll development are diagrammed in figure 2.5.




FIGURE 2.5 Stages in the development of an atoll, illustrated by block diagrams of various near-atolls and atolls. A, Naiau; B, Kambara; C, Fulanga; D, Tuvutha; E, Namuka; F, Ongea; G, Yangasa; H, Oneata; I, North Argo; J, Reid; K, Great Argo. (After Davis 1928.)





Atolls are among the most precarious environments settled by Pacific peoples.8 Atoll motu stand only 2 to 3 meters above sea level, making them vulnerable to inundation by waves and storm surges during cyclones. Atoll dwellers have learned that a thin lens of freshwater (the Ghyben-Herzberg aquifer) floats on the heavier salt water within the sandy sediments of motu and can be tapped by excavating shallow wells. Certain crops, such as the giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis), can be cultivated in pits dug down to expose this freshwater lens. In Micronesia, people developed salt-tolerant varieties of breadfruit that thrived in atoll conditions (Petersen 2009). However, cultivation on atolls is risky; many crops simply will not tolerate the saline conditions. On the other hand, atolls offer rich marine resources, and atoll peoples tend to be at home as much on and in the sea as on the land. Since atolls lack stone of any kind, their inhabitants have had to adapt their material culture, using coral and shell, especially the giant clam (Tridacna gigas), to make adzes and other tools.


MAKATEA ISLANDSWhen an atoll, or an old high island surrounded by a barrier reef, becomes elevated above sea level it forms a makatea island. Makatea is a Polynesian word meaning “white stone” (reef limestone); it is also the proper name of an island of this type in the Tuamotu Archipelago. Makatea islands are formed by tectonic uplift at plate margins, or by lithospheric flexure, in which a new volcanic hot spot island point-loads the thin oceanic crust, causing an upwarping at a certain distance from the hot spot. The heavy mass of Rarotonga in the Southern Cook Islands caused just such a warping of the oceanic crust, elevating several nearby islands as much as 80 meters above sea level. Some makatea islands are marginal environments for human habitation, lacking surface water (rainfall disappears immediately into the spongelike karst) and even soil for cultivation. One such is Henderson Island, yet prehistoric Polynesians managed to maintain a settlement there for six hundred years (see chap. 8).





CLIMATIC FACTORS IN THE PACIFIC


Pacific islands span the humid tropics to the temperate zones (New Zealand), but most of the islands considered here lie within the tropical to subtropical range. On some islands, high mountains create microclimates, as on Hawai‘i and Maui, where the higher elevations span humid temperate to alpine and tundra environments. The summits of both these islands receive snowfalls during the winter months, and Mauna Kea on Hawai‘i was capped by a small glacier during the late Pleistocene. New Guinea not only had Pleistocene glaciers, but exhibits even greater altitudinal climate differences.

The wind and current systems of the Pacific basin greatly influenced voyaging and settlement, and have important effects on island ecology.9 A wind and current map of the Pacific reveals two great gyres, or circulation cells, one each in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres (map 4). Both of these flow from east to west across the equatorial region (the intertropical convergence zone); the northern gyre flows clockwise, while the southern gyre flows counterclockwise. Given that the prevailing winds and currents are from the east throughout the main zone of tropical islands, Pacific navigators had to develop strategies for sailing from west to east (see chap. 7). There is some temporal variation, however, and the trade winds dominating the eastern Pacific are concentrated between May and September. In the western Pacific, there is a stronger seasonality between trade wind and monsoon seasons, influenced by the cyclic heating and cooling of the nearby Asian and Australian landmasses.




MAP 4 The dominant wind and current directions in the Pacific Ocean. (Adapted from Oliver 1989.)





The persistent trade winds, coming year after year from the same direction, have a major environmental effect on high islands in their path. As moisture-laden trades flow across the windward side of a high island, they are heated and rise, resulting in heavy rainfall (known as orographic precipitation). The island’s leeward side remains in a rain shadow, with significantly reduced rainfall. Over time, greater windward rainfall results in accelerated stream erosion and the creation of broad, amphitheater-headed valleys, while leeward landforms remain relatively dry and undissected. Lush rainforests cover windward slopes, while dryland shrub or parkland characterizes leeward slopes. These windward-leeward contrasts influenced where Oceanic peoples could establish their settlements and gardens. Not surprisingly, the Polynesians developed a terminology for this windward-leeward axis, tonga/tokerau, which they carried with them throughout their colonizations.10

To horticultural peoples such as those of Oceania, rainfall is critical to the sustenance of life. Rainfall over the Pacific gradually declines from west to east, with the Melanesian archipelagoes of the Bismarcks and Solomons receiving the greatest rainfall. However, there is sufficient rainfall throughout the zone of most islands to make horticulture feasible. The exceptions are along the equator (the Kiribati and Tuvalu Archipelagoes) and in northern Micronesia, where, for example, certain of the Marshall Islands suffer from periodic drought, making habitation tenuous.

El Niño and Southern Oscillation are terms that have become familiar to many people because of their effect on contemporary patterns of rainfall or drought in North and South America as well as Australia. The El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) process consists of a periodic thermodynamic redistribution of energy over the Pacific basin, resulting from differential heat buildup in the western Pacific. During an ENSO event, the normal aridity of the western-central Pacific is broken by periodic heavy rainfall episodes, trade winds decrease in intensity, and there is a significant eastward flow of warm water. ENSO events can have dramatic consequences for particular islands, including droughts in the western and central Pacific and heavy rains, floods, and increased cyclone frequency in the eastern Pacific. Fish populations, and the seabird colonies that depend on them for food, are sometimes devastated. These events presumably had serious impacts on Pacific island populations in the past.11





ISLAND LIFE AND BIOGEOGRAPHY


When a new volcanic island emerges above the ocean swells it consists merely of barren rock and cinder—but not for long. Plant colonization begins surprisingly quickly, with floating seeds washed ashore by the waves, or with tiny seeds passed through the digestive tracts of visiting birds. Insects and spiders arrive either under their own power or passively dispersed on high-altitude winds. Seabirds may colonize an island even if it is still relatively barren of plant life. Over a few hundred thousand years, the new island will have acquired a significant biota, its slopes cloaked in trees, shrubs, and herbs, inhabited by a diversity of invertebrates and of volant vertebrates (e.g., birds, fruit bats, or microbats).

Dispersal is one of the most fundamental aspects of Pacific biogeography.12 Groups of plants and animals that are good dispersers (because, for example, their seeds float and remain viable in salt water or because they are capable of over-water flight) have managed to colonize oceanic islands time and again. Other groups, such as most vertebrates, have found it generally impossible to get far beyond continental shores. Because of this, the biota of Pacific islands differs radically from that of continental regions, with certain groups well represented and others wholly lacking; biogeographers refer to this phenomenon as disharmony.

Distance—both from mainland source regions and between stepping-stone islands that aid in the dispersal process—is a critical aspect of island biogeography. The majority of Pacific islands are clustered in the ocean’s western sector; interisland distances increase dramatically as one moves eastward. Due to this uneven clustering of islands, Asia and New Guinea have served as primary source areas for Pacific floras and faunas, with a much lesser contribution from the Americas. Moreover, the large archipelagoes closest to Asia and New Guinea, such as the Solomons and Vanuatu, have much more diverse biotas, with greater numbers of higher-order taxa represented (genera and families), than islands in the central and eastern parts of the Pacific.

Another key aspect of island biogeography is the process of adaptive radiation. When a species of plant or animal succeeded in colonizing an isolated island, it often found itself without its former predators and in a position to exploit what ecologists call an empty niche. Generations descending from this original colonist multiplied and diverged as some offspring adapted and moved into different microhabitats. The classic textbook case of adaptive radiation is that of Darwin’s Galápagos finches, but numerous other examples abound throughout Oceania, such as the achatinellid and amastrid land snails of Hawai‘i or the cryptorhynchinid weevils of Rapa. Speciation on oceanic islands led to high degrees of endemism in certain islands and archipelagoes. In the Hawaiian Islands, for example, no less than 94 percent of all flowering plant species and 13 percent of the plant genera are endemic; that is, they are found nowhere else in the world.

These aspects of island biogeography, whose complexities I have only touched on, had important consequences for colonizing human populations. First, as people moved from the large Near Oceanic archipelagoes into Remote Oceania, they increasingly found the newly discovered islands lacking in many familiar plants and animals. Moreover, east of the Bismarcks, there were few indigenous plants with edible tubers or fruits; the would-be colonizers had to bring crop plants and other economic species with them. On the other hand, sizable populations of land birds and nesting seabirds offered a ready source of meat, a resource that was frequently hit very hard within the first few decades after human settlement (Steadman 2006).

Vegetation on Pacific islands varies tremendously according to island size and altitudinal range, but a few typical plant communities are noteworthy from the perspective of human use.13 In the tropical Pacific, the immediate coastal or strand vegetation is dominated by salt-tolerant trees such as Pandanus, whose leaves were widely used to weave mats; Barringtonia asiatica, whose fruit produces a poison used to catch fish; and the ubiquitous coconut palm (Cocos nucifera). A wild form of coconut had naturally dispersed at least as far as central Polynesia (Cook Islands and Society Islands) prior to human settlement, but domesticated varieties with their larger fruit were carried by would-be colonists in canoes.14 In the western Pacific, the coastal zone is often characterized by extensive mangrove (Rhizophora and other taxa) swamps or by lowland swamps dominated by the sago palm (Metroxylon spp.), which is harvested for its starchy pith. Moving away from the coast into the interior lowlands of island-arc or high islands, one enters rainforest, eventually giving way to even wetter montane and cloud forests on the higher islands. On some islands, the lower and middle elevations are dominated by grasslands or fernlands, especially in the drier leeward zones. This is the case over large parts of Viti Levu in Fiji (Ash 1992) and on New Caledonia, as well as on some smaller islands, such as Futuna, Mangaia, and Mangareva (fig. 2.6). These pyrophytic (fire-tolerant) savannas, characterized by Miscanthus grass or Dicranopteris ferns, often resulted from millennia of forest clearance and repeated burning by humans.




FIGURE 2.6 Large tracts in the interior of Futuna Island in Western Polynesia are covered in pyrophytic Dicranopteris fernlands, the result of former land use practices such as shifting cultivation. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Island faunas, as I have noted, are frequently disharmonic in comparison to those of nearby continental regions.15 In the Pacific, mammals are limited to a few marsupials (e.g., wallabies, wombats, cuscus) and to several genera of rats (Rattus, Melomys, Uromys), along with fruit bats (Pteropodidae). Of these, only fruit bats dispersed into Remote Oceania, the marsupials and rats being restricted to the Bismarcks and the Solomon Islands. Reptiles too are of fairly limited distribution, with the majority of species of snakes, frogs, diurnal lizards, and geckos being found in Near Oceania or in the larger island-arc archipelagoes. Because of their excellent dispersal abilities, many kinds of birds managed to colonize Pacific islands, where they account for the greatest diversity of vertebrates. Seabirds (including frigates, shearwaters, petrels, noddies, and boobies) and various kinds of land birds (megapodes, pigeons, fruit doves, rails, and parrots, among them) were especially abundant on oceanic islands at the time of first human arrival (Steadman 1995, 2006). More-over, flightlessness developed in a repeated evolutionary process on many Pacific islands, especially in various genera of rails.

The richest terrestrial faunal diversity on Pacific islands was among the invertebrates, including insects and land snails, but most of these were of little direct consequence or interest to people. However, a large and highly delect-able land crab, Birgus latro, the “coconut robber” crab, was a prized food of islanders. The presence of certain insects—most of all the Anopheles mosquitoes, which are vectors for several kinds of Plasmodium, the cause of malaria—also had health implications for humans.

The Pacific islands were not rich in edible terrestrial species other than birds and fruit bats, and their floras were particularly impoverished in terms of edible plants. Far more important sources of animal food were the reefs and lagoons surrounding most islands. The same general pattern of a west-to-east decline in diversity holds for the fish and mollusks of the Indo-Pacific faunal province.16 Thus the waters of the Bismarck Archipelago teem with several thousand species of fish, whereas remote Rapa Nui has a mere 126 species. Most important to Oceanic peoples were the inshore and benthic, or bottom-dwelling, fish, in such families as the parrotfish (Scaridae), wrasses (Labridae), tangs (Acanthuridae), squirrelfish (Holocentridae), jacks (Carangidae), and groupers (Serranidae). These were taken with an amazing variety of fishing techniques, including the use of hooks, nets, spears, traps, and poisons. Oceanic peoples also knew how to troll the open sea for pelagic fish such as tunas (Scombridae) and mahi-mahi (Corphyraenidae), but compared to the inshore reefs the open ocean is a relative desert; the yield from pelagic trolling was fairly minor. Bivalves and gastropod mollusks of all kinds were collected from reef and lagoon floors, both for consumption and, in many cases, to manufacture artifacts from their durable shells. Other important marine foods were sea urchins, octopi, crabs of many kinds, seaweeds, and marine turtles, especially the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas).





THE MICROBIOTIC WORLD AND HUMAN POPULATIONS


It may be a universal cognitive feature of Homo sapiens to think of the world primarily in terms of our own bodily scale; this bias carries over even into scientific notions about human history. Thus we take great account of human interactions with macroscopic animals and plants but in general pay little attention to the vast microscopic world that not only surrounds us but also lives within us. Archaeologists have paid too little attention to these matters, partly because the evidence for disease among prehistoric populations can be difficult to obtain. However, the historically documented distribution of disease-causing microorganisms in the Pacific islands raises several important hypotheses regarding the impacts and effects of disease in Oceanic prehistory.

The same biogeographic patterns that hold for macroscopic biota in the Pacific apply to the microscopic world. Thus the diversity of microorganisms drops off sharply between Near Oceania and Remote Oceania, as does the diversity of such disease-bearing vectors as Anopheles mosquitoes. Generalizing broadly, the archipelagoes of Near Oceania (and here we must extend the boundary to encompass Vanuatu as well) are replete with infectious and parasitic viruses, protozoa, bacteria, and other disease-causing microorganisms, whereas the islands of Remote Oceania are (or were, prior to the expansion of disease after Western contact) relatively disease-free. Anyone who has done fieldwork in both Near Oceania and Remote Oceania will have learned this difference for themselves, often the hard way. I have spent many months on islands in both regions, and whereas neither I nor my Western team members have ever suffered serious health problems in Remote Oceanic field sites, it has been quite the opposite story in the Solomon Islands or in Mussau in the Bismarcks. There we have contracted malaria (at times life-threatening), ulcerating skin infections resistant to even broad-spectrum antibiotics, persistent respiratory ailments, and gut-racking intestinal infections. It is not just that we are “soft” Westerners unaccustomed to the rigors of the “bush.” The indigenous villagers with whom we lived in close contact in the Solomons and Mussau are themselves beset with these same ailments; they often exhibit high levels of anemia from endemic malaria. In contrast, the indigenous peoples with whom I have worked in Remote Oceania generally enjoy good health, even where little or no modern medical care is available (see Howe 1984:47–50). Tellingly, the exceptions occur where the adoption of a Western diet and lifestyle has led to such new diseases as hypertension and diabetes.

Without doubt, the most significant parasitic disease preying on the human occupants of Near Oceania (again extending into Vanuatu) has been malaria, a highly debilitating and often fatal disease resulting from infection by one or more of several Plasmodium species. In historic times, Plasmodium vivax, P. malariae, and P. falciparum have been found throughout the low- to midaltitude elevations of New Guinea, the Bismarcks, the Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. The first two of these have probably been in the region for as long as humans (Groube 1993a), whereas the more virulent and often fatal P. falciparum may have been introduced somewhat later in prehistory. At least five species of Anopheles mosquito are also present, providing the necessary vector. In a study of four Solomon Islands populations, Damon (1974) found that as many as two-thirds of the adults (in Kwaio and Baegu) had enlarged spleens and lowered hemoglobin as a consequence of high malarial infection rates. In contrast, both the Plasmodium parasite and the Anopheles vector are absent from all of Remote Oceania other than the Reef–Santa Cruz group of the southeastern Solomons and Vanuatu. (Indeed, in some Remote Oceanic island groups such as Hawai‘i, mosquitoes were entirely absent prior to European contact.) This disjunct distribution of malaria probably had major consequences for the demographic history of human populations in the two regions.

Near Oceania is also replete with other kinds of infectious and parasitic microorganisms, many of which are little studied and not well documented in either the anthropological or the medical literature. Epidemiological surveys of several human groups in the Solomon Islands, however, reported frequently high infection rates for such parasites as hookworm (nearly 45 percent of some populations) and intestinal parasites like Entamoeba coli and other species (causing amoebic dysentery), Ascaris, Trichuris, Iodamoeba, Giardia, and Dientamoeba (Damon 1974; Friedlaender and Page 1987). Brown (1978:60–61) refers to the “high incidence of enteric and respiratory disease” among the Highlands peoples of New Guinea, as well as the presence of various “parasite and worm infections.” The pervasiveness of these diseases in Near Oceania presumably lowered the overall resistance levels of indigenous populations, thereby increasing the probability of mortality from malaria or other fatal diseases, especially among high-risk individuals such as infants and pregnant women. While we must be cautious about overgeneralizing, the distribution of diseases in the pre-European Pacific islands was far from uniform. Certainly, the concentration and persistence of disease-causing microorganisms in Near Oceania had serious consequences for long-term human history.





ISLAND ECOSYSTEMS


Just as island biotas differ in fundamental ways from those of continents, so island ecosystems have their peculiar characteristics. The brilliant Pacific botanist Raymond Fosberg (1963b) drew attention to some of the key aspects of island ecosystems that are relevant to our understanding of the role of humans in adapting to—and frequently changing—Pacific environments. Fosberg delineated two features as “basic to insularity”: isolation and limited size. Naturally, both of these are relative and become more significant as one moves from the larger and less isolated archipelagoes of Near Oceania into the vastness of the central and eastern Pacific. Fosberg cataloged some of the consequences of isolation and limited size: “limitation in, or even absence of certain other resources; limitation in organic diversity; reduced inter-species competition; protection from outside competition and consequent preservation of archaic, bizarre, or possibly ill-adapted forms; tendency toward climatic equability; extreme vulnerability, or tendency toward great instability when isolation is broken down; and tendency toward rapid increase in entropy when change has set in” (1963b:5). The last two of these are of particular relevance to the human settlement and occupation of the Pacific islands, for insular ecosystems were more vulnerable than others to disturbance at human hands. As Fosberg put it, “Perhaps the thing that most distinguishes islands, at least oceanic islands . . . is their extreme vulnerability, or susceptibility, to disturbance” (1963a:559).

Oceanic ecosystems have never been static or changeless; natural and cultural processes are always at work to foster change. Short-term natural processes such as ENSO events trigger episodes of drought or high cyclone frequency. In various parts of the Pacific, volcanic eruptions have had dramatic consequences for human populations. In Melanesia, explosive eruptions have occurred within the period of human occupation in New Guinea, New Britain, the Manus Islands, and Vanuatu.17 Some of these volcanic events blanketed vast areas with scalding ash and pyroclastic debris, killing many people and making human habitation impossible. The Kuwae eruption in the mid-fifteenth century A.D. blew apart an originally larger island, creating a vast caldera between what are now Epi and Tongoa Islands in Vanuatu. This eruption, which is recorded in Vanuatu oral traditions, probably had some effect on world climate; it is recorded in ash falls from the South Pole dating to A.D. 1452 (Robin, Monzier, and Eissen 1994). About three hundred years ago, Long Island off the northeast coast of New Guinea similarly exploded in a cataclysmic eruption, spewing 10 cubic kilo-meters of tephra westward across the interior of New Guinea, blanketing about 80,000 square kilometers with an average depth of 1.5 centimeters of airfall tephra; this momentous geological event is likewise recorded in oral traditions throughout the region (Blong 1982). In the Hawaiian Islands, volcanism is rarely explosive but no less significant for the Polynesian inhabitants, since large portions of Hawai‘i Island (and some parts of Maui) have been extensively covered with lava flows since the time of initial human arrival (Somers 1991).

Longer-term dynamism comes from such changes as the subsidence and formation of atolls, tectonic uplift of makatea islands, and eustatically fluctuating sea levels. Sea level change, in particular, has had important consequences for human settlement of the Pacific. During the Pleistocene, sea levels were periodically as much as 100 to 120 meters lower than at present, facilitating movement of people into Near Oceania (see chap. 3). Sea levels rose rapidly during the early Holocene, and throughout much of the central Pacific they reached a level 1 to 1.5 meters higher than at present by about 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. Archaeological sites dating to this time period are frequently found on older beach terraces, sometimes a considerable distance inland from present coastlines (see chap. 4).





HUMANS AND ISLAND SOCIOECOSYSTEMS


It has not always been realized that Pacific islanders played an active role in modifying and molding their island worlds. Eighteenth-century voyagers to the Pacific helped to shape European notions of the “noble savage,” l’homme naturel, living in a state of harmony with nature. Arriving at Tahiti in April 1768, the French navigator Louis de Bougainville thought himself “transported into the garden of Eden” (Smith 1985:42). As natural history studies gained sophistication in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, the role of humans in causing disturbance to island ecosystems became increasingly evident, but often this was attributed to changes that occurred after the arrival of Western peoples, who introduced a host of new plants and animals, many of them competitive and destructive (e.g., goats, sheep, and cattle), as well as new land use practices (e.g., large-scale plantation agriculture). Thus for most anthropologists, until relatively recently, the disturbances caused by indigenous populations in the Pacific were thought to be minor or insignificant. The social anthropologist George P. Murdock (1963:151) summed up the prevailing view when he claimed that even the colonization of islands by Polynesian agriculturalists resulted in “little net change in organic diversity.”

This Rousseauian view was based on unquestioned assumptions, untested with direct empirical evidence of environmental changes before and after the colonization of islands by indigenous Pacific populations. Evidence for pre-European anthropogenic change began to accumulate in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when archaeologists working in the Pacific started to shift their research agendas away from an emphasis on origins and cultural sequences to investigate ecological relationships between indigenous human populations and island environments. Working collaboratively with palynologists, avian paleontologists, geomorphologists, and other natural scientists, Pacific archaeologists have amassed a substantial body of data demonstrating that the nonindustrialized peoples of the Pacific often exerted major impacts on island ecosystems.18 This should not come as a surprise, given the inherent fragility or vulnerability of oceanic ecosystems (as Fosberg had pointed out), combined with the high human population densities observed on many Pacific islands and the intensive modes of land use practiced by Pacific peoples.

But the interactions between island populations and their environments was hardly a one-way street. Even as human activities inevitably changed island landscapes and the fauna and flora that inhabited them, people themselves had to adapt their technologies, their economies, and their social and political organization. To use current phrasing, the natural and human systems on islands were “dynamically coupled.” Barton et al. (2004) proposed the term socioecosystems for landscapes shaped by these dynamically linked human-natural processes.

Human-induced changes on islands often commenced with the first arrival of would-be colonists, for these people usually were equipped to establish permanent settlements, which meant that they were carrying with them crop plants and domestic animals. Islanders also moved other organisms about, such as tree snails of the genus Partula, which were prized for making necklaces (Ó Foighil, Lee, and Slapcinsky 2011). Moreover, voyaging canoes carried inadvertent “stowaways,” such as the Pacific rat (Rattus exulans), whose bones show up in virtually every Pacific settlement site.19 Rats, whose numbers soon increased in the absence of predators, probably had significant impacts on ground-nesting land bird and seabird populations. In addition to the rat, we have evidence for the accidental transport of geckos and skinks, certain species of garden snails (e.g., Lamellaxis gracilis), and various weeds (e.g., Ludwigia octivalvis).

The modification of island ecosystems began in earnest as native forests were cleared to make way for root-crop gardens and for orchards of tree crops. Oceanic peoples widely practice swidden, or shifting, cultivation, in which patches of forest are cut, allowed to dry, and burned prior to planting.20 Under conditions of low population density it is possible for forests to regenerate, but more often than not the cleared land is gardened repeatedly and a highly transformed, “second-growth” vegetation replaces the original rainforest. On certain kinds of substrate, where soils are thin or poorly developed (as on many tropical islands), the removal of forest and repeated burning can seriously degrade a landscape, which then comes to be dominated by fire-resistant (pyrophytic) grasses or ferns. Other landscapes were, over time, thoroughly reworked by Pacific agriculturalists into highly intensive forms of land use. Examples of such “landesque capital-intensive” agriculture are the Highlands valleys of New Guinea, the vast irrigated systems and yam fields of New Caledonia, the extensive hill and ridge terraces of Palau, and the stone-faced taro pondfields of Hawaiian valleys.21

Evidence for vegetation changes resulting from such land use practices as shifting cultivation has now been obtained from many Pacific islands, primarily through the analysis of pollen grains (palynology) in sediment cores. Pollen sequences from sites in New Guinea, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, Yap, the Cook Islands, the Society Islands, New Zealand, Rapa Nui, and Hawai‘i all demonstrate major vegetation changes that can be linked to human land use actions.22 Charcoal recovered from archaeological excavations offers an alternative source of information regarding human use of woody plants and changes in forest composition through time (Dotte-Sarout et al. 2013; Huebert and Allen 2016).

Rapa Nui presents a dramatic case of human-induced vegetation change, for this entire island was essentially deforested through hundreds of years of intensive land use.23 Botanists, who once thought that the island was a natural oceanic grassland “steppe,” now realize that it was originally covered in forest dominated by an extinct species of giant palm (Paschalococos disperta), closely related to the Chilean oil palm. The Mangareva Islands are another instance where the natural forest was virtually eliminated, replaced with a limited range of Polynesian-introduced tree crops (including coconut and breadfruit) on the coastal plains and in the narrow valleys, while on the steeper slopes and hills fire-resistant ferns and grasses came to dominate (Kirch, Molle, et al. 2015).

The causes of deforestation on Pacific islands may not have been limited to forest clearance alone (Rolett and Diamond 2004). On volcanic islands more than a few million years old (e.g., Mangaia and Mangareva), rock-derived nutrients such as phosphorus become seriously depleted, hindering forest regeneration (Vitousek 2002). On these older islands, large colonies of nesting seabirds probably provided a key source of nutrients, through deposition of their guano, prior to human arrival. Decimation of these seabird populations, however, eliminated the nutrient flows. Analysis of stable isotopes in the bones of Pacific rats excavated from Mangareva archaeological sites shows steep declines in nitrogen levels over time (Swift, Miller, and Kirch 2016), almost certainly a consequence of major reductions in seabird colonies.

Forest clearance had additional consequences on certain islands, due to the exposure of steep hill slopes and accelerated erosion. Matthew Spriggs (1986) has shown that on the island of Aneityum in Vanuatu, a process of valley-bottom infilling and extension of the coastal plains began about two thousand years ago, as a direct result of forest clearance and increased erosion rates on the interior hills and ridges. Similar sequences have been suggested for Futuna, Mo‘orea, and O‘ahu Islands; the extensive iron sand dunes at the mouth of the great Sigatoka Valley on Viti Levu (Fiji) probably also owe their existence to land clearance and increased erosion rates in the interior. In addition to sedimentation in valleys and on coastal plains, increased sediment loads in streams and rivers may have had effects on inshore marine ecology. In the Koné region of New Caledonia, for example, changes in the kinds of marine mollusks available through time are linked to changes in littoral substrates or turbidity resulting from erosion (Miller 1997). Vast tracts on both North and South Islands, New Zealand, were converted from temperate forest to open terrain, typically dominated by Pteridium ferns, as a consequence of human ignited fires (Bussell 1988; Elliot et al. 1995; McGlone 1983; McGlone and Wilmshurst 1999).

Human impacts on islands were by no means limited to forest clearance and the development of savannas, or to erosion and valley infilling. Dramatic evidence for human impacts on island ecosystems comes from the record of bird bones excavated from Pacific archaeological sites. David Steadman (2006) has analyzed assemblages of bird bones from sites on many islands across tropical Polynesia; his data are reinforced by other studies for Hawai‘i and New Zealand. Case after case demonstrates that the Pacific islands before the advent of humans had a far richer bird fauna than that historically documented, with large populations of certain kinds of birds occupying oceanic islands at the time of initial human arrival.24 On Rapa Nui, for example, at least twenty-five species of seabirds and possibly six species of land birds were originally present, yet only one seabird species survives (barely) on the island today; there are no endemic or indigenous land birds at all (Steadman 2006; Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino 1994). In New Caledonia, a large mound-building megapode (Sylviornis neocaledoniae) went extinct soon after the arrival of humans in the mid–second millennium B.C., as did other endemic fauna, including a terrestrial crocodile (fig 2.7).




FIGURE 2.7 Reconstruction of the extinct giant ground-dwelling megapode Sylviornis neocaledoniae and the extinct terrestrial crocodile Mekosuchus inexpectatus, both from the island of New Caledonia. (After Sand 1995.)





In 1989 and 1991, together with Steadman, I excavated a large rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, called Tangatatau (Kirch, ed., 2017). From the well-stratified ashy midden layers of this rockshelter, which had been occupied by Mangaians repeatedly for about eight centuries, we recovered a remarkable collection of bird bones, revealing a typical story of the reduction, local extirpation, and extinction of a large part of the island’s original avifauna.25 Among the bird species that were once present on the island, and which had been hunted, eaten, and their remains discarded in the shelter, were rails, crakes, a gallinule, a sandpiper, fruit doves, pigeons, and lorikeets. In all, a prehuman avifauna consisting of at least nineteen land bird species and twelve seabird species was reduced during the period of Polynesian occupation to five land bird and six seabird species, many of these today holding on to a most precarious and endangered existence.

For no island group in the Pacific is the record of bird extinctions more dramatic than New Zealand. On these large subtropical to temperate islands, a marvelous array of birdlife had evolved prior to the arrival of the first Polynesian settlers. Most distinctive were several genera and species of flightless birds known collectively by their Maori name, moa.26 The biggest of these moa, Dinornis giganteus, stood almost 4 meters tall, probably the largest bird ever known to exist. However, New Zealand wildlife was not limited to the moa, and at least thirty-seven native bird species and subspecies went extinct during the period of Polynesian settlement (Anderson 1997:280). By the time of European arrival, all eleven moa species had been completely eliminated. The larger moa were extensively hunted for food, especially on South Island, where some archaeological middens were so packed full of moa bones that they were commercially mined in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in order to make bone meal fertilizer! Equally important as a cause of the decimation of New Zealand’s birdlife was forest clearance for gardening and clearance by fire for hunting, which has been estimated to have drastically reduced the native forest cover of the two main islands (McGlone 1983, 1989).27

Recognizing that indigenous Pacific peoples were responsible for significant changes to their island environments—as documented by mounting archaeological and paleoecological evidence—is not to single them out as environmentally insensitive eco-vandals. In my view, Pacific islanders were not more or less environmentally conscious than most other human groups; it is only our outdated Rousseauian notions that make it appear so. Pacific peoples certainly have a fond and often deeply emotional attachment to their island homes, and their songs and traditions frequently speak to the great beauty of these islands. It is also the case that traditional Oceanic societies practiced certain kinds of conservation practices and land management strategies, but these were generally aimed at conservation of resources for future use.28 Yet the simple truth is that human populations everywhere live not in some idealized “state of nature” but in various forms of exploitative relationships with their environments. The impact of low-density hunters and gatherers may be relatively slight, but the cumulative effects of high-density agricultural peoples on their landscapes are inescapably significant. Pacific islanders did much—with the “neolithic” technology at their disposal—to create viable subsistence economies on the islands they settled and to manage their resources wisely. That they were not always successful is a lesson that humanity today has yet to fully hear or heed.





THREE


Sahul and the Prehistory of “Old” Melanesia



The Pleistocene evidence may open a window onto two different forms of the creation of time and space. The initial forms of colonisation created a spatially extensive and mobile world, in which the definition of groups and social identity would have been quite unlike anything we know of today. Spatially extensive and temporally long lasting, this world was then transformed in the glacial maximum to a way of life with different spatial and temporal rhythms.

C. GOSDEN, “Understanding the Settlement

of Pacific Islands in the Pleistocene” (1993)





ON THE HUON PENINSULA of northern Papua New Guinea, nature played the role of architect on a grand scale: a staircase created for a Wagnerian race of giants rises steeply from the Bismarck Sea, climbing hundreds of meters into the sky. The relentless tectonic engine of plate-margin uplift raised a succession of coral reefs over the past 140,000 years. Each emerged reef appears like an abrupt step; thanks to U/Th dating, these stages can be accurately dated. In the 1980s, Les Groube of the University of Papua New Guinea explored this giant staircase. At a place called Bobongara he found numbers of stone implements called “waisted blades” on a reef terrace dated between 61,000 and 52,000 years ago. Actually, these tools are more like crude axes, sometimes made from large river cobbles that had been split in half and further modified by flaking at their “waists,” possibly to tie or haft them to wooden handles (fig. 3.1). Volcanic ash from a layer associated with some of these implements gave a thermoluminescence date of 60,000 to 40,000 years ago, cross-checking well with the U/Th dates on the reef terrace.1 This makes the Huon site among the oldest manifestations of a human presence in the Australia–New Guinea region.




FIGURE 3.1 Waisted axes from the Huon Peninsula. (After Groube 1986.)





On our way to a third field season in the Mussau Islands in 1988, my graduate students and I visited Groube at his University of PNG laboratory at Boroko, just outside the capital, Port Moresby. One of the more colorful characters of Pacific archaeology, Les greeted us in rumpled clothes and sandals and proceeded to pull out several wooden trays filled with the Bobongara waisted blades while his lab mascot—a wiry tabby cat—rolled about on a heap of potsherds on the lab workbench. There is an indescribable thrill to holding in one’s own hands a stone tool manufactured more than forty millennia ago (something on the order of 1,600 to 2,000 human generations). Later, at the university staff club, Les told us of his speculative interpretation of the Huon tools. Not being edge-ground, these implements could not have functioned as proper axes, but given their weight they might have been effective at smashing down forest undergrowth or for ring-barking trees. According to Groube (1989:297), these tools “would be suitable also for some forms of more direct food procurement [such as] stages of sago production, for splitting cycad trunks, or for thinning Pandanus stands to promote ripening of the fruit.” Groube observed that various natural food plants, such as “aerial yams, local bananas, swamp taro,” and others (many of which were domesticated in Near Oceania), would thrive in areas where the dense rainforest canopy had been disturbed or opened up (299). In short, the waisted axes of the Huon Peninsula may represent early stages in an evolutionary progression from forest foraging, through intermediate stages of food-plant promotion and forest management, leading ultimately to plant domestication and true gardening (301–2).2

The Bobongara finds are among the critical and exciting evidence pertaining to the first great era in Pacific prehistory: the colonization of Australia, New Guinea, and the adjacent islands of Near Oceania by early humans and the development—by generations of their descendants—of diverse cultures, languages, and biological populations. Although Pleistocene and early Holocene people did not venture into the Pacific beyond the southeastern end of the Solomons, this period is of greatest significance for regional prehistory. For it was here, in the area we call Near Oceania, that several fundamental cultural developments took place, especially the domestication of tropical crop plants and the origination of an oceanic mode of horticulture.





THE PLEISTOCENE GEOGRAPHY OF SAHUL AND NEAR OCEANIA


The great nineteenth-century naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace explored the Malay archipelago (what we today call Indonesia), drawing the attention of biogeographers to fundamental biological differences between the Australia–New Guinea region and Southeast Asia. Notable among such differences is the concentration of marsupials in the Australia–New Guinea region, with a concomitant near-total absence of other forms of terrestrial mammals. The boundary between the Asian and Australian faunal regions consists of a zone of smaller islands bearing the name “Wallacea,” in honor of the great co-discoverer of the theory of natural selection.3

Wallace (1895:9) speculated that the key to understanding this disjunct faunal distribution would lie in “now-submerged lands, uniting islands to continents.” He was right in that, with plate tectonic theory and knowledge of the geological evolution of the former Gondwanaland supercontinent, we now comprehend the long-term mechanisms for the patterns Wallace recognized. The deep-time history of Gondwanaland need not detain us, except to note that the Australian Plate separated from the rest about 40 million years ago; its archaic biota thenceforth evolved on a separate trajectory. By the Pleistocene era the Australian Plate was in its modern position, separated from the Asian mainland by deep oceanic trenches in the Wallacean region.

New Guinea, Tasmania, and some smaller islands near Australia appear on a modern map as separate lands, yet were we to siphon off the world’s oceans to a depth of only 130 meters below sea level, all these would suddenly be joined to the greater Australian landmass. This, indeed, is just what happened at several intervals during the Pleistocene, the siphon being the uptake of oceanic waters into the vast ice sheets that repeatedly covered the world’s high latitudes. A map of the Australian region during such a glacial maximum, such as map 5, reveals the modern Arafura Sea between New Guinea and Australia as an extensive plain (with the Gulf of Carpentaria as a lake at various times) linking New Guinea to Australia, and similarly, the Bass Strait as a land bridge to Tasmania. Biogeographers call this enlarged “Greater Australian” continent Sahul (Ballard 1993). On the western side of Wallacea, the vast Sunda shelf was also exposed as dry land, greatly expanding the Southeast Asian mainland. Nonetheless, the islands of Wallacea (primarily Sulawesi, Ambon, Ceram, Halmahera, and the Lesser Sundas) always remained an island world, imposing a barrier to the dispersal of terrestrial vertebrates, including early hominids.




MAP 5 Approximate configuration of Sunda and Sahul during the Pleistocene. (Adapted from Spriggs 1997.)





To the north and east of New Guinea, the islands of Near Oceania (the Bismarcks and Solomons) were likewise never connected to Sahul by dry land, for deepwater trenches also separate these from the Australian Plate. This isolation gave rise to marked biogeographic patterns, for the diversity of marsupials, birds, and other life forms drops off rapidly as one leaves New Guinea and moves progressively through the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes.

The Pleistocene sequence of rising and falling global sea levels—linked to climatic cycles of glacial retreat and expanse—and the succession of transgressing and regressing shorelines that resulted from sea level change have been reconstructed by analyzing deep-sea cores combined with geomorphological study and radiometric dating of coastlines, such as that of the Huon Peninsula.4 A sea level curve for the past 140,000 years indicates that the periods of greatest fall were at about 140,000 and 18,000 years ago (fig. 3.2). Between these two maximal periods, when the oceans dropped more than 100 meters, were less pronounced cycles with drops of 20 to 60 meters.




FIGURE 3.2 Fluctuating sea levels characterized the Pacific world during the late Pleistocene and Holocene. HP, Huon Peninsula curve; NJS, temperature-corrected isotopic sea level curve. (After Chappell 1993.)





One might anticipate that the peopling of Sahul would correlate with one of these phases of greatest sea level lowering and maximal exposure of dry land. The archaeological evidence is against this, however, and it seems that human colonization of this region was most likely effected during the interval between 60,000 and 40,000 years ago. But the key point is that even when the oceans were at their lowest levels, there were always significant open-water gaps between the islands of Wallacea; therefore the arrival of humans into Sahul necessitated over-water transport. This was also the case with the expansion of humans beyond New Guinea into the archipelagoes of Near Oceania. Herein lies one of the most exciting and intriguing aspects of Pacific prehistory: we are likely dealing with the earliest purposive voyaging in the history of humankind.





INITIAL HUMAN ARRIVAL IN SAHUL AND NEAR OCEANIA


More than one hundred Pleistocene sites have been discovered in Sahul (including Australia) and Near Oceania (Smith and Sharp 1993). According to a recent review by O’Connell and Allen (2015:74; see also Allen and O’Connell 2014), there are “26 archaeological sites or localities that offer relatively reliable, relatively well-published evidence of an anatomically modern human presence in Sahul, Wallacea and the Bismarck Archipelago by about 40,000 years ago.” Although the possibility of earlier sites cannot be entirely dismissed, after a thorough review of the radiocarbon dates from these sites, O’Connell and Allen (2015: 80) conclude that the ancestors of the modern Sahul indigenous peoples arrived on the continent around 47,000 year ago. These early sites are not concentrated in the western parts of Sahul near the likely corridors of human entrée but are distributed over virtually the entire geographic expanse of Sahul and Near Oceania, from Northern Australia to the Murray-Darling basin, from southern Tasmania to New Guinea, and even up to New Ireland. This geographic spread demonstrates that having crossed the sea barriers separating Sahul from Asia for more than 40 million years, Homo sapiens populations rapidly spread out over these new lands. Moreover, these early modern humans were able to move into, exploit, and permanently inhabit a remarkable range of habitats, from the tundralike high latitudes of Tasmania through the deserts of Australia to the humid tropical rainforests of New Guinea and the Bismarcks.5

Within Near Oceania itself, several sites on New Guinea, New Britain, and New Ireland date to the early stage of human entry into Sahul (table 3.1). In addition to Bobongara on the Huon Peninsula, open sites in the Ivane Valley in the eastern Highlands have been dated to between 38,000 and 41,000 years old (Ford 2011; Summerhayes, Leavesley et al. 2010). Colonists would have had to cross open water from New Guinea to reach New Britain, where sites at Kupona na Dari on the Willaumez Peninsula (Torrence et al. 2004) and at Yombon in the island’s interior (Pavlides 1993) indicate human activities over this large island by around 40,000 years ago. And on New Ireland, two rockshelters, Buang Merabak and Matemkupkum, have initial occupations dated to between roughly 38,000 and 40,000 years ago.


TABLE 3.1

Selected Pleistocene Sites of Near Oceaniaa





Synthesizing the available archaeological evidence for the initial colonization of Sahul and Near Oceania, O’Connell and Allen write:

Wallacea and Sahul were deliberately colonised by highly mobile, Southeast Asian–derived human populations practising economies based on the exploitation of intermediate and high ranked plant and animal foods. Migration was provoked by demographic pressure on Sunda and facilitated by the relatively favourable climatic and environmental conditions. . . . Despite their inherent capacity for growth, Sahul populations subsequently remained surprisingly small and spatially concentrated in persistent ‘sweet’ spots, enjoying occasional growth spurts and expanding geographically, but always retreating to the same or similar refuges, mainly along steeply sloping coastlines, in better-watered parts of the continental interior and on the islands of the Bismarck Archipelago. . . . Patterns in archaeological site structure and assemblage composition point to high mobility in each of the regions occupied. With limited exceptions, diets and technologies remained narrow and relatively simple for many millennia. Historically known patterns in economy, technology and demography emerged only in the Holocene. (2012:12)





PLEISTOCENE VOYAGING IN NEAR OCEANIA


When Pleistocene-age dates for Australia began to be reported, first from Mulvaney’s 1962 excavations at Kenniff Cave and then increasingly as the pace of archaeological research picked up, the probability of purposive voyaging—or of the watercraft to enable such voyaging—seemed unlikely for this remote time period. Some speculated that Sahul was settled by accident, with a few early humans (or even a single pregnant female!) drifting on floating logs over the Wallacean waterways. However, the mounting (if indirect) evidence that these early colonists were capable of transporting themselves over open ocean for distances of 200 or more kilometers has forced a rethinking of the possibilities of Pleistocene-era watercraft. On reflection, this seems only appropriate, for the history of humankind in the Pacific must above all be a history of voyaging.

The evidence is entirely circumstantial, for no remains of rafts, dugouts, bark-boats, or the like have been preserved. What then compels us to think that the colonists of Sahul and Near Oceania did not merely drift into their new lands by accident? The weight of statistical probability. If only a single open-water crossing were required, one could invoke Occam’s razor, or similar principles of parsimony, to argue that over the course of thousands of human generations, surely a few individuals would have made it by chance alone over the Wallacean divide into Sahul. But this was not the case, for—regardless of whether the early migrants followed a northerly route into Sahul via Sulawesi, Peleng, and Sula on into what is now Irian Jaya (or other variants thereof) or a southerly route via the intervisible chain of islands stretching from Java through Bali, Lombok, Sumbawa, Flores, Alor, and Timor onto the Arafura Shelf—not just one, but repeated water crossings of 10 to 100 kilometers would have been required.

Such successive and successful crossings, over admittedly largely intervisible gaps between islands, got humans onto the Sahul continent. But the evidence does not end there. In 1981 Jim Specht reported the first Pleistocene-age radiocarbon date from New Britain, an island never connected to Sahul by dry land (Specht, Lilley, and Normu 1981). A few years later, the Lapita Homeland Project uncovered firm evidence for the settlement of both New Britain and New Ireland at least 35,000 years ago. New Britain is visible from New Guinea, and New Ireland from the former, so one might again argue that an adventurous Sahulian saw opportunity on the horizon, set himself or herself adrift on a handy log, and hoped for the best. But then came the evidence from Kilu, a rockshelter on Buka Island in the Solomons with a first occupation dated to 29,000 years ago, which is not visible from New Britain.6 Suddenly the probability that people had gotten all the way out to the Solomons by a remarkable sequence of merely accidental “voyages” seemed quite low indeed. And then the clincher: an Australian National University team dug into the 4-meter depths of Pamwak rockshelter on Manus (fig. 3.3) and found that the Admiralty Islands too had been settled deep in the Pleistocene, by at least 13,000 years ago if not considerably before.7 Matthew Spriggs, one of the excavators of Pamwak, puts the implications of this discovery this way:

The settlement of Manus may represent a real threshold in voyaging ability as it is the only island settled in the Pleistocene beyond the range of one-way intervisibility. Voyaging to Manus involved a blind crossing of some 60–90 km in a 200–230-km voyage, when no land would have been visible whether coming from the north coast of Sahul or New Hanover at the northern end of New Ireland. These would have been tense hours or days on board that first voyage and the name of the Pleistocene Columbus who led this crew will never be known. The target arcs for Manus are 15° from New Hanover, 17° from Mussau, and 28° from New Guinea. (1997:29)




FIGURE 3.3 Archaeological excavation in progress in the Pamwak rockshelter, Manus Island. (Photo courtesy Wal Ambrose.)





Once it was certain that Manus and Buka had been colonized in the Pleistocene, who could doubt that the first Sahulians were people comfortable around and on the water? And why not? Fish bones and shellfish remains from the Matenkupkum site on New Ireland are possibly the earliest evidence of marine resource exploitation anywhere in the world.8

While we can be confident that early Pacific peoples were capable of open-ocean voyages, gaining real understanding of their vessels or their methods is another matter. Here we remain wholly in the realm of theory, although the carefully crafted studies of Geoff Irwin (1991, 1992, 1993) allow us to glimpse some of the possibilities. Irwin views the region extending from the Bismarck Archipelago through the main Solomon Islands as a great “voyaging nursery,” sheltered from the tropical cyclone belts that lie to the north and south, and one in which “seasonal and predictable changes” in wind and current direction encouraged early voyagers to experiment with round-trip expeditions exploring and exploiting these mostly intervisible islands. An intrepid navigator might anticipate the prevailing winds and currents of the southern summer that would take his or her social group from a departure point in New Britain or New Ireland down through the Solomons chain as far as San Cristobal or Santa Anna and plan for an equally predictable return voyage in the southern winter. If such a group were at home exploiting the rich shellfish and fish of inshore waters, as well as the more limited marsupial, avian, and other resources of the rainforest, the trip might well be repeated on a regular basis. But here we come to the limits of theoretical speculation regarding this period, so remote from the world of known ethnography; a brief reimmersion into the “facts” of prehistory is appropriate.





NEAR OCEANIA DURING THE PLEISTOCENE


Archaeological knowledge of New Guinea, the Bismarcks, and the Solomons during the Pleistocene remains limited, with only about twenty-four documented sites (table 3.1).9 Map 6 shows the geographical locations of some of the key site locations. Unfortunately, not all of these sites have yet been thoroughly excavated or reported. With the exception of Bobongara on the Huon terraces, most of the New Guinea sites are located in the interior, mountainous Highlands. The dearth of coastal or lowland sites stems from the difficulty of finding exposed sedimentary contexts dating to the Pleistocene, due both to post-Pleistocene drowning of coastlines and to the modern prevalence of extensive mangrove swamps around the littoral perimeter of New Guinea. Thus the uplifted terraces of the Huon Peninsula provide a uniquely preserved example of Pleistocene shorelines. The other sites listed in table 3.1 are located on the large islands of New Britain and New Ireland, and on more distant Manus and Buka. Since these two clusters of Pleistocene sites—in the New Guinea Highlands and on the Melanesian islands—occur in radically different environmental settings, I discuss them separately, beginning with the Highlands.




MAP 6 Near Oceania, showing the distribution of important Pleistocene and early Holocene archaeological sites.





THE NEW GUINEA HIGHLANDSEuropean exploration of the Highlands, which began in earnest only in the mid-twentieth century, stunned the anthropological world by revealing the unsuspected presence of at least a million people, living a more or less “neolithic” existence. Thanks to the work of several archaeologists—especially Jack Golson, Mary-Jane Mountain, and J. Peter White—we know that people have been present in these intermontane valleys for more than thirty millennia.10 Moreover, the very landscape of the Highlands, with its extensive grasslands, has been radically shaped by the cumulative actions of many human generations. Still, we have little more than a glimpse through the window of time into the lives and cultures of these early mountain dwellers, because direct evidence is limited to materials from a handful of excavated and published sites, such as the Kafiavana (fig. 3.4) and Nombe rockshelters, the open site of Kosipe, and other localities in the Ivane Valley of the eastern Highlands. The material culture found in these sites consists largely of amorphous stone flake and core tools and, from some sites such as Kosipe and Nombe, waisted blades, or axes, similar to those from Bobongara (fig. 3.5). Remains of animal bones and terrestrial gastropods collected for food provide limited evidence of diet and economy. Additional evidence for environmental change comes from pollen sequences obtained from several Highlands swamp sites.11




FIGURE 3.4 The Kafiavana rockshelter in the New Guinea Highlands, after excavation by J. Peter White. The site spans the terminal Pleistocene to Holocene periods. (Photo courtesy J. P. White.)





FIGURE 3.5 Stone tools from the Pleistocene occupation levels at Kosipe, New Guinea Highlands. (After White and O’Connell 1982.)





The climate of the higher-altitude interior of New Guinea fluctuated during the late Pleistocene, in response to worldwide climatic changes. Between about 35,000 and 30,000 years ago, alpine shrub or grassland vegetation expanded considerably and persisted until perhaps 15,000 years ago, when the tree line began to rise significantly in response to climatic warming. The pollen cores suggest, however, that climatic factors were not the only influence on vegetation patterns; there is good evidence that humans were igniting fires, and thus encouraging the spread of grasslands, certainly as early as 21,000 years ago and possibly even before 30,000 years ago (Fairbairn, Hope, and Summerhayes 2006). The evidence for anthropogenic burning lies in significant increases in carbonized particles in the cores, as described by Haberle (1993:117), who refers to a “sustained anthropogenic disturbance episode” lasting from 21,000 to 8,000 years ago. The cultural reasons behind such human burning can only be guessed, but they might include the facilitation of hunting or forest clearance in order to encourage the growth and spread of economically useful plants, such as Pandanus. I have already mentioned Groube’s hypothesis that early people in New Guinea were actively managing plant resources, using waisted axes to open up forest canopy by trimming or ring-barking. Such cobble tools have been found at a number of the Highland sites, including Kosipe, which has been interpreted as “a seasonal site for the exploitation of mountain pandanus nuts and perhaps hunting of some of the upper forest megafaunal browsers” (Mountain 1991a:515). From sites in the Ivane Valley, Summerhayes, Leavesley, et al. (2010) recovered charred Pandanus nutshells, and starch grains extracted from the surfaces of stone tools were identified to the yam genus Dioscorea. From these data, they argue that “people occupied a New Guinea valley at 2000 m above sea level soon after their arrival in Sahul. As the climate cooled, the optimal growing conditions for yams would have occurred at lower altitudes. This may indicate that Pandanus was the most important staple at this time and help explain the late Pleistocene abandonment of the highland sites” (2010:81). Denham argues that “highly mobile groups” may have permanently occupied the Highlands during the Pleistocene, hunting and exploiting plant resources such as Pandanus: “Since first colonisation, people engaged in environmental manipulation to enhance resource availability as well as extensive hunting and foraging activities, including the targeting of relatively resource-diverse gaps in the forest and along ecotones, such as those along wetland margins and riparian corridors in addition to the high altitude grassland/forest boundary” (2007:46).

The New Guinea Highlands during the Pleistocene were home to a remarkable range of marsupial megafauna, all of which were extinct by the early Holocene (Sutton et al. 2009). Several species of large, herbivorous marsupials have been identified from archaeological contexts, belonging to the Diprotodontidae and Macropodidae families. According to Tim Flannery (1994:132), these animals were “browsers of the forest and subalpine grassland,” and although smaller than their Australian megafaunal counterparts, they offered substantial food packages to Highlands hunters. The largest of the extinct diprotodons weighed up to 200 kilograms and “was similar in form to the marsupial rhinoceros of Australia.” There was also the “Huli beast” (Hulitherium tomassetii), “shaped much like a panda, with the same high forehead and forward-facing eyes,” weighing about 100 kilograms. Bones of Protemnodon, Dendrolagus, Thylogale, Diprotodon, and various other genera have been recovered from Highlands sites such as Nombe; these are likely to have been among the prey targeted by early hunters. To what extent hunting was responsible for the extinction of these great beasts is debatable, although the combination of hunting and human-induced fires resulting in grassland expansion is likely to have been important, in conjunction with climatic changes. In her detailed faunal analysis of Nombe, Mountain (1983, 1991a, 1991b) demonstrated important changes in the faunal evidence for hunting over the 20,000 years that this Highlands rockshelter was inhabited. In particular, at the end of the Pleistocene and into the early Holocene, there are significant increases in the numbers of smaller and medium-sized prey, such as birds, rodents, and fruit bats.

One yearns to know more about this fascinating and lengthy period in the early history of Near Oceania, but the evidence is still thin. We are left with a hazy picture of peoples adept at inhabiting a relatively cold, interior region despite their minimal technology, insofar as that technology is reflected in the surviving record of stone and bone. They may have hunted a range of now-extinct large marsupials, as well as other smaller fauna including birds, fruit bats, rodents, frogs, and dasyurids. By at least 21,000 years ago and quite likely even earlier, they were also burning the vegetation of their valleys, and possibly practicing forms of forest clearance and plant management (especially of Pandanus) aided by their waisted, split-cobble axes. Such early experiments in plant manipulation and management would lead, by the early Holocene, to the actual domestication of certain plants.


THE BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO AND THE SOLOMONSIn 1985, the international Lapita Homeland Project sent several teams of archaeologists into the field throughout the Bismarck Archipelago, in a coordinated effort to resolve some refractory issues surrounding the Lapita cultural complex (see chap. 4).12 Prior to the LHP, relatively little was known of the prehistory of this vast arc of islands: a handful of Lapita ceramic sites had been identified, the Balof 1 rockshelter on New Ireland had been dated to ca. 6000 B.C., and a single cave site called Misisil in the interior of New Britain had yielded a radiocarbon date that barely qualified as terminal Pleistocene. A year later, at the conclusion of the main field season of the LHP, Melanesian prehistory had to be rewritten. Excavations at four rockshelters on New Ireland (Balof 2, Buang Merabak, Matenkupkum, and Panakiwuk) had produced sequences well back into the Pleistocene, with the oldest from Matenkupkum coming in at 35,410 ± 430 years B.P. (J. Allen and Gosden 1996:186). In the next few years, continued work by LHP members and others resulted in new Pleistocene finds at Matenbek on New Ireland, Yombon and Kupona na Dari on New Britain, Kilu on Buka, and Pamwak on Manus (see table 3.1). The evidence from these sites allows us to rough out the framework of a prehistoric sequence for the Bismarcks-Solomons region from 40,000 to 10,000 years ago.13

Allen and Gosden (1996:185) opined that “crossing the Vitiaz Strait may have been a quick paddle for humans but it was a significant journey for Pacific history,” for the Bismarcks were the first true Pacific islands to be colonized, beyond the shifting continental margins of Sahul. Establishing a viable existence on these islands required certain adaptations, given a steep decline in biogeographic richness as one moves off Sahul into the island world. The numbers of plant and animal resources available to Pleistocene hunters and gatherers would have been noticeably reduced, as illustrated by a comparison of the modern faunas of New Guinea and New Britain (table 3.2). Moreover, the islands lacked the now-extinct marsupial megafauna that had been available both in Australia and in the New Guinea Highlands during the period of initial human arrival.


TABLE 3.2

Comparison of the Modern Faunas of New Guinea and New Britain (Numbers of Species)a





From the finds at the early coastally situated rockshelters such as Buang Merabak and Matenkupkum, it appeared at first that this adaptation to a true island existence might have been facilitated by a focus on the exploitation of littoral food resources (C. Gosden and Robertson 1991:43), in a kind of “strandlooping” (coastal hunting-and-gathering) economic mode. However, several of the rockshelters now close to the coast were, at the time of their Pleistocene occupation, situated a considerable distance inland, a consequence of lowered sea level. Moreover, the discovery of chert flaking floors dated to 35,000 to 33,000 years ago at Yombon, in the interior of New Britain (35 kilometers from the coast), dispels any simple notion that the Pleistocene colonists of the Bismarcks confined their activities to the shoreline. As Pavlides (2004:106) writes, “The new evidence from Yombon indicates from the time of their earliest arrival in New Britain, people located and harnessed key rainforest resources.” These findings challenge “current theories about both the pre-agricultural utilization of this habitat, and the capability of Pleistocene humans to successfully harness and colonize the tropical rainforest zone.”

In fact, the faunal evidence from the oldest Pleistocene sites in the Bismarcks suggests that people exploited a wide range of both terrestrial and inshore marine resources. Among the terrestrial animals represented in the faunal assemblages from these sites are a number of bird species (including some now extinct; Steadman, White, and Allen 1999), lizards, snakes, rats, and fruit bats. The coastal marine fauna includes a few fishbones and a limited range of shellfish, such as the large reef gastropod Turbo argyrostoma. These marine foods could have been taken with simple methods, such as spearing, hand groping, and collecting.

A more open question concerns the kinds of plant foods that might have provided some balance to the diet of these early settlers. No hard-shelled nuts or other plant remains (including pollen) have yet been recovered from sites or levels predating 20,000 years ago. However, microscopic starch grains and raphides identified on stone tools from the Kilu site have been tentatively identified to the aroid genus Colocasia (of which the domesticated taro, C. esculenta, is a member), raising the possibility of wild tuber gathering.14 Not only Colocasia but also the aroid genera Cyrtosperma and Alocasia may have been naturally present in the Bismarcks, along with the sago palm (Metroxylon spp.); Spriggs (1997:34) suggests that these could have been “possible staples . . . encountered by the first colonists.”

The lithic technology of the pre-20,000 B.P. period in the Bismarcks consists almost exclusively of simple flake and core tools of expedient or amorphous shapes (fig. 3.6). These were made of locally available rocks, primarily fine-grained igneous or sedimentary types. There is no indication at this earliest period of the transport or exchange of stone resources over long distances.




FIGURE 3.6 Stone tools from the Matenkupkum rockshelter on New Ireland. (After J. Allen et al. 1989.)





Summarizing the period from about 35,000 to 20,000 years ago in the Bismarcks, Allen and Gosden (1996:187) wrote that the “meagre data imply population numbers large enough to create archaeological sites, but beyond this the sites themselves suggest only sporadic occupation. . . . We envisage this settlement to have involved small groups of mobile, broad-spectrum foragers.” Gosden (1993:133) has called this a “world without any ethnographic parallel,” emphasizing the challenge it poses to archaeological understanding. At about 20,000 to 18,000 years ago, however, things began to change in a manner that is detectable in the archaeological record of the Bismarcks. Two changes have captured the attention of prehistorians: (1) the appearance of bones of the gray cuscus, an arboreal marsupial (Phalanger orientalis); and (2) the presence of obsidian, deriving from the Mopir and Talasea sources on New Britain.15 The cuscus bones are important because this species is not indigenous to the Bismarcks and is likely to have been purposively introduced by humans into the islands from its original habitat on New Guinea.16 Matthew Leavesley, who studied the faunal remains of cuscus from the Buang Merabak rockshelter site, opines that “the introduction of the cuscus dramatically increased the number of individual animals and therefore expanded the island-based protein resource available to prehistoric hunters” (2005:218). The obsidian, in a similar manner, indicates that people were no longer simply using local stone resources, but were transporting—directly or through trade or exchange networks—a valuable lithic material over distances of up to 350 kilometers (e.g., from Talasea to Matenbek, as measured by straight-line distance). Gosden (1993:133) points to the significance of these two changes: “instead of moving people to resources, resources were [now] moved to people,” perhaps signaling a shift in the way that islanders viewed their environment. Certainly, the possibility that watercraft and sailing abilities had undergone further development seems likely. It may be at around this time that the more remote Manus Islands were discovered, as the oldest levels in Pamwak (fig. 3.3) date to some time earlier than 11,000 B.C.

Other aspects of subsistence do not look much different in the period after 20,000 years ago from that preceding. A mix of fish, shellfish, bats, rats, reptiles, and the newly imported Phalanger fills out the roster of faunal remains.17 There may have been some evolution in material culture, however, for in addition to the imported obsidian there are hints at shell working. Some worked shell pieces from Matenbek appear to be blanks or roughouts for simple fishhooks.

Although the Pleistocene archaeological record for island Melanesia remains only scantily documented, remarkable strides continue to be made in our knowledge of regional prehistory. The millennia that passed between the initial voyage across the Vitiaz Strait from New Guinea to New Britain and the end of the Pleistocene were not without significant cultural changes. Filling out the archaeological record of change remains a challenge lying ahead.





CULTURAL INNOVATIONS OF THE EARLY HOLOCENE


If the pace of cultural change during the Pleistocene was so gradual as to be barely perceptible in the archaeological record, things began to change rapidly during the early Holocene, both in the New Guinea Highlands and in the coastal lowlands and islands. It is an open question whether the developments in these two regions proceeded independently or whether they were influenced by exchanges of ideas (and human genes?). Likewise, prehistorians debate the extent of cultural and biological contacts between the peoples of Near Oceania and those of island Southeast Asia during the early to mid-Holocene. Near Oceania was certainly not hermetically sealed; the appearance of the pig in New Guinea—by around 3000 B.C. if not somewhat earlier—suggests that contacts between Near Oceania and Southeast Asia were active. For the most part, however, the cultural developments of this period were indigenous to Near Oceania.

Plant geographers and ethnobotanists have long recognized that New Guinea and the adjacent Bismarcks are the probable place of origin for many tropical crops, because the wild ancestors of these plants are restricted in their natural distributions to this region.18 Among these domesticates are the Australimusa bananas (which have an upright inflorescence and reddish-orange fruit), sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), a tuber crop (Pueraria lobata), the ti plant (Cordyline fruticosum), probably breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), a number of fruit- and nut-bearing trees (including the Canarium almond, Tahitian chestnut [Inocarpus fagiferus], Barringtonia spp., and Terminalia), as well as several aroids, notably taro (Colocasia esculenta), “elephant-ear” taro (Alocasia macrorrhiza), and giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis). Colocasia, a major staple throughout Oceania, was once thought to be a Southeast Asian domesticate, but cytological research suggests multiple loci of domestication, one in the New Guinea region.

Archaeological discoveries in Near Oceania increasingly lend support to this ethnobotanical interpretation of a Near Oceanic center of early plant domestication and horticultural development.19 These include macroscopic archaeobotanical remains of crop plants such as carbonized tubers (parenchyma), as well as microbotanical remains such as pollen and phytoliths; the physical remains of field cultivation systems across landscapes provides another line of evidence. Moreover, radiocarbon dates make it increasingly certain that these developments began in the early Holocene (if not indeed in the late Pleistocene), as early as similar steps toward agriculture elsewhere in the Old World. As Denham (2011) stresses, these steps toward domestication and horticulture certainly preceded the dispersal of the Austronesian-speaking peoples. Thus the peoples of Near Oceania can rightly lay claim to their own act in the great play that is the cultural development of modern Homo sapiens: the independent invention within Near Oceania of a horticultural mode of production.


THE NEW GUINEA HIGHLANDSWhen Western explorers first entered the Highland valleys before World War II, they were amazed not only at the density of indigenous populations but also at the marvelous ditched and raised-bed gardens that frequently covered hectare upon hectare of originally swampy valley bottoms.20 The first evidence for the antiquity and development of such Highlands cultivation systems began to emerge in the late 1960s, when Jack Golson began his long-term work at the now-famous Kuk plantation site in the Wahgi Valley near Mount Hagen.21 At an elevation of 1,550 meters above sea level, the swampy floor of the Wahgi was being drained for a tea plantation in 1970 when Jim Allen observed a stratigraphic succession of often intercut older drains in the sidewalls of the new plantation drainage canals. When subjected to detailed stratigraphic analysis, combined with extensive areal excavations by Golson, these drains and associated features revealed a remarkable sequence of horticultural use of the Wahgi Valley floor over a period of some 9,000 years.

Golson defined six phases of increasingly complex and intensive use of the Wahgi Valley floor at Kuk. Phase 1, dated to 9,000 years ago, was described as a series of “gutters, hollows, pits and stakeholes” of human origin sealed beneath a telltale wedge of “grey clay” that blanketed the entire valley floor (Golson 1977:613). Golson interpreted these features as reflecting some kind of simple horticultural function, while the gray clay testified to a period of accelerated erosion on the surrounding valley flanks. The evidence of erosion, in conjunction with pollen analyses, was regarded as a signal of heightened levels of human disturbance, arguably from some form of incipient horticulture. In a detailed reanalysis of the Phase 1 “palaeosurface” features, however, Denham (2004:56) argued that the archaeological evidence did not support “claims of an agricultural origin” for these features. In Kuk phase 2 (6000–5500 B.P.), the evidence for active manipulation of the swampy valley floor becomes incontrovertible, with at least four large channels up to 2 meters wide and deep that were cut across the swamp to drain it (fig. 3.7). In phase 2, there are now also circular clay islands about 1 meter in diameter separated by intersecting channels (Golson 1977; Denham et al. 2003; Denham, Haberle, and Lentfer 2004). Such islands would have formed excellent raised beds for the cultivation of Colocasia taro, and possibly also Australimusa bananas or Pueraria tubers. By phase 3 (4000–2500 B.P.), the primitive raised beds of phase 2 had been replaced by true reticulate drainage systems that are undeniably the antecedents of the complex drainage systems ultimately witnessed by twentieth-century anthropologists.




FIGURE 3.7 Archaeological section across a large drainage ditch (the dark infilled feature to the man’s right), dating to about 1500 B.C., at the Kuk site in the New Guinea Highlands. (Photo courtesy Jack Golson.)





A study of the pollen archive preserved in the Kuk swamp has provided additional information on the paleoenvironmental changes that occurred from the late Pleistocene into the Holocene (Haberle et al. 2012; see also Haberle 2003). During the period that the “gray clay” was being deposited over the phase 1 features, grasslands and ferns increased at the expense of forest, which was being periodically burned. The most dramatic change, however, occurred around 7,000 years ago, when there was “a rapid loss of forest associated with increased and persistent burning and a permanent open grass-sedge swampland” was established (Haberle et al. 2012:135). Combined with the archaeological evidence from the Kuk swamp, this “vegetation history represents the establishment of an agricultural landscape in the Upper Wahgi Valley by the mid-Holocene” (Haberle et al. 2012:135).

Douglas Yen (1991) originally hypothesized that Colocasia taro, which seems to have been domesticated independently in Near Oceania, was a key crop plant cultivated in the Kuk swamp. More recent research supports this hypothesis. Fullagar et al. (2006) extracted microfossil starch granules from stone tools at Kuk, demonstrating that both Colocasia taro and Dioscorea yams were being processed at the site by 10,200 years ago, although these may have been wild, rather than domesticated, forms of these plants. By about 7,000 years ago, “the processing of taro, yam and other plants indicates that they are likely to have been integrated into cultivation practices on the wetland edge” (Fullagar et al. 2006:595). In addition, banana (Musa) phytoliths are also present throughout the sequence at Kuk, although deliberate planting of bananas may not have occurred until phase 2 (Denham et al. 2003). Future research should expand our understanding of the kinds of social and economic transformations that surely accompanied these early steps in the development of indigenous agriculture in the Highland valleys.22


NEW GUINEA LOWLANDS AND THE ISLANDSA number of sites ranging geographically from the northern New Guinea lowlands to the main Solomon Islands have yielded cultural materials dating to the early to mid-Holocene period (table 3.3). Some of these are the upper levels of sites also producing Pleistocene-age assemblages, such as Pamwak and Panakiwuk rockshelters; others are strictly of Holocene age. Space precludes a site-by-site discussion; here I will focus on two key aspects emerging from this period: evidence for horticulture and for advances in material culture, especially shell tool technology.23


TABLE 3.3

Selected Sites of the Early to Mid-Holocene Period in Lowland New Guinea and Near Oceania





At present, portions of the north coast of New Guinea and the entire floor of the great Sepik-Ramu River drainages extending some 100 or more kilometers inland are dominated by dense, seasonally flooded swamps with Nipa palms, sago, mangrove, and other plants. Traveling by canoe or launch up the meandering Sepik today and viewing kilometer after kilometer of rank, saltwater-crocodile infested swampland, one would think such an environment virtually primeval. Yet a mere 6,000 years ago, the lower Sepik-Ramu was not swamp at all but a vast inland sea or lagoon rich in marine and brackish water resources, enticing people to settle along its shifting shorelines. Archaeologists Pam Swadling and Nick Araho of the Papua New Guinea National Museum, aided by the geochronologist John Chappell, determined the extent of this mid-Holocene embayment and its subsequent history of alluvial infilling, locating several settlement sites that help to fill in the picture of early economic developments in Near Oceania.24

The Dongan site, a marine shell midden now more than 15 kilometers inland on a tributary of the Ramu River, was once situated on or near the shores of the ancient inland sea. A test trench excavated into the eroding riverbank revealed occupation deposits radiocarbon dated between 5,690 and 5,830 years ago, and the waterlogged, anaerobic sediments contained well-preserved plant remains. Among the fruits, seeds, and nuts found by Swadling and Araho and their team are many of the tree crops so important in indigenous Melanesian subsistence: the Canarium almond, coconut (Cocos nucifera), candlenut (Aleurites), Pangium edule, Pometia pinnata, Pandanus, and several others (Swadling, Araho, and Ivuyo 1991).25 This is the strongest evidence yet that the peoples of lowland Near Oceania had already taken significant steps toward the domestication of tree crops by the middle Holocene.26

From various sites in the Bismarcks and Solomons, evidence for indigenous arboriculture based on domesticated Canarium almond and other tree crops is also slowly accumulating. At Apalo on Kumbun Island off the southern New Britain coast, another waterlogged deposit dated to 2300–2100 B.C. (and thus predating the Lapita period) also yielded remains of Canarium indicum, coconut, Aleurites, Terminalia, Pandanus, Pangium, Spondias, and Dracontomelon (Spriggs 1997:79). On Nissan Island between the Bismarck and Solomon Archipelagoes, Spriggs recovered Canarium, Pangium, Sterculia, Metroxylon, Burckella, Dracontomelon, and Terminalia remains from levels of two rockshelters dated to the early second millennium B.C., again predating Lapita ceramic horizons. And in two aceramic rockshelter sites on Guadalcanal Island in the main Solomons, Roe (1992, 1993) found Canarium nut charcoal and anvil stones used to crack open the hard-shelled nuts.

All of this evidence mounts a fairly strong case for indigenous development of arboriculture, or orchard-based tree cropping, prior to the arrival of Austronesian-speaking peoples in Near Oceania. Whether taro or other root crops such as Pueraria were also cultivated at this period in the Near Oceanic lowlands and islands is not yet established. But tree crops such as Canarium, which is today distributed from Wallacea to Vanuatu, could have provided an important basis for subsistence. Moreover, Canarium and various other economically important trees would later become an essential component of subsistence economies not only in Near Oceania but also in the farther-flung islands of Remote Oceania.27

Other key cultural developments of the early to mid-Holocene period took place in material culture. Both Pam Swadling and Paul Gorecki have claimed that pottery was present in mid-Holocene contexts in their sites in the Ramu River region and on the Vanimo coast of New Guinea, respectively. There are unresolved questions, however, regarding the stratigraphic contexts and dating of these collections.28 Gaffney, Ford, and Summerhayes (2015) have shown that potsherds originally excavated by Sue Bulmer at the Wañelek site on the fringe of the central Highlands of New Guinea, and radiocarbon dated to around 3,000 years ago, were both imported from the coast and locally manufactured. As the authors noted, “Whether the pottery, and the knowledge of its production, came with the original Austronesian speakers or was traded and copied will require further research from a wider area” (12). On present evidence, however, the existence of any pre-Lapita ceramic assemblages in Near Oceania seems unlikely.

What is clear is that in the islands there was a mid-Holocene advance in shell-working technology, a critical adaptation to an insular and marine way of living. The sample of shell artifacts is still limited, but enough examples have been recovered from Pamwak (where there are edge-ground adzes or axes of Tridacna shell), Lolmo Cave (where the assemblage includes fishhooks and armbands of Trochus shell and a Conus shell disc), Lebang Halika (Tridacna shell adzes, polished shell knives, and a Trochus fishhook), and the Guadalcanal rockshelters (Trochus armbands and cut shell) to dispel any doubts about the development of a complex shell-working technology. Both adzes and fishhooks are among the objects manufactured from shell; these are two of the most fundamental implements in the classic oceanic tool kit: the adz for forest clearance and woodworking of all kinds, the fishhook for exploitation of sea resources beyond what can be simply speared or gathered in the inshore shallows.

Of noneconomic aspects of life among these mid-Holocene occupants of Near Oceania we as yet know almost nothing. A few shell beads and armbands hint at a bodily aesthetic, but what of their forms of kinship address and social organization, their mythologies and cosmologies—all the things that make us uniquely human? The archaeological record is, for the present, mute, and I imagine that it will take the work of several more generations of archaeologists and historical anthropologists to even begin to draw back this veil of time. Matthew Spriggs (1977:66) sums up the situation elegantly: “That the early Island Melanesians had an aesthetic sense is obvious. They were after all modern humans like us. If they painted on cave walls the tropical climate would long ago have removed all traces. Other canvases for their art were likely to have been even more ephemeral. They had no fired pots to paint or incise. Their songs have gone.”





A PARADOX AND A HYPOTHESIS


Before leaving the topic of “Old” Melanesia, I must draw attention to an apparent paradox of great consequence for the human history of Oceania. Given that humans have been in Near Oceania for at least 40,000 years and that this is a region of large and resource-rich islands, why did human populations never reach high density levels (except in the New Guinea Highlands), especially after the development of food-producing subsistence strategies in the early Holocene? The natural reproductive capacity of humans to increase rapidly has been understood at least since Thomas Malthus’s classic essay; even at the relatively low reproductive rates known for hunting and gathering populations (perhaps 0.1 percent per year; Hassan 1981:200–203) a sizable population could easily have arisen in Near Oceania. Presumably the carrying capacity of the rainforests and littoral zones was not sufficient to support this kind of density with only a hunting and gathering economy, but then why did populations not suddenly burgeon after the domestication of various indigenous tree and root crops, as they did elsewhere in the world following the invention and adoption of agriculture? There is no evidence in the archaeological record for Near Oceania that human populations were ever very numerous or densely settled; if anything, the archaeological landscape of the early to mid-Holocene is particularly sparse. Moreover, as we will see in later chapters, this situation contrasts strikingly with that in the Remote Oceanic islands, in which large and dense populations arose repeatedly on islands within only 1,000 to 2,500 years. The demographic history of Near Oceania (except the New Guinea Highlands) thus stands apart from that of Remote Oceania.

This paradox is best explained by the pernicious effects of malaria, combined with other infectious diseases, as Groube (1993a) suggested (see also Golson 1972b:29). The several species of malaria parasite (Plasmodium), along with their Anopheles mosquito vectors, are geographically confined to Near Oceania, along with the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands and Vanuatu. At least two species of Plasmodium (P. vivax and P. malariae) probably accompanied the first human colonizers of Sahul, or followed shortly thereafter, given the presence of genetic mutations in the blood systems of Near Oceanic populations that have been selected for because they confer partial resistance to the disease.29 The more debilitating and frequently fatal P. falciparum may have entered the region later. Groube notes how endemic malaria (which is persistent, in contrast to epidemic diseases such as measles) might have regulated human population numbers, primarily through the continual mortality of individuals before they could reach reproductive age. Even with a case mortality of just 0.5 percent due to P. vivax, endemic malaria could have the effect of an 80 percent reduction in the rate of natural increase in the population (Groube 1993a:175–76). In addition to causing high mortality among infants and children, malaria can lodge in the placenta of a pregnant woman, “causing anaemia, foetal loss and death” (Groube 1993a:174). Endemic malaria combined with other debilitating infectious diseases in adults can also lead to higher overall mortality rates.

In sum, Groube presents a hypothesis of fundamental significance in the long-term human history of Near Oceania. He writes, “It is pointless to speculate too closely on unknown demographic variables in such a remote period. What is clear is that the natural increase rate appears to have been very low throughout the prehistory of Sundaland. Infections of vivax and malariae offer one possible check upon natural increase which could have been in operation from an early stage in the prehistory of the region” (1993a:177). The single obvious exception in Near Oceania is the New Guinea Highlands, where a large and dense population did develop in the fertile valleys, supported by intensive systems of food production. But the Highlands are generally above the altitude for Anopheles mosquitoes to survive, and malaria is either absent or has relatively little effect in the Highlands valleys (Brown 1978:60; Cattani 1992:304); they are the exception that proves the rule.





FOUR


