ORIGINS AND DISPERSALS



Earlier historical theories explained diversity in Polynesia from diffusion—from supposed waves of immigrants, each bringing in new cultural traditions and new levels of complexity; all present evidence, whether from genetics, linguistics, or culture, including ethnology and archaeology, converges towards the conclusion that the major Polynesian diversities have arisen from internal differentiation.

I. GOLDMAN, Ancient Polynesian Society (1970)





AT THE EASTERN END OF THE SAMOAN archipelago lies a cluster of three small islands—Ta‘u, Olosenga, and Ofu—collectively known as the Manu‘a Islands (fig. 7.1). Ta‘u was the location of Margaret Mead’s trend-setting ethnographic research on Samoan adolescent girls in the early 1920s, but little was known of the islands’ archaeology. Yosihiko Sinoto and Bill Kikuchi of the Bishop Museum had reconnoitered the Manu‘a group in 1962 but had come away disappointed, finding neither pottery nor fishhooks in the sites that they tested (Emory and Sinoto 1965:45–48). Given that pottery sites dating to the first millennium B.C. had been located on the larger islands of ‘Upolu and Savai‘i in Western Samoa, this was surprising. I thought that a second look at Manu‘a might be warranted.




FIGURE 7.1 The beach at To‘aga, Ofu Island, in the Manu‘a group of American Samoa. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





In 1986 the opportunity for a new look at Manu‘a came when the American Samoan Historic Preservation Office offered funds for a survey of archaeological sites. Assisted by graduate student Terry Hunt and Epi Suafo‘a, a young Samoan woman eager to learn about archaeology, we spent several weeks exploring the narrow coastal plains and slogging up the steep, jungle-covered slopes. We discovered lots of stone house platforms and some “star mounds” (platforms with curious spokelike arms) but no pottery. Then, on Ofu Island near the end of our trip, I came across a deep cut in the narrow coastal plain at To‘aga, which had been bulldozed by the public works department for a landfill. As I examined the 8-foot-high wall of the dozer cut, I noticed a grayish-brown midden deposit sandwiched between white beach sand below and a thick layer of clay above. A quick test pit adjacent to the landfill turned up a handful of thick, coarse pottery of the type known as Polynesian Plain Ware; later, a Turbo shell from the pottery-bearing deposit gave a radiocarbon age of between 28 B.C. and A.D. 108.

In 1987 and again in 1989, I returned to excavate more extensively across the To‘aga coastal plain.1 Prior experience in Futuna, Tikopia, and Tonga had taught me that Polynesian landscapes were often surprisingly dynamic: in just a few thousand years changing sea levels could shift shorelines tens or even hundreds of meters, while the clearing of forests for gardens exposed steep hillslopes to erosion, resulting in thick accumulations of clay on adjacent coastal plains. Evidently at To‘aga we had just such a situation, where the earliest villages—occupied by the makers of the Polynesian Plain Ware—lay some distance inland of the present beach, buried under two or more meters of heavy clay and boulders eroded from the steep hillsides. It took backbreaking work with picks, shovels, and iron crowbars to dig through this overburden to get down to the ancient occupation strata (fig. 7.2).




FIGURE 7.2 Excavations in the coastal plain at To‘aga, Ofu Island, revealed deeply buried cultural deposits containing an early form of Polynesian pottery. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





When we did reach the sandy cultural deposits, we were rewarded with a rich assemblage of artifacts and faunal remains dating to the early phase of Polynesian culture in Samoa. Not just lots of pottery—the oldest consisting of a thin, fine-ware—but also many one-piece fishhooks of Turbo shell, stone and shell adzes, beads and rings of Conus shell, sea urchin spine and coral abraders, drilled sharks’ teeth, and more. The faunal assemblage was rich in fishbone and shellfish, offering insights into early Polynesian subsistence strategies. Radiocarbon dates revealed that the narrow To‘aga plain had been occupied since about 800 B.C. Our discoveries at To‘aga opened a window on a critical phase in the prehistory of Polynesia, during which a distinct “Ancestral Polynesian” culture arose from its Lapita predecessor in the Western Polynesian “homeland” region.





POLYNESIAN ORIGINS


The idea that the Polynesian homeland lies within the Polynesian Triangle itself, in the region of the Tongan and Samoan archipelagoes (along with Futuna and ‘Uvea), emerged from archaeological research in the 1950s and 1960s (see chap. 1). Earlier scholars had sought the answer to the “problem of Polynesian origins” by searching for an external homeland, usually in Asia, or in the case of some theorizers (e.g., Heyerdahl 1952), in the Americas. Te Rangi Hiroa (1938b), for example, believed that the Polynesians had migrated in large fleets from an Asiatic homeland, passing through Micronesia to enter the Polynesian Triangle via Samoa and on to the Society Islands, which he called the “hub” of the Triangle. Most scholars agreed with some version of an Asiatic homeland scenario. What all the theories had in common was the notion that Polynesian culture had existed in all its essential elements in some other region of the world—on either side of the Pacific basin—at an earlier point in time. Migration was invoked to bring Polynesians into the Pacific, with culture change seen as the outcome of an overlaying of successive waves of migration (e.g., Handy 1930a).

Kenneth Emory, originally schooled in the migration paradigm, was one of the first to grasp the significance of the new archaeological finds from Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa when he predicted that the origins of the Polynesians would be found “in a western archipelago in the Polynesian area about 1500 B.C.” (1959:34). When Jack Golson, Roger Green, Jens Poulsen, and others began to excavate in Samoa and Tonga in the late 1950s and 1960s, their finds showed that distinctly “Polynesian” cultural traits had emerged within these archipelagoes over more than a thousand years.2 Green (1967a:237) summed up this new understanding of Polynesian origins: “There never was a Polynesian migration from elsewhere; becoming Polynesian took place in Polynesia itself as the archaeology of Tonga and Samoa over the last 3,000 years readily attests. One begins with Eastern Lapita, and ends with Polynesian.”3

Lapita pottery-making peoples from the southeastern Solomons and/or northern Vanuatu, crossed the 850-kilometer water gap to arrive at the Fiji archipelago around 1100–1000 B.C. (see chap. 4). Discovery and settlement of the Lau Islands and then Tonga quickly followed, by 896–880 B.C. in the case of Tongatapu, where the Nukuleka site has been identified as the probable founding settlement (Burley, Weisler, and Zhao 2012; Burley et al. 2015). Pottery from Nukuleka exhibits decorative motifs similar to those found in Lapita sites in the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands (see fig. 4.9). Lapita colonization proceeded rapidly up the Tongan island chain, with dates for the Ha‘apai group of 822–809 B.C. and for Vava‘u of 855–810 B.C. (Burley et al. 2015). Samoa was settled around 900–850 B.C., based on dates from Mulifanua, the only Early Eastern Lapita site currently known from that island group (Petchy 2001). The more isolated islands of Futuna, ‘Uvea, and Niuatoputapu were all also settled early in the first millennium B.C. (Kirch 1988c; Sand 2000a). The similarities in Early Eastern Lapita ceramics on all of these islands, as well as direct evidence for transport of obsidian, chert, and stone adzes between communities, reveal an interaction network between these newly founded settlements.4 Over time, however, breaks in this chain of Lapita communities arose, first between Fiji and Tonga and later between Tonga and Samoa.5 Such breaks were not absolute, for interaction between the peoples of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa region continued throughout prehistory. But isolation was sufficient to give rise to local variation—especially in the pottery—by the end of the first millennium B.C. (Kirch 1988c). Out of such partial isolation, combined with adaptation to new environmental and social conditions, a distinctively Polynesian culture emerged.

The pottery sequences of Western Polynesia evolved gradually out of their Eastern Lapita antecedents. The classic dentate-stamped decoration disappeared fairly quickly, followed by gradual reduction in the range of vessel forms (fig. 7.3).6 A distinctive Polynesian adz kit likewise developed out of Lapita prototypes, in part as a response to the need to produce adzes from the dense basalt stone found on such high islands as ‘Uvea and Samoa.7 Other aspects of material culture, such as shell ornaments and fishing gear, show continuity. In short, the Polynesians trace their origins to the Eastern Lapita expansion, becoming distinctly Polynesian—in language and culture—during the course of the first millennium B.C. Tonga and Samoa and their close neighbors Futuna and ‘Uvea constitute the immediate Polynesian homeland—what generations of later Polynesian peoples would call, in their myths and traditions, Havaiki.8




FIGURE 7.3 The gradual transition from Early Eastern Lapita to Polynesian Plain Ware ceramics took place over more than one millennium. This diagram shows changes in vessel forms. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





POLYNESIA AS A PHYLETIC UNIT


Of the three categories into which Dumont d’Urville subdivided the Oceanic peoples—Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia—only Polynesia has stood the test of time as a meaningful unit for culture-historical analysis. As we have seen, the cultural history of Melanesia is exceedingly complex, extending back in time 40,000 years or more, incorporating peoples of highly diverse origins, genetic makeup, linguistic affiliation, and cultural patterns. It makes no sense whatsoever to speak of a unified “Melanesian culture,” for the peoples and cultures of Melanesia are strongly multiphyletic. Micronesia lacks the great time depth and complexity of Melanesia, but even there we find peoples speaking languages from two major subgroups of the Austronesian family (Oceanic and Western Malayo-Polynesian); at least four population movements into Micronesia can be identified linguistically and archaeologically. Only in Polynesia do we find a group of peoples and cultures who share a common history.9 All of the Polynesian cultures known ethnographically (and the languages spoken by them) derived from a common ancestral culture (and proto-language) over a period of about 2,500 years (Kirch and Green 1987, 2001). It is in this sense that one can speak of Polynesia as a phyletic unit, a “segment of cultural history” to which a phylogenetic approach to historical anthropology may fruitfully be applied.10

Language provided the first clue to the essential unity of Polynesia. Beginning with Captain James Cook, astute explorers observed that languages as far-flung as those of New Zealand, Rapa Nui, and Hawai‘i were very similar. Lieutenant King of HMS Resolution wrote that “the same language . . . hardly requires any other proof of those who speak it being the same people, and originating from the same country” (Beaglehole, ed., 1967:1392). J.R. Forster, naturalist on Cook’s second voyage, published a “comparative table of the various languages in the isles of the South-Sea,” documenting the many similarities (Forster 1996 [1778]:188–89). Today we would not call Maori, Rapanui, and Hawaiian a single language; rather, we regard them as closely related languages sharing a high degree of cognate vocabulary, as well as similar grammatical patterns. But it was precisely this relatedness of speech that allowed Cook, King, Forster, and other early observers to recognize that the Polynesian languages were all of one “stock.”

Exhaustive linguistic research in the latter part of the twentieth century yielded a fine-grained understanding of the subgrouping, or internal relationships, of the Polynesian languages. Although refinements continue to be made, the linguistic phylogeny for Polynesian has been well understood since the pioneering work of Biggs, Green, and Pawley.11 As a group, the thirty-six extant or recorded Polynesian languages12 are most closely related to Fijian and Rotuman, with which they form the next higher-order subgroup of Oceanic languages, Central Pacific. Proto Central-Pacific was presumably the language spoken by the Eastern Lapita colonists of the Fiji-Tonga-Samoa area, and at first would have formed a dialect chain throughout this region. Fairly quickly, however, “weak links” where speech communication was less frequent led to sound and word changes across the dialect chain; Proto Central-Pacific began to differentiate into distinct Proto Fijic and Proto Tokalau-Polynesian languages (Geraghty 1983). Continued change within the latter linkage would lead to successive language interstages within the Tonga-Samoa region.

Figure 7.4 shows the internal relationships of the extant Polynesian languages. Two points relevant to prehistory are evident in this linguistic tree. First, all known Polynesian languages can be traced back to Proto Polynesian, confirming the existence of a monophyletic unit. Second, the branching structure of the tree provides a model for successive stages in the differentiation of Polynesian subgroups. While the early split of Proto Polynesian into Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian branches surely occurred within the Western Polynesian homeland, subsequent splits in the tree presumably resulted from populations moving out of this core region, primarily into central Eastern Polynesia, and later to the more distant and isolated islands and archipelagoes.




FIGURE 7.4 The subgrouping of the Polynesian languages. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





Biological anthropology also affirms the essential homogeneity of Polynesian populations. Despite some variation, many morphological features denote a common Polynesian phenotype, such as large body size and a high incidence of the “rocker jaw” and of a strongly “pentagonally” shaped cranium (Houghton 1996). Studies of metrical and nonmetrical traits, measured on both living Polynesians and skeletal populations, yield statistical groupings in which Polynesian samples consistently link more closely with each other than with external populations.13 Recent genetic studies, including DNA sequencing, reinforce this homogeneity within the Polynesian genotype.14 The likely explanation for this high degree of biological homogeneity—reflected both phenotypically and genotypically—is that the parental population from which all Polynesian groups derive went through a “bottleneck” during the initial colonization of Fiji and Western Polynesia (Kelly 1996; Martinson 1996; Martinson et al. 1993), resulting in the well-known “founder effect.”15

Comparative ethnography—a third line of evidence regarding Polynesian relationships—likewise documents the set of shared, systemic cultural patterns inherited by Polynesian cultures from their common ancestor. Marshall Sahlins, in his classic comparative analysis of Polynesian cultures, invoked a biological metaphor when he wrote that “the Polynesian cultures derive from a common source; they are members of a single cultural genus that has filled in and adapted to a variety of local habitats” (1958:ix). These shared systemic patterns include the basic kinds of social groups (the kainanga and the kainga) and land tenure patterns, the concepts of mana (spiritual power) and tapu (sacredness), cosmogonic origin myths, and the ubiquitous presence of hereditary chiefs (all called by some variant of the word ariki), as well as more prosaic aspects of material culture (Burrows 1938).

In sum, the evidence of linguistics, biological anthropology, and comparative ethnography all demonstrate that Polynesia’s modern languages, populations, and cultures descended from a common proto-language, parental population, and ancestral culture. Polynesian cultural differentiation took place over two and a half millennia, due to geographic expansion out of an original homeland combined with a variety of evolutionary processes and historical contingencies (Kirch 1984a; Kirch and Green 1987, 2001). The geographic homeland of the parental population was the Tonga-Samoa region, and the time frame for the emergence of Ancestral Polynesian culture was the second half of the first millennium B.C.

Western and Eastern Polynesia, referred to previously, require formal definition, for they have much historical significance. The distinction was first examined critically by Edwin G. Burrows (1938), who recognized that aspects of material culture, systemic social structures, and religious beliefs displayed consistent geographic distributions. Western Polynesia encompasses Tonga, Samoa, Futuna, ‘Uvea, Niue, and Tokelau; Eastern Polynesia encompasses the central archipelagoes of the Societies, Cooks, Australs, Marquesas, Tuamotus, and Mangareva, along with the more remote Hawai‘i, Rapa Nui, and New Zealand. In religion, the Eastern Polynesian cultures share a pantheon of first-order, functionally differentiated, anthropomorphic gods—including Tāne, Tū, Rongo, and Tangaloa—whereas only one of these (Tangaloa) is known in Western Polynesia (Marck 2000). Similarly, the marae as a formal temple with enclosed court and raised altar (ahu) is exclusively an Eastern Polynesian phenomenon; in Western Polynesia the malae is an open-air assembly area.16 Burrows inferred that Western Polynesia was the area of the Polynesian homeland, with the Eastern Polynesian cultures deriving from later migration and expansion out of that homeland, a scenario later confirmed by archaeology.

That the Eastern Polynesian cultures share many traits, as well as innovations in language, indicates that there was also an Eastern Polynesian homeland prior to dispersal to the more remote archipelagoes. This need not have been a single island or even archipelago; it could readily have encompassed most of the tropical core of central Eastern Polynesia, given extensive interisland voyaging and communication. Abundant evidence for regular voyaging and interaction among the archipelagoes of central Eastern Polynesia has emerged from the geochemical analysis and sourcing of basalt adzes that moved between these early communities.17

Cultural divergence within Polynesia did not result solely from successive “branchings,” or from increased isolation. Linguists can show that borrowing sometimes occurred between languages, demonstrating contact between speech communities (Marck 2000). Oral traditions and archaeological evidence both demonstrate long-distance contacts between islands and archipelagoes at various times in prehistory and proto-history (Weisler, ed., 1997). Such contacts were sometimes significant, as in Tonga, where the proto-historic polity relied on a prestige-goods economy of long-distance exchange to reinforce its hegemony (G. Clark et al. 2014). But the existence of interisland linkages does not obviate Polynesia’s basic phyletic structure, nor does it require a “tangled bank” metaphor for the region’s cultural history.





ANCESTRAL POLYNESIA


As a phyletic unit, Polynesia is especially well suited to a phylogenetic approach, “a method for inferring cultural history . . . , establishing phylogeny, and permitting the disentanglement of homology [common origins of a trait] from analogy [independent origins of a trait]” (Kirch and Green 1987:434). Central to this approach is “triangulation,” in which independent lines of evidence from historical linguistics, comparative ethnology, archaeology, and biological anthropology are applied to the reconstruction of an earlier stage in the history of a group of related cultures, such as Ancestral Polynesia (Kirch and Green 2001). Some aspects of a reconstructed culture—such as artifacts, diet, or settlement patterns—may be evidenced by archaeological materials as well as inferred from linguistic reconstructions and comparative ethnography. However, not all aspects of culture leave material traces. In the case of early Polynesian religious beliefs, there is scant archaeological data (except the negative evidence of the absence of formal temple structures), hence triangulation must rely on linguistic and comparative ethnographic data. Despite such limitations, by using the triangulation method—in a phylogenetic model where the internal relationships of the descendant cultures have been specified—it is possible to put forward detailed and nuanced cultural histories.

Kirch and Green (2001) systematically applied a phylogenetic model and the triangulation method to reconstruct the Ancestral Polynesian culture that was shared by the societies of the Western Polynesian homeland region from the middle to the end of the first millennium B.C. We use the plural societies because a number of geographically localized communities had emerged by this time. Because these societies were in regular communication through interisland voyaging, linguistic and cultural innovations were mostly shared. Archaeologically, more than twenty-five sites dating to this time period have been identified (fig. 7.5), each representing a social community. All are small hamlets or villages, mostly situated on or near the coast, although inland settlements also existed, as in the Falefa Valley on ‘Upolu, Samoa. A mixed horticultural-maritime economy supported these Ancestral Polynesian communities—much as it had their Lapita ancestors. They cultivated tuber and root crops such as taro and yams and tree crops such as coconut, breadfruit, bananas, Vi apple, and Tahitian chestnut. There is no evidence for large-scale canal or pondfield irrigation at this early date. Most likely, shifting cultivation was used for field crops such as taro, yams, and bananas, and tree crops were planted in and around villages and along coastal plains. These early Polynesians kept pigs, dogs, and chickens, but only chickens are well represented in the archaeological faunal remains. Fish and shellfish provided most of the protein in the Ancestral Polynesian diet, augmented by hunting birds. Linguistic reconstructions indicate a wide range of fishing methods, as well as more than 150 terms for different kinds of fish (R. Clark 1991; Hooper 1994).




FIGURE 7.5 Excavation through a large earthen mound (SU-Va-2) at Vailele, ‘Upolu Island, Western Samoa. At the base of this mound is a layer with Polynesian Plain Ware pottery dating to the Ancestral Polynesian period. (Photo courtesy Roger C. Green.)





Ancestral Polynesians made and used plain ware pottery (largely simple bowls and cups), adzes of Tridacna shell and (increasingly over time) of basalt, one-piece fishhooks of Turbo shell, beads and rings of Conus shell, hammerstones, files or abraders of sea urchin spine and of coral or pumice, and amorphous scrapers or other ad hoc tools made from flakes of basalt or obsidian (fig. 7.6). The triangulation method allows us to enumerate other aspects of material culture that—being made of wood or vegetable fibers—did not preserve in the archaeological record. Entering an Ancestral Polynesian dwelling, one would have found mats woven from coconut and Pandanus leaves, wooden bowls and containers, coconut water bottles, baskets, and clothing (loincloths and skirts) made from paper mulberry bark (Broussonetia papyrifera) and other plants. Fishing gear stored among the rafters would have included poles and lines, along with several kinds of nets made from Pipturus bark cordage. Gardeners used digging sticks (which often doubled as coconut-husking poles) and transported the harvest back to their cook-houses with carrying poles. Dwellings and cook-houses alike were fashioned with stout timber posts and rafters and thatched with sago palm or Pandanus leaves.




FIGURE 7.6 Artifacts from the Ancestral Polynesian site of To‘aga, Ofu Island: a, basalt adz with plano-convex section; b, shell adz; c, basalt adz of triangular section; d, unfinished Tridacna shell ring; e, abrading stone; f, Conus shell ring fragment; g, sea urchin spine abrader; h, i, Turbo shell fishhooks; j, unfinished fishhook; k, Turbo shell fishhook; l, bone chisel fragment; m, drilled shark’s tooth; n, Conus shell bead; o, cut pearl shell. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





The archaeological record is largely mute with respect to kinship, social organization, and religion, requiring us to rely on the Proto Polynesian lexical reconstructions, aided by comparative ethnography to flesh out semantic history hypotheses (Green 1994). Marck (2000), for example, reconstructed Proto Polynesian kinship, finding that relatives were classified principally on a generational basis and that birth order (i.e., senior/junior distinctions) and gender distinctions were significant. The primary social group in Ancestral Polynesia was called the *kainanga (the asterisk denotes a reconstructed term), which indicated a unilineal descent group whose members traced their lineage back to a founding ancestor (*tupunga). At the head of such a *kainanga was the *qariki, in most cases a senior (ranking) male, who served as the group’s secular and ritual leader. Nothing suggests, at this early stage in the development of Polynesian societies, a separate status category of priest. There are, however, special terms for an expert or knowledgeable craftsperson (*tufunga), sea expert or navigator (*tautai), and warrior (*toa). A smaller social group was the *kainga, a coresidential group holding an estate of land as well as other tangible and intangible property and rights.

While ethnographic cognates of the term *qariki (such as Hawaiian ali‘i) are associated in proto-historic Polynesian societies with chiefship, we cannot naively project back onto Ancestral Polynesian societies a notion of complex social stratification or rigid hierarchy. Rather, simple ranking based on the hereditary principle of seniority (birth order) seems to have been key; given the small size of these communities (as indicated by the archaeological settlements), it is reasonable to think of them as heterarchical rather than hierarchical.18 Nonetheless, subtle differences in ranking and access to resources by different *kainga and *kainanga and their leaders provided the structural basis for the evolution of hierarchy and stratification after large and dense populations had arisen and competition for land and resources intensified. This trend toward increased social stratification in many Polynesian societies is an issue I take up in chapter 8.

What of Ancestral Polynesian religious concepts, their calendar, and their ritual cycle? The pan-Polynesian concepts of *tapu and *mana were central to their belief system (Shore 1989). *Mana flowed to this world from the spirit world, particularly via the efficacy of ancestors (*tupuna); indeed, ancestors were arguably at the core of Ancestral Polynesian ritual life. Functionally diversified anthropomorphic gods—such as Tāne, Tū, and Rongo, so well known from Eastern Polynesian societies (e.g., Hawaiian Lono)—had not yet been invented, for these were decidedly a later, early Eastern Polynesian innovation, accompanied by changes in ritual architecture and the beginnings of a formal priesthood. Only Tangaloa seems to have been known as a deity to the Ancestral Polynesians. They also told tales of a culture hero, Maui, who performed magical feats to do with bringing order—and culture—into the world.

Ritual activity in Ancestral Polynesian communities was most likely conducted in a house (*fare) much like an ordinary dwelling—perhaps the residence of the *qariki or ritual elder—and on an open, cleared space (*malaqe) to the seaward side of that house. Either key posts within the house or simple upright stones placed around the perimeter of the *malaqe, or both, represented specific ancestors or spirits, to whom prayers and invocations were directed. Deceased ancestors were probably buried beneath the house floor. The psychoactive kava (Piper methysticum), domesticated in Vanuatu and likely brought to the Western Polynesian homeland by the first Lapita colonizers, certainly played a role in Ancestral Polynesian ritual because of the trancelike state it induced.19 We can only guess about other ceremonies, although there are at least ten Proto Polynesian words for kinds of rituals, prayers, and rites. There is a hint of an important ceremonial feast, perhaps a first-fruits ritual. The year was organized around a lunar calendar of thirteen months (fig. 7.7), indexed to the rising and setting of the star cluster Pleiades (*Mata-liki) and to the annual spawning of the reproductive segments of the *palolo sea worm. The lunar month names are concerned in large part with the annual wet-dry seasonality critical to the planting and harvesting of the yam crop.




FIGURE 7.7 The Ancestral Polynesian lunar calendar and ritual cycle, as reconstructed using the “triangulation” method. (After Kirch and Green 2001.)





Such was the shared culture of the small communities that occupied the scattered islands of Tonga, Samoa, and their immediate neighbors in the late first millennium B.C. As the centuries passed, Ancestral Polynesians in Tongatapu or Ha‘apai or Samoa increasingly developed distinctive local variations in speech and in cultural practice, different from those in ‘Uvea or Futuna or Niuatoputapu. By the close of the first millennium B.C., sufficient lexical innovations had occurred at the southern and northern ends of the Proto Polynesian dialect chain to result in distinct Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian languages. I turn now to the history of differentiation and cultural change within Western Polynesia, as evidenced by archaeology.





CULTURAL SEQUENCES IN WESTERN POLYNESIA


In 1956 Jack Golson (1961) pioneered stratigraphic archaeology in Tonga and Samoa (map 11), discovering the first pottery in Samoa and showing that in both archipelagoes ceramics defined the earliest cultural stages. Golson’s efforts were followed by a multiyear settlement-pattern study in Western Samoa, directed by Roger Green, and by Jens Poulsen’s excavations on Tongatapu.20 Subsequent studies have extended our knowledge of the Samoan archaeological record, with surveys and excavations by several archaeologists on Tutuila and in the Manu‘a group of American Samoa, as well as continued research in ‘Upolu and Savai‘i.21 In the Kingdom of Tonga, I investigated Niuatoputapu Island in 1976, while David Burley has directed a long-term project from Tongatapu, through Ha‘apai, and up to Vava‘u. Recently, Geoff Clark and his students have focused on the emergence of the Tongan archaic state on Tongatapu.22 In ‘Uvea and Futuna, my pioneering surveys in 1974 were amplified by a French team under the direction of Daniel Frimigacci.23 The isolated makatea island of Niue, lying 400 kilometers east of Vava‘u, has had more limited archaeological study.24 We can now define cultural sequences for most islands in Western Polynesia, beginning with initial Lapita settlement through the development of Ancestral Polynesian culture and the emergence of regionally distinctive cultures characterized by complex chiefdoms in later prehistory.25 Some of the key Western Polynesian sites are summarized in table 7.1.




MAP 11 The islands of Western Polynesia, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





TABLE 7.1

Selected Archaeological Sites in Western Polynesia





In both Tongatapu and Samoa, the cultural sequences commence with Early Eastern Lapita pottery, as they do in the smaller islands of the Ha‘apai group, Vava‘u, and Niuatoputapu, Futuna, and ‘Uvea. Throughout the first millennium B.C.—the period during which Ancestral Polynesian culture emerged—the region’s ceramic sequences show parallel changes. Despite local differences in vessel forms (such as a distinctive handled, narrow-necked jar in Niuatoputapu and Futuna) and surface treatment, all of the ceramic sequences go through the following succession of stages: Early Eastern Lapita (ca. 900–700 B.C.), Late Eastern Lapita (ca. 700–300 B.C.), and Polynesian Plain Ware (ca. 300 B.C.–A.D. 300), as shown in figure 7.2. Moreover, in all of these groups—and in striking contrast to nearby Fiji—the manufacture and use of pottery disappear early in the first millennium A.D.26

Ceramics are one of the most important human inventions, and to give them up willingly strikes most of us as peculiar. The loss of pottery among Polynesians cannot be explained by the absence of suitable clay or temper, because ceramics were, in fact, manufactured in Western Polynesia using local materials for more than a thousand years. Thus we must seek nontechnological reasons. Early changes in the ceramic sequences included the abandonment of decorated vessels, which, as argued in chapter 4, were used in long-distance exchange. Probably these early ceramic changes were responses to innovation in exchange systems; pottery may have become “proletarianized,” as Doug Yen once suggested. Once decorated pottery had been lost and ceramics no longer figured as prestige goods or high-status items, they would have become strictly utilitarian. The Ancestral Polynesians did not need pottery for cooking (they preferred the earth oven), and they had an abundant supply of coconut shells for water storage and wooden bowls for food serving and pudding preparation. Wooden bowls are more durable than pottery; one can readily stone-boil liquids such as coconut cream in them. Thus the abandonment of pottery was probably linked with the nature of the Polynesian culinary complex (H. Leach 1982).

The period after the abandonment of ceramics in Western Polynesia but before the development of later sites with monumental archi-tecture corresponds roughly with the first millennium A.D. and has been called the “dark ages” (Davidson 1979:94–95), reflecting a dearth of excavated sites and lack of information. In part, this is a direct consequence of the abandonment of pottery, because sites become less visible on the archaeological landscape. However, some sites are known, such as Niutoua on Niuatoputapu and the Luatuanu‘u complex on ‘Upolu, and these suggest much cultural continuity. But there were also changes during the first millennium A.D., such as innovations in the Samoan adz kit, particularly the new triangular and trapezoidal-sectioned forms made in basalt, which began to replace older plano-convex sectioned types.27 On the whole, the first millennium A.D. in Western Polynesia is a period that calls for more primary excavation.

Sites dating to the last thousand years, what Davidson (1979:95–107) termed the “recent period” in Western Polynesia, are more frequent and better studied. In virtually all islands, specialized, monumental architecture, linked with the rise of complex chiefdoms based on large populations and intensified forms of food production, marks this period. From oral traditions and ethnohistoric sources, augmented by archaeology, we know that toward the end of the second millennium A.D. the Western Polynesian islands were linked by a long-distance prestige-goods exchange network, whose center of gravity was Tongatapu. The later prehistoric transformations of the Western Polynesian societies, including the emergence of an “archaic state” in Tonga, are discussed in greater detail in chapter 8.

In the cultural sequences of Western Polynesia—despite distinctive regional and local differences—the main trends are remarkably parallel, suggesting that similar processes of change were at work throughout the entire region. In part, the synchronous nature of cultural change in Western Polynesia reflects continued interisland contact and the sharing of cultural and social innovations. There was also the imposition of cultural practice by conquest and force, particularly through the late expansion of the Tongan polity to such islands as ‘Uvea and Niuatoputapu (see chap. 8). But other changes reflect the gradual buildup of large and densely settled populations in Samoa, Tonga, Futuna, and ‘Uvea, along with the intensification of agricultural production, accompanied by increased hierarchy and political centralization. Warfare and force played a role in political change, evidenced by fortifications throughout the region. These matters are explored in greater detail in chapter 8, when the transformation of Polynesian sociopolitical structures is considered.





THE SETTLEMENT OF EASTERN POLYNESIA


Archaeologists, historical linguists, and comparative ethnographers concur in identifying Western Polynesia as the immediate Polynesian homeland, where a distinctive Polynesian culture and language emerged during the first millennium B.C. The timing and sequence of subsequent dispersals out of this homeland—especially into the archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia—have been the focus of much debate over several decades. The idea that Eastern Polynesia was settled from Western Polynesia has not been in doubt, but only in recent years have the particulars of sequence and chronology been resolved to the satisfaction of most scholars.

In part, uncertainties regarding the chronology of initial Eastern Polynesian settlement stemmed from a dearth of archaeological fieldwork in many Eastern Polynesian islands; for example, the Austral Island chain, one possible corridor of early expansion into southeastern Polynesia, still remains only partly explored. Archaeologists have also debated the kinds of evidence required to establish the chronology of human settlement on islands.28 Some archaeologists insist that only artifactual evidence—that found at a primary habitation site—can pin down the date of human colonization of an island. Others argue that indirect environmental evidence for human disturbance on fragile island ecosystems (e.g., increased charcoal influxes in sediment cores, pollen evidence for forest clearance and expansion of grass- or fernlands, or the appearance of commensal animals such as the Pacific rat) offer proxy indicators of human arrival. On large islands (such as Hawai‘i or New Zealand), where physical remains of the first settlements may be elusive, environmental indicators may offer a better means for tracking the chronology of human arrival. But the most important methodological advances have been in the use of radiocarbon dating.

In the 1960s, Kenneth Emory and Yosihiko Sinoto developed a model of Polynesian dispersals that privileged the Marquesas Islands as the first archipelago to be settled by voyagers moving out from Western Polynesia.29 Their model invoked successive dispersals radiating from the Marquesas to the Society Islands and subsequently from both of these archipelagoes to the other Eastern Polynesian islands (see fig. 1.15). This “orthodox scenario” reflected the richness of the early Marquesan archaeological record but was hampered by incomplete knowledge of the initial settlement period in other islands.30 In recent years, the discovery and excavation of additional early sites in the Cook, Society, Austral, and Mangareva Archipelagoes has revealed that the entire central Eastern Polynesian region was colonized very rapidly. The small founding settlements established in these islands remained in communication with each other for some time, forming an Eastern Polynesian homeland region.

The debate regarding Eastern Polynesian settlement revolved around the so-called long pause, a temporal gap between the arrival of Lapita populations in the Western Polynesian homeland and the later expansion of Polynesians into the islands of Eastern Polynesia.31 While Tonga, Samoa, and other Western Polynesian islands were colonized by 900–800 B.C., based on radiocarbon dates obtained during the 1950s to 1980s, it seemed that the earliest sites in Eastern Polynesia dated to around 200 B.C.–A.D. 1. This left a “pause” of around six to nine centuries between the settlement of the Polynesian homeland and the later diaspora to Eastern Polynesia. Indeed, there was good reason to believe that such a pause did occur. Historical linguists such as Pawley (1996) and Marck (2000) argued that a period of common development in the Western Polynesian homeland—prior to later dispersals—was necessary to explain the many innovations in Proto Polynesian language (approximately 1,300 lexical innovations have been cataloged) and to allow time for the differentiation of the Proto Tongic and Proto Nuclear Polynesian languages (see fig. 7.3).

The length of the pause between settlement of the ancestral homeland and the colonization of Eastern Polynesia was greatly extended when Spriggs and Anderson (1993)—influenced by radiocarbon dating developments in New Zealand—suggested a very late colonization of those large islands. Arguing that many of the original radiocarbon dates from Eastern Polynesian sites were inaccurate and too old, Spriggs and Anderson proposed applying “chronometric hygiene,” eliminating dates that did not meet certain strict criteria. Applying such “hygiene,” Spriggs and Anderson (1993:211) claimed that the Marquesas were colonized by ca. A.D. 300–600, while the “central, northern, and eastern archipleagoes” had not been settled until ca. A.D. 600–950, with New Zealand being the last to be discovered around A.D. 1000–1200.

Why did the radiocarbon dates obtained by such pioneering archaeologists as Kenneth Emory, Robert Suggs, and Yosihiko Sinoto prove to be inaccurate? One issue had to do with laboratory methods; others concerned sample type and collection. Many of the early radiocarbon dates had large standard errors, a reflection of the crude solid-carbon counting methods first used by Willard Libby and other radiocarbon-dating pioneers. The shift to new liquid scintillation methods later reduced such errors, but the greatest advance came with the development of accelerator mass spectrometry in the 1990s. AMS dating not only allowed for greatly reduced standard errors (as low as ± 15 years) but also permitted the dating of very small samples. With sample sizes as small as 10 milligrams for carbonized plant materials, individual seeds or small twig fragments could be directly dated.

Archaeologists in the Pacific increasingly paid close attention to the kinds of samples they selected for dating, in the case of wood charcoal identifying the species of wood being submitted. In the early years of radiocarbon dating there had been a tendency to select the largest pieces of charcoal. Often, the entire contents of hearths or earth ovens (including tens or even hundreds of individual charcoal fragments) had been submitted in bulk. We now realize that such samples often included old-growth timber, with an “in-built” age older than the time at which the wood was gathered and burned. At coastal sites, there was also the likelihood of old driftwood having been used for fuel. Identifying individual charcoal specimens for AMS dating and selecting only short-lived species eliminated the problem of old wood that was not directly related to the age of human occupation of a site. These methodological advances revolutionized the radiocarbon chronology for Eastern Polynesia. A new consensus has recently emerged around a “short chronology” in which the central archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia did not begin to be settled until after A.D. 900.32

For the Society Islands, possibly the first archipelago to be discovered by canoes exploring eastward from Samoa or Tonga, Kahn and Sinoto (2017) argue that revised dating of early sites indicates Polynesian arrival around A.D. 1000–1100. Sediment coring and pollen analysis at Lake Temae on Mo‘orea likewise documents initial human presence, and cultivation of Colocasia taro, by A.D. 1000 (Stevenson et al. 2017).33 The chronology of Marquesan set-tlement has also been shortened. Initial dates as old as 150 B.C. in the case of Suggs’s excavations at Ha‘atuatua (Suggs 1961) were certainly due to the “old wood” problem. Sinoto (1966) proposed a Marquesan settlement date of A.D. 300–600 based on his initial dates from the Hane site on Ua Huka, but when Anderson and Sinoto (2002) redated ten samples from Hane, none were earlier than A.D. 1000. In 2009, Conte and Molle (2012) reexcavated at Hane, obtaining a new series of AMS dates from the lowest deposits of A.D. 900–1000. This is consistent with dates for the earliest levels at Hanamiai on Tahuata Island, bracketed between A.D. 1025 and 1300 (Rolett 1998:241, table 4.1).

Recent chronologies for other Eastern Polynesian islands likewise support initial settlement between A.D. 900 and 1100. In the Southern Cook Islands, the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia has been extensively redated using AMS on identified, short-lived plant remains and on the bones of the Polynesian-introduced Pacific rat; these dates indicate initial human arrival between A.D. 906 and 1180 (Kirch, ed., 2017:85). On Aitutaki Island in the Southern Cooks, the base of the Moturaku rockshelter dates to A.D. 1047–1297 (Allen and Morrison 2013), whereas the Ureia site on the main island is slightly later in age, A.D. 1225–1430 (M. Allen and Wallace 2007). AMS dates from the Onemea site on Taravai Island in the Mangareva (Gambier) Islands indicate Polynesian colonization around A.D. 950 (Kirch et al. 2010), while Weisler’s dates from Henderson Island to the east of Mangareva are no earlier than A.D. 1050 (Weisler 1995:389, table 2). Although Hunt and Lipo (2006, 2011) claim that Rapa Nui was not settled until A.D. 1200, the full set of AMS dates from the Anakena dune site (including those of Steadman, Vargas, and Cristino 1994) suggest colonization between A.D. 1000 and 1100. To sum up, the central and southeastern archipelagoes and islands of Eastern Polynesia now have well-supported radiocarbon chronologies converging on the period from A.D. 900 to 1100.

What of the timing of Polynesian expansion to the most remote archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia, those of Hawai‘i and New Zealand? Some Hawaiian sites previously regarded as dating to the early part of the Hawaiian sequence, such as Kuli‘ou‘ou on O‘ahu and Hālawa on Moloka‘i, are now known to be younger in age (Kahn et al. 2014; Kirch and McCoy 2007). The oldest reliably dated occupation site in the Hawaiian Islands, the Bellows Beach (O18) site on O‘ahu (Pearson, Kirch, and Pietrusewsky 1971), has AMS dates of A.D. 1040–1219 (Dye and Pantaleo 2010:113). Paleoenvironmental evidence including dates on bones of the Pacific rat and on Polynesian-introduced plants such as candlenut likewise bracket the settlement of Hawai‘i between A.D. 940 and 1130 (Athens, Reith, and Dye 2014; see also Dye 2011, 2015). The large islands of New Zealand were evidently the last to be colonized. Extensive AMS dating of Polynesian-introduced Pacific rat bones indicate that this animal was established in New Zealand by A.D. 1280 (Wilmshurst et al. 2008), while seeds displaying rat gnawing have been dated to A.D. 1140–1340 (Wilmshurst and Higham 2004). Thus the time frame for the settlement of New Zealand is currently regarded as being sometime in the thirteenth century (Anderson, Binney, and Harris 2014:21).





EARLY SETTLEMENT SITES IN EASTERN POLYNESIA


A number of sites dating to the initial phase of settlement in Eastern Polynesian have been excavated over the years (table 7.2). In contrast to later Eastern Polynesian settlement patterns in which habitation sites are typically dispersed (with a few exceptions, such as New Zealand and Rapa), these early settlements were mostly nucleated hamlets or small villages, usually on or near the coast. On the tropical and subtropical high islands, early communities chose to situate their hamlets or villages in favorable ecological zones, such as well-watered windward coasts adjacent to freshwater streams and close to reef and lagoon resources.


TABLE 7.2

Selected Early Eastern Polynesian Archaeological Sites





Many of the early Eastern Polynesian sites are found in sand dune or beach terrace geomorphological contexts, such as Ureia on Aitutaki, Hane on Ua Huka, and Onemea on Taravai. The stratigraphy in such sites is often complex (fig. 7.8), with reworking and redeposition of deposits that can confuse archaeologists, as may have happened at Ha‘atuatua on Nuku Hiva (Rolett and Conte 1995; Suggs 1961). The Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia site on Huahine (Society Islands) occupies low-lying terrain that was part of an infilling lagoon; its waterlogged, anaerobic deposits preserved many wooden artifacts (Sinoto 1979a; Sinoto with Aramata 2016; Sinoto and Han 1981; Sinoto and McCoy 1975). In addition to wooden bowls, a hafted adz, and cordage, this remarkable site yielded wooden planks that were probably part of a large canoe, as well as the framing timbers of a wooden storage hut.




FIGURE 7.8 The Hane site on Ua Huka Island, Marquesas, exhibits complex stratification typical of such coastal sand dune localities. Two buried stone pavements are evident. (Photo courtesy of Guillaume Molle.)





These communities seemed to have separate dwelling and cooking spaces, as well as a variety of domestic architecture. Some dwellings were raised on low stone pavements, as at Hane (fig. 7.8), while others had gravel floors. There were rectangular as well as round-ended house forms. There are no known religious or ceremonial structures, although historical linguistic evidence suggests that the initial stages of the Eastern Polynesian marae probably developed at this time (Kirch and Green 2001). There is ample evidence for horticulture and domestic animals (especially dogs and pigs, as well as chickens), as the colonization strategies originally worked out during the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania were successfully continued in Eastern Polynesia. The early Eastern Polynesian colonists experimented with fishing techniques, developing a wider range of fishing gear than had been present in immediately preceding Ancestral Polynesian communities in Samoa or Tonga (fig. 7.9). Early sites in the Marquesas, the Southern Cook Islands, Mangareva, and the Hawaiian group display a remarkable diversity of one-piece fishhook types as well as trolling rigs; both angling and trolling hooks were made from pearl shell (Pinctada sp.) where available but also from bone (fig. 7.10). Where good-quality shell was not available, as in Hawai‘i, larger angling hooks were manufactured (usually from bone) by a clever two-piece method, with the point and shank carved of separate pieces lashed together at the bend.




FIGURE 7.9 Early Eastern Polynesian fishhooks from the Marquesas Islands display a great diversity of styles. (After Suggs 1961.).





FIGURE 7.10 One-piece fishhooks of pearl shell from the Tangatatau rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, Southern Cook Islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Many stylistic innovations set off the material culture of these early Eastern Polynesian sites from its Ancestral Polynesian antecedents. New forms of basalt adzes were invented (fig. 7.11), with incipient tangs to assist in lashing the stone blade to the wooden haft, and displaying a range of triangular, trapezoidal, and quadrangular cross sections. There is a diversity of ornaments (including whale-tooth pendants or necklaces), tattooing needles, coconut grater heads in pearl shell and basalt, and net sinkers and weights. Sinoto (1970, 1983, 1996b) labeled these distinctive early Eastern Polynesian assemblages as an Archaic Phase (see also Walter 1996). However, not all of the artifact forms are shared by all early Eastern Polynesian assemblages.




FIGURE 7.11 Basalt adzes of Early Eastern Polynesian style, with incipient tangs, from the Tangatatau rockshelter site on Mangaia Island, Southern Cook Islands. (Drawing by Judith Ogden.)





POLYNESIAN VOYAGING


The first Europeans to explore Polynesia had no doubts that the Pacific peoples arrived in the islands through purposive voyaging, for they witnessed firsthand the remarkable seagoing double-hulled and outrigger canoes, such as that encountered at sea between Tonga and Samoa by the Dutch voyagers Schouten and Le Maire in 1616 (fig. 7.12). But in the early nineteenth century indigenous Polynesian canoe-building industries collapsed; traditional navigational lore was almost completely lost. By the mid-twentieth century a new generation of scholars was proposing that the Polynesians had arrived in the islands primarily by chance, riding prevailing winds and currents. Heyerdahl (1952) pushed this idea with his Kon-Tiki raft voyage from South America to the Tuamotus, arguing that the Polynesian ancestors were American Indians who drifted into Polynesia from the Northwest Coast and from Peru. Though widely acclaimed in the popular press, Heyerdahl’s theory was never taken seriously by scholars, since it ignores the mass of linguistic, ethnographic, ethnobiological, and archaeological evidence in support of a western (Asiatic) origin for the Polynesians. Another theorist who proposed that the Polynesians had settled their islands by drifting was Andrew Sharp (1956). He did not derive the Polynesians from the Americas but argued that they were incapable of long-distance purposive navigation against prevailing winds and currents. In Sharp’s opinion, the Polynesians had colonized the eastern Pacific islands through a lengthy succession of chance or drift voyages.




FIGURE 7.12 A Polynesian double-hulled canoe at sea between Tonga and Samoa, as seen by the Dutch voyagers Schouten and Le Maire in 1616. (From Burney 1806.)





Sharp’s thesis was tested in an early application of computer simulation by Levison, Ward, and Webb (1973). Using a massive probability matrix of current and wind speed and force for specific areas of the Pacific Ocean obtained from naval hydrographic records, these geographers ran 101,016 simulated drift “voyages” from many Polynesian islands. Although the simulations showed that there is a good possibility of successful drift from east to west, as would account for the settlement of the Polynesian Outliers (see chaps. 5 and 6), it is virtually impossible to go in the opposite direction without purposive sailing. Not a single simulated voyage out of 16,000 computer trials from various starting points in central Eastern Polynesia managed to end up in Hawai‘i. This led Levison et al. to conclude that Hawai‘i had been colonized “by crews who intended to follow a northerly course, which implies a motive such as seeking new lands” (1973:53; emphasis added).

Computer simulation continues to aid our understanding of ancient voyaging in the Pacific. Taking advantage of new, high-resolution databases of wind, currents, precipitation, and land distribution in the southwestern Pacific, Montenegro, Callaghan, and Fitzpatrick (2016) simulated the settlement of Remote Oceania in terms of “shortest-hop trajectories.” For Polynesia, the results indicate that Samoa was the “most probable staging area for the colonization of East Polynesia” and that remote Rapa Nui was more likely to have been settled from Mangareva than from the Marquesas. The Hawaiian Islands could have been settled from either the Marquesas or the Society Islands; although voyages from the former would require “more efficient windward sailing capacities,” they would also have been considerably shorter in duration. In a separate study, Goodwin, Browning, and Anderson (2014) explored the effects of the Medieval Climate Anomaly (A.D. 800–1300) on voyaging routes to the more remote islands of southern and eastern Polynesia. Their results suggest that “intensification and poleward expansion of the Pacific subtropical anticyclone culminating in A.D. 1140–1260 opened an anomalous climate window for off-wind sailing routes to New Zealand” (Goodwin, Browning, and Anderson 2014:14716), with likely source areas in the southern Austral Islands and the Southern Cook Islands.

Intentionality in voyaging had long been indicated by Polynesian oral traditions, rich in accounts of the discovery of certain archipelagoes and subsequent interarchipelago return trips.34 Hawaiian traditions speak of great navigators such as Mo‘ikeha and Pā‘ao, who made round-trip voyages between the ancestral lands of “Kahiki” (Tahiti) and the Hawaiian group. Pā‘ao quarreled with his older sibling Lonopele in Kahiki and fled to new lands in the north, introducing the cult of the war god Tū (Kū in Hawaiian), along with human sacrifice.

Geoff Irwin (1989, 1990, 1992), an archaeologist and a deepwater yachtsman, built on the pioneering work of Levison et al. to develop a sophisticated theory of Polynesian voyaging and colonization. Irwin argues that the purposive colonization of Eastern Polynesia was the final stage in a long process of Pacific exploration, enabled by gradual improvements in voyaging skills, originating in the “voyaging nursery” of the Bismarck Archipelago (see chap. 3) and elaborated during the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania. A key element in this process was a “survival sailing strategy” (fig. 7.13). Taking advantage of predictable westerly reversals of the prevailing east-to-west trades (Finney 1988, 1994), Pacific peoples learned to sail eastward in search of new landfalls, always relying on regular trade winds to return them to their home islands. They discovered how to fix latitude by the stars, enabling them to run back to a home island on the proper latitude; in this strategy, knowing longitude was not necessary. Effectively, exploration and the discovery of new islands proceeded as a series of “arcs of exploration,” becoming wider in angle and deeper in their distance of penetration into the unknown as canoe technology and navigational skills improved with accumulated experience (fig. 7.14).




FIGURE 7.13 Geoff Irwin’s model of survival sailing strategy. (Courtesy G. Irwin.)





FIGURE 7.14 Geoff Irwin’s model of arcs of exploration. (Courtesy G. Irwin.)





Gradual developments and improvements in sailing abilities as the Lapita voyagers and their Polynesian descendants moved from west to east across Remote Oceania were accompanied by technical advances in canoe design and performance. One of the most significant innovations was that of the double-hulled canoe, in which the outrigger was replaced by a second hull, creating what Western sailors call a catamaran. Stout timbers connecting the twin hulls were decked over to increase carrying capacity, and the hulls were enlarged and given increased freeboard by adding wash strakes attached with sennit lashing. Other advances included changes in sail design and in the hydrodynamic performance of hulls with V-shaped cross sections (Irwin and Flay 2015). The double-hulled canoe was most likely developed in the Western Polynesian homeland during the late first millennium B.C. to early first millennium A.D. (Finney, in Howe, ed., 2006:127). All of these developments, but especially the double-hulled canoe, provided the technological ability for Polynesian explorers to expand beyond the confines of the Tonga-Samoa region and to discover and colonize the myriad islands and archipelagoes of central and marginal Eastern Polynesia.

Computer simulations and theoretical models can also be tested by practical experiment. In 1976, the Pacific world took notice when the replicated 19-meter Polynesian voyaging canoe Hokule‘a (fig. 7.15) made a successful round-trip voyage between Hawai‘i and Tahiti.35 Subsequent voyages, many made without the aid of any Western navigational devices, have covered the seaways between Samoa and central Polynesia, Rarotonga and New Zealand, and Hawai‘i and central Polynesia. A major voyage to Rapa Nui by the Hokule‘a was successfully completed in October 1999. These voyages constitute a kind of “experimental archaeology,” adding insight into the seaworthiness of traditional Polynesian watercraft and the effectiveness of noninstrumental navigation. The voyages have had a dual effect, for as Finney (1996b:372) writes, “in addition to helping to make voyaging once [again] more central to the study of Polynesian prehistory, our experimental initiative has also led to a voyaging renaissance whereby empowered Polynesians are now seeking to learn about their maritime past by sailing Hokule‘a and other reconstructed canoes over the sea roads pioneered by their ancestors.” By the time this book appears in print, Hokule‘a will have completed an unprecedented, three-year, 47,000-nautical-mile circumnavigation of the world.




FIGURE 7.15 The replicated voyaging canoe Hokule‘a has sailed on numerous experimental voyages throughout Polynesia. (Photo courtesy Bishop Museum.)





Being made of perishable materials, canoes or their components rarely survive in archaeological contexts, but parts of two early Eastern Polynesian canoes have been recovered from waterlogged deposits in the Society Islands and New Zealand. At the Vaito‘otia-Fa‘ahia site on Huahine Island, Sinoto (1979a) discovered the planks and mast of a double-hulled canoe estimated to have a length of 25 meters. “The planks have lap-joint ends, indicating that they were joined together longitudinally, and they are drilled along the sides for lashing to planks above and below them” (Finney, in Howe, ed., 2006:103). Even more remarkable was the discovery at Anaweka, on the northwestern coast of New Zealand’s South Island, of a large section of a complex composite canoe (fig. 7.16). The canoe was made in New Zealand from native matai wood (Prumnopitys taxifolia); radiocarbon dates on both the wood and the caulking indicate that the canoe was in use around A.D. 1400 (Johns, Irwin, and Sung 2014). The sophistication of the craftsmen who built this canoe is evident in the exquisite bas-relief carving of a sea turtle that graces the hull (fig. 7.17).




FIGURE 7.16 An internal view of the canoe hull found at Anaweka, New Zealand, showing the pointed end and butt end and lashing holes for attachment of other timbers on all sides. (From Johns et al. 2014, courtesy of Dilys Johns.)





FIGURE 7.17 A sea turtle is carved in raised relief at the shaped end of the Anaweka canoe strake, and a ridge behind it extends to the end of the strake. B shows a detail of the raised relief turtle. (From Johns et al. 2014, courtesy of Dilys Johns.)





CONTACTS WITH THE AMERICASAdvances in our understanding of Polynesian voyaging, combined with archaeological discoveries, have turned the tables on Thor Heyerdahl’s theory of an American origin for the Polynesians, suggesting instead that it was the Polynesians who reached the coast of South America and successfully returned, bringing both the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) and the bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) with them (Green 1998). The sweet potato was domesticated in South America (Yen 1974b), but for a long time it was uncertain whether the plant had been introduced to Polynesia by early Spanish explorers. When the late eighteenth-century botanists Solander and Forster on Cook’s voyages first documented the flora of Polynesia, they found that the sweet potato was intensively cultivated, especially in Hawai‘i, Rapa Nui, and New Zealand (Merrill 1954). Yen’s (1974b) extensive research on sweet potato distribution and variation led him to propose a “tripartite hypothesis” of the plant’s distribution, in which sweet potato arrived in Eastern Polynesia in pre-European times, with the Polynesians themselves as the most likely transferors, a model recently confirmed by molecular genetic analysis (Roullier et al. 2013).

The discovery and dating of carbonized sweet potato tubers (parenchyma) in the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia in the Southern Cook Islands (Hather and Kirch 1991; Kirch, ed., 2017) provided direct evidence that sweet potato had been transferred into central Polynesia no later than the end of the fourteenth century A.D. Subsequently, many archaeobotanical samples of sweet potato have been radiocarbon dated to precontact periods in New Zealand and Hawai‘i. Given the evidence for rapid Polynesian expansion throughout southeastern Polynesia between about A.D. 900 and 1100, it is entirely plausible that at least one voyaging canoe reached South America to establish contact and return with sweet potato tubers. Polynesian adoption of the sweet potato (as opposed to other American crops such as maize or beans) is culturally plausible, given that the plant is both morphologically and ecologically similar to the Dioscorea yams with which the Polynesians were already familiar. The Proto Eastern Polynesian word for sweet potato, *kūmara, seems to be a borrowing from a South American dialect in which the term for the crop is kumar (Yen 1974b; Green 2005). The importance of sweet potato introduction into Eastern Polynesia cannot be underestimated, for in the subtropical islands and in temperate New Zealand it became a major crop, underwriting the staple economy of island societies.

The bottle gourd, a useful plant known to have been present in the Americas by at least 9,900 years ago, was also introduced into Eastern Polynesia well before European contact (Clarke et al. 2006). Archaeobotanical remains of bottle gourd (gourd fragments and seeds) have been found in Hawai‘i and elsewhere in Eastern Polynesia. A recent effort to test the hypothesis of a pre-Columbian American origin for the Polynesian bottle gourd using molecular evidence (Clarke et al. 2006) proved inconclusive, due to the likelihood of postcontact hybridization with Asian cultivars. Nonetheless, bottle gourd remains a likely candidate for Polynesian transfer from South America.

If Polynesians made contact with coastal peoples in the Americas, the question arises whether this resulted in the flow of ideas, organisms, or even genes into the New World. One recent claim for such a Polynesia-to-America transfer concerns the jungle fowl (Gallus gallus), which was carried from Southeast Asia throughout the Pacific during the Austronesian expansion. Whether chickens were present in South America in pre-Columbian times has itself been debated, but Storey et al. (2007) reported AMS-dated chicken bone from the El Arenal site in south central Chile, which they argue is evidence for Polynesian introduction of chickens. The reported date, calibrated to A.D. 1321–1407, falls toward the end of the period of extensive Eastern Polynesia voyaging but predates Spanish occupation (Pizarro reached Peru in 1532). This claim has provoked strong debate (Gongora et al. 2008; Storey et al. 2008), and more evidence from additional sites will be required before a pre-Columbian transfer of chickens from Polynesia to South America can be firmly accepted.

A second case for Polynesian cultural influence in the New World has been made by Jones and Klar (2005), who argue that the sewn plank canoes of the Channel Islands region of California resulted from Polynesian contacts. They adduce archaeological and linguistic evidence in support of their argument, again spurring vigorous debate (Anderson 2006; Arnold 2007).

In short, some contact between Eastern Polynesians and indigenous American populations seems incontrovertible based on the evidence of the sweet potato, and probably the bottle gourd (Jones et al., eds., 2011). But more research is necessary to refine our understanding of such contact, and whether or not the Polynesians made any significant contributions to New World culture history.


INTERACTION SPHERES IN EASTERN POLYNESIAWhen stratigraphic archaeology commenced in Eastern Polynesia in the 1950s and 1960s, connections between island groups had to be inferred on the basis of stylistic similarities between artifacts such as fishhooks36 and adzes (pottery being absent, except for a few sherds in early Marquesan sites).37 These comparisons hinted at a close relationship between early sites in the Marquesas and Hawai‘i and similar linkages between the Society Islands and New Zealand, as well as the possibility of a later connection between Hawai‘i and the Society Islands (Emory and Sinoto 1965). Despite trial experimentation with petrographic analysis of adz rock, however, there was no effort to trace the physical movement of individual artifacts between islands.

The development of high-precision geochemical characterization and sourcing of stone using energy-dispersive and wave-length-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF, WD-XRF), along with isotopic analysis, has provided the means to determine the source localities of basalt adzes and adz flakes, as well as of oven stones.38 Analysis of adzes and adz flakes from early deposits at the Tangatatau rockshelter on Mangaia Island demonstrates that while some stone tools were being produced from locally available basalt, adzes were also being imported from Rurutu in the Austral Islands, from Eiao in the Marquesas, and from at least two sources in Samoa (Weisler and Kirch 1996; Weisler et al. 2016). That the early Mangaian population was linked into a long-distance interisland exchange network was also suggested by quantities of pearl shell (Pinctada margaritifera), used to make fishhooks and other artifacts. Pearl shell does not occur locally on Mangaia and would have had to be imported from an island with a lagoon, perhaps Aitutaki or one of the Tuamotu atolls. Imported basalt and pearl shell also occur on Ma‘uke Island and on Aitutaki.39 On these Southern Cook Islands, the early patterns of extralocal linkages and importation of exotic materials gave way in later prehistory to replacements with strictly local materials (e.g., the use of inferior Turbo setosus shell for fishhooks on Mangaia). Thus an early period of interaction gradually shifted to a later phase of increased isolation.

More dramatic evidence for long-distance movement of stone artifacts has been obtained through analysis of adzes and oven stones from Mangareva and Pitcairn in southeastern Polynesia and from Mo‘orea in the Society Islands (Weisler 1993, 1998a). Weisler documented regular movement of oven stones from Mangareva and of basalt and pitchstone (a kind of volcanic glass) from Pitcairn to the remote makatea island of Henderson between about A.D. 800 and 1450. Adz stone quarried from Eiao in the Marquesas was transported to Mo‘orea in the Society Islands, to Mangaia in the Cooks, and to Mangareva in the Australs (Weisler 1998a; Weisler et al. 2016). These results confirm that the central Eastern Polynesian archipelagoes were in regular communication during the early settlement period.

Another innovative approach to the study of prehistoric interaction in Eastern Polynesia uses the sequencing and comparison of mitochondrial DNA in populations of the Pacific rat (Rattus exulans). Work by Matisoo-Smith et al. (1998) with populations of this commensal species—which was widely spread by the Polynesians—suggests that there were multiple contacts between some island groups. On the other hand, certain islands (e.g., the remote Chathams) have only a single rat lineage, suggesting isolation. Matisoo-Smith’s research also shows a link between the Hawaiian and Marquesan rat populations, confirming independent archaeological and linguistic evidence for the initial settlement of Hawai‘i from the Marquesas.





SUMMARY


Since the first edition of this book was written, almost twenty years ago, the evidence for the chronology and sequence of Polynesian settlement has accumulated substantially, with a new consensus emerging, closing the debate over “long” and “short” chronologies for Eastern Polynesian colonization. There is no doubt that the Western Polynesian archipelagoes of Tonga and Samoa, along with smaller islands such as Futuna and ‘Uvea, were settled early in the first millennium B.C. by Lapita voyagers. In the case of Tonga, the early Nukuleka site has been precisely dated to 896–880 B.C. Within probably no more than a century, small settlements had been established on all of the main islands throughout this region. A long period of gradual cultural change and adaptation to truly “oceanic” environmental conditions ensued, with the emergence of a distinctive Ancestral Polynesian culture and Proto Polynesian language by the close of the first millennium B.C. Archaeologically, these changes are marked among other things by the gradual loss of ceramic technology and by the development of distinctive adze types made from basalt.

The development of the double-hulled sailing canoe and enhanced navigational skills during the Ancestral Polynesian period led to the capacity to undertake exploratory voyages of long duration, transporting dozens of people and their cargo. By around A.D. 900–1000 these voyaging skills permitted an expansion out of the Western Polynesian homeland region into the central archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia. Computer simulations as well as linguistic evidence suggest that Samoa may have been the origin point for voyagers exploring eastward. The large and fertile Society Islands group was perhaps the first to be discovered, although near-simultaneous dates for early settlement sites in the Society Islands, Marquesas, Southern Cook Islands, and Mangareva indicate that all of central Eastern Polynesia was rapidly explored, with colonies established on many islands by A.D. 1100–1200. Even the Hawaiian Islands, 3,500 kilometers north of the Marquesas, had been discovered and colonized by A.D. 940–1130.40 The large islands of New Zealand were the last to have been settled, between about A.D. 1200 and 1300.

The incredible “explosion” of canoes and people out of Western Polynesia at the close of the first millennium A.D. did not end with the discovery of remote Rapa Nui or Hawai‘i, for it is clear that one or more canoes reached the shores of South America (and possibly the California coast of North America as well). At least one canoe returned carrying the sweet potato, a South American crop that flourished in the subtropical islands of Eastern Polynesia and that in New Zealand provided the basis for the local economy. With these contacts between Polynesia and the Americas, the vast Pacific world had finally been crossed by the tentacles of a human migration that began millennia earlier in the balmy waters of the South China Sea.





EIGHT


