The Prehistory of “New” Melanesia



All the chief social institutions of Melanesia, its dual organisation, its secret societies, its totemism, its cult of the dead, and many of its less essential customs, such as its use of money, its decorative art, its practice of incision and its square houses, have been the direct outcome of the interaction between different and sometimes conflicting cultures.

W.H.R. RIVERS, The History of Melanesian Society (1914)





THE CULTURAL SYNTHESIS OF Austronesian-speaking “newcomers” and the older indigenous peoples of Near Oceania (the Papuan or Non-Austronesian speakers)—from which the remarkable Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania emerged—forever changed the cultural landscape of the region Dumont d’Urville dubbed “Melanesia” (map 8). Whereas prior to 1200 B.C. humans had been confined to the intervisible archipelagoes west of Makira (San Cristobal) Island in the Solomons, they now rapidly colonized virtually every island within the southwestern Pacific. The verbal, cultural, and genetic interactions between Austronesian- and Non-Austronesian-speaking populations would lead to protean linguistic, cultural, and biological complexity. It is in this sense that I use the terms Old and New Melanesia to speak of the periods prior to and after the emergence and expansion of Lapita.




MAP 8 Island Melanesia, excluding Fiji, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





To canvass the cultural developments that occurred throughout New Melanesia in the period following the Lapita expansion is a daunting task given the enormous ethnographic diversity that emerged within this region over the past three millennia.1 The task is rendered more difficult by the paucity of archaeological work in some areas, such as the Massim or the central Solomons. Nonetheless, the number of well-excavated and analyzed sites has grown steadily (table 5.1). In this chapter, I follow a region-by-region approach, emphasizing aspects of the prehistoric record that are of special interest or have been more thoroughly studied. In the chapter summary, I discuss recurring themes of Melanesian prehistory.


TABLE 5.1

Selected Non-Lapita Sites in Melanesia





TABLE 5.1 (continued)





TRADING SOCIETIES OF PAPUA AND THE MASSIM


When pioneering anthropologists such as Bronislaw Malinowski, C.G. Seligman, and F.E. Williams began systematically to explore and describe the indigenous cultures of southeastern New Guinea and the adjacent Massim Islands (comprising the D’Entrecasteaux, Trobriand, Woodlark, and Louisiade groups), they were struck more than anything else by the highly specialized systems of trade and exchange that dominated the lives of these peoples (fig. 5.1). Malinowski made the kula network of the Massim—with its counter-circulating shell valuables (the ritual epiphenomenon of a highly complex network circulating all manner of goods)—a textbook case of “primitive economics.” Of equal interest were the loosely interconnected trade networks centered on the Mailu and Motu peoples of the southern Papuan coast, especially the annual hiri expeditions that sailed on large seagoing canoes called lagatoi, each voyage transporting as many as thirty thousand clay pots from the Port Moresby area several hundred kilometers west, to the sago swamp–dwelling peoples of the Gulf, returning with quantities of sago palm flour sufficient to provide sustenance for months.2 Many of these coastal and island trading peoples are Austronesian (Oceanic) speakers (although the Mailu and their trade partners in the Gulf are Non-Austronesians).




FIGURE 5.1 High-volume production of pottery for trade characterized many of the coastal societies of Papua in the proto-historic period. (Photo courtesy Jim Allen.)





Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, archaeological work in the vicinity of Port Moresby, as well as in the Mailu area, began to unearth a 2,000-year-long cultural sequence and to provide crucial evidence for the rise of specialized trading along the Papuan coast.3 Less is known regarding the Gulf end of this trading network, although recent work at sites such as Keveoki, Popo, Kerema, and Emo has begun to provide some insights (David et al. 2009, 2010; Skelly and David 2017). For the Massim and adjacent coast of northeast Papua (the Collingwood Bay area), the archaeological record is spotty, few stratigraphic excavations having been conducted.4

The recent discovery of late Lapita ceramics at Caution Bay (David et al. 2011; McNiven 2011) dating to 950 B.C. demonstrates that the Lapita expansion extended as far as the south Papuan coast (see chap. 4). Prior to this discovery, the oldest known sites along the Papuan coast—such as Oposisi on Yule Island, Nebira 4 near Port Moresby, and Selai in the Mailu area—were dated to between A.D. 50 and 350 (fig. 5.2). Although a sequence linking the South Papuan Lapita to the ceramic assemblages that follow has yet to be elucidated in detail, we can reasonably assume that there was cultural continuity. Vanderwal (1978:418) characterized pottery from the lowest deposits at Oposisi as consisting of three vessel types (open bowls and two pot forms), well-fired and burnished, with frequent use of red slip and decorations (sometimes lime-infilled) made by “pressing the edge and sides of small shells” into the clay. Many motifs are reminiscent of Lapita designs, as is the use of lime-filling and red slip. Vanderwal (1978:424) saw the early Oposisi assemblage as falling “within the Lapita tradition.” Jim Allen (2017) also regards the earliest Papuan coast cultures as derivative from Lapita, marking a phase of expansion of Austronesian-speakers.




FIGURE 5.2 Potsherds from the Nebira 4 site. (After Allen 1972.)





On the northern Papuan coast, in the Wanigela region of Collingwood Bay, Egloff (1979) found no in situ stratified deposits older than about 1,000 years, but he collected surface potsherds that he thought were older. In particular, his “Ceramic Group P” includes pedestaled bowls of striking Lapita affinity (Egloff 1979:70, pl. 8). A connection between Egloff’s Group P and Lapita seems probable (fig. 5.3). Further fieldwork along the northeastern Papuan coast and/or in the Massim Islands may ultimately yield Lapita occupations.5




FIGURE 5.3 A pedestaled bowl from the Collingwood Bay region is strongly suggestive of Lapita connections. (After Egloff 1971.)





Long-distance exchange or trade among these early populations is evident from the presence of Fergusson Island obsidian at several sites. Trochus shell armbands were probably exchange items, and specialized manufacture of shell beads at Nebira 4 suggests that shell “valuables” continued to play a role in exchange, as they had in the earlier Lapita networks (see chap. 4). Bickler (1997) demonstrated that Yule Island pottery moved as far west as the Gulf of Papua during this early period. According to Jim Allen (1982:202), there was increasing formalization of trade until about A.D. 800, when a “disruption” of socioeconomic systems occurred along the entire south Papuan coast.

After A.D. 800, the archaeological records from the Port Moresby (Motupore) and Mailu regions chronicle the rise of highly specialized trade networks, with loose linkages between them. Allen’s extensive Motupore Island excavations document the history of this specialized trading center from about A.D. 1200 to 1700 (Allen 2017). The Motupore inhabitants engaged in high-volume pottery production for export and also manufactured small shell disc beads (S.J. Allen et al. 1997). They imported wallabies from the New Guinea mainland for food and probably sago flour and other perishable foodstuffs. Chemical analyses of potsherds from the Popo site in the Gulf of Papua link Bootless Bay pottery with the Gulf sago producers. However, the ethnographically documented hiri system appears to be only the final phase in a long history of intensification and specialization of trade along the southern Papuan coast (Skelly and David 2017).

Irwin’s research in the Mailu region showed that initially Mailu (an offshore island like Motupore) was only one of several pottery-making villages, enjoying no particular economic advantage. Over time, Mailu became increasingly specialized in ceramic manufacture and eclipsed nearby communities. Combined with a pattern of increased warfare and raiding—leading to changes in settlement patterns from coastal fringe to hilltop locations—Mailu became a central place in the area’s trading system, by European contact achieving a total monopoly on pottery manufacture.

On Wari Island off the eastern tip of New Guinea, excavations by Negishi and Ono (2009) revealed a stratified sequence at the Kasasinabwana shell midden, with three distinct ceramic phases. The oldest, dated to between 850 and 650 B.C., is characterized by plain pottery with everted rims, similar to late Lapita ceramics. The middle phase, dated to 350 B.C. to A.D. 350 has red-slipped pottery with incised decorations, while the most recent phase contains pottery similar to that made on Wari ethnographically. Elsewhere in the Massim, with few excavated sites or continuous sequences, the picture is far from clear. The available data suggest that the kula of the “ethnographic present” has no great time depth and was preceded by more geographically extensive exchange networks. For example, while pottery in the Trobriands came historically from the Amphlett Islands, surface sherds collected from the Trobriands include ceramics deriving from the New Guinea mainland (Collingwood Bay) and from Goodenough Island. Egloff (1978:434) concluded that prior to A.D. 1500 there was a wider system in place, with “increasing localization through time and a constriction of interaction in the north-western sector of the kula islands.” Irwin (1983) suggests that the highly specialized Amphlett Islands pottery producers may be a recent phenomenon, perhaps analogous to the development of Mailu as a central place.

Based on recent work on Rossel and Nimowa Islands, Shaw (2016; Shaw et al. 2016) has outlined a tentative cultural sequence for the Massim region. Although no Lapita site proper has yet been discovered, Shaw (2016:120) believes that “the Lapita culture likely spread to the Massim islands, perhaps from as early as 3000/2900 B.P.” The plain ware pottery at the base of the Wari site is thus probably a late derivative of Lapita. From about 550 B.C. until A.D. 600 there was a process of “regionalization” of cultural traditions, followed from A.D. 600 to 1400 by the development of a “southern Massim pottery tradition.” Shaw (2016:120) concludes that “within the last 1000 years, archaeological evidence indicates that the Massim had developed into a culturally distinctive region, with trade networks linking many of the islands in the northern and southern Massim already apparent by this time.” Continued field and laboratory work in the Massim should in the future continue to refine our understanding of the historical development of the kula and related exchange systems of the Massim and Papuan coast, made famous by Seligman and Malinowski.6





THE LATE HOLOCENE IN HIGHLAND NEW GUINEA


One part of Near Oceania that experienced only indirect impact from the incursion of Austronesian-speaking peoples, and from the emergence of the Lapita cultural complex, is the interior Highlands of New Guinea.7 Nonetheless, the late Holocene period in the Highland valleys witnessed significant changes. Unfortunately, there are too few well-excavated and published sites dating to this period to provide a picture of regional variability within the Highlands, though such regional patterns will doubtless emerge through further work.8 Yet a broad picture can be sketched.

In chapter 3, I discussed the emergence in the Highlands during the early Holocene of incipient forms of cultivation involving drainage of the valley floors, based on the cultivation of Colocasia taro, along with other crops such as Dioscorea yams, Pueraria tubers, and Australimusa bananas. By the late Holocene, the Kuk swamp sequence shows that these systems had become quite sophisticated. Kuk phase 4, dated to A.D. 1–800, is marked by a highly standardized grid of parallel and right-angle ditches enclosing square or rectangular plots. Bayliss-Smith and Golson (1992) argue that Kuk phase 4 represents a new level of intensification based on taro cultivation. Indeed, it may mark a “Colocasian revolution” (18). The phase 4 “agricultural base had the capacity to sustain a high density of pigs and people in stable, sedentary settlements and to permit regular exchange, in what was otherwise a quite empty landscape of degraded grasslands with shifting cultivation in scattered forest swiddens” (18).

Environmental data—especially pollen sequences—reveal that agriculture in the Highlands was not restricted to the swampy valley floors; shifting cultivation was probably far more important overall, at least until the intensive developments of the past 1,200 years.9 These pollen sequences chronicle deforestation and expansion of anthropogenic grasslands and a consistent rise after about A.D. 1000 in the occurrence of ironwood (Casuarina equisetifolia) pollen. Golson (1997: 41) observes that Casuarina is planted today “for its timber and its capacity for soil rehabilitation through nitrogen fixation”; he hypothesizes that its increased frequency in the past millennium marks the development of an indigenous silviculture. Yet in spite of such efforts, over the past few thousand years the net effect of human agricultural practices in the Highlands—especially shifting cultivation—was a cycle leading to ever more intensive forms of cultivation, and to increased investment in a built environment in response to environmental degradation. To quote Golson, “a model incorporating these elements would propose the continuing replacement of older forest by increasingly degraded secondary growth, as cultivation expanded to its local limits and turned back on itself in a tightening cycle of more frequent clearances separated by ever-shortening fallow periods, driven by the pressures of production” (1997:41).

Pigs are essential to Highlands economies. Ethnographically, pigs along with certain imported shell valuables are “accorded marked cultural value by Highlands prestige systems” (Kelly 1988:173). Claims for the presence of Sus scrofa in the Highlands as early as 8000 B.C. are based on rare single teeth or bones in dubious stratigraphic contexts.10 Most likely, pigs were not introduced to New Guinea until after about 3000 B.C.; indeed, “pig bone is only sparsely represented in the Highlands archaeological record before perhaps the past 1,000 years” (Golson 1997:44). Thus the highly intensive systems of pig production—and exchange networks based on pig feasts—are a relatively new feature of Highland societies. Moreover, the systems so well documented ethnographically most likely owe their origins to an event that dates to a mere 300 years ago: the introduction of the sweet potato into the Highland valleys.

When Highland societies were first contacted by whites earlier in this century, it was apparent that their high population densities were dependent on the high productivity of the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), a crop noted for abundant yields, tolerance of higher altitudes and cooler climates, and adaptability to nutrient-poor or depleted soils. Although the sweet potato was introduced into Eastern Polynesia in prehistoric times (see chap. 7), there is no evidence that it had been transported westward into Melanesia or New Guinea prior to European expansion into the Pacific. Following Yen’s (1974b) “tripartite hypothesis” of I. batatas distribution, the crop arrived in Southeast Asia via two routes, one Portuguese (via the Atlantic and the Cape of Good Hope), the other Spanish (across the Pacific with the Manila Galleon trade). From the Indonesian islands adjacent to New Guinea, where sweet potatoes were present by the end of the seventeenth century, the crop found its way via indigenous networks of trade and exchange into New Guinea and the Highland valleys. There, given the cycle of increasingly intensive agricultural production that had emerged over the preceding millennia, the new crop was a godsend, its productivity spurring what James Watson (1965) first called an “Ipomoean revolution.”

At Kuk, the final phase (A.D. 1750–1900) reflects this Ipomoean introduction, with regularized grid and raised-bed cultivation. For the first time, habitations appear within the field system itself. The emphasis on the sweet potato had direct repercussions for pig production, since it is excellent pig fodder. Golson writes, “In principle, the sweet potato, as prime pig fodder that could be grown over a wider range of soils and environments, extended possibilities for successful pig keeping and offered an opportunity for more men, through the labor of their wives, to enter previously restricted systems of exchange in which pigs were a central item” (1997:49).

A final aspect of late Holocene prehistory in the Highlands is external exchange or trade networks,11 particularly those involving obsidian, stone axes, and shells. Watson (1986) determined that obsidian flakes from open sites in the Eastern Highlands originated at a source on New Britain, although one flake came from Fergusson Island in the Massim. These materials moved over long distances, “probably in incremental steps rather than in a single trade trajectory” (Watson 1986:9). Fourteen stone axe quarries are documented within the Highlands, and sourcing studies link surface-collected as well as excavated axes or axe fragments to the quarries. Burton (1987) demonstrated the appearance of specialized quarrying in the Tuman and Jimi areas, a pattern that may have emerged between about 500 B.C. and A.D. 500. Swadling, Wiessner, and Tumu (2008:290), drawing on stylistic similarities in a variety of stone mortars and pestles, conclude that extensive exchange networks linked the Highlands to the lowlands, via the Sepik-Ramu, with the networks extending even to New Britain: “The presence of stylistically similar stone mortars and pestles in the highlands, the Sepik-Ramu, the Madang-Morobe coastline and West New Britain indicate that ideas and products, such as crops, were being exchanged by the social contact that linked these regions” (see also Swadling and Hide 2005).





THE BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO AFTER LAPITA


No sudden or abrupt “end” to Lapita is evident in the Bismarck Archipleago. Rather, we see a gradual process of “settling in,” accompanied by the development of local or regional cultural spheres. The early system of geographically widespread, highly interconnected, and complex exchanges that characterized Lapita in the Bismarcks (see chap. 4) was gradually transformed into several regional systems, evidenced for example by the sequence from Mussau (Kirch 1990d, 1996a). This process of regionalization is reflected linguistically, in several primary clusters or subgroups of Oceanic languages, resulting from the breakup of the original Oceanic dialect chain and, later, from the expansion of the Meso-Melanesian Cluster in Bougainville and the western Solomons region (Ross 1988, 1989).12 These main, high-order Oceanic subgroups may indeed mirror regionalized exchange networks of the late first millennium B.C. They include a North New Guinea Coast Cluster, a Meso-Melanesian Cluster linking New Ireland and the northern-central Solomons, and a Papuan Tip Cluster (probably correlating with the expansion of Oceanic speakers into Papua and the Massim).

Spriggs (1997:152–61) reviews some cultural processes possibly accounting for the “end” of Lapita, not only in the Bismarcks, but also in the Remote Oceanic archipelagoes. In addition to (1) the contraction or specialization of trade and exchange networks (correlated with dialect differentiation), these include (2) local adaptation; (3) sociopolitical transformation, particularly that resulting from the breakdown of earlier prestige-goods exchange systems; (4) absorption by indigenous, Non-Austronesian–speaking groups; and (5) secondary migrations. All of these factors probably played their roles in the transformation of a widespread Lapita “horizon” into the more highly localized and differentiated set of archaeological cultures, ranging from the Bismarcks out to New Caledonia and Fiji. More elaboration of local archaeological sequences will be necessary to determine which processes were salient in any given region.

Using a classic archaeological approach of indexing cultural change through pottery styles, the transformation of Lapita into a varied set of local ceramic traditions can be traced in several localities in the Bismarcks. In Mussau, a major change occurs between about 1000 and 700 B.C., when the use of dentate stamping declined precipitously, giving way to a high frequency of incising, and slightly later in time to other techniques such as end-tool impressing, punctation, fingernail impression, and shell-stamping (fig. 5.4). There is no evidence to suggest that this ceramic sequence represents anything other than style changes produced by the same people. By the mid-first millennium B.C. in Mussau, sites such as Epakapaka rockshelter (EKQ) exhibit little dentate stamping, with the pottery made up largely of thin-walled, well-fired globular jars decorated with incised motifs, and with crenation or finger-pinching on their rims. The Mussau ceramic sequence is paralleled in other sites in the Bismarcks.




FIGURE 5.4 Potsherds from the Epakapaka rockshelter (site EKQ) in Mussau with incised and punctate designs. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





On New Ireland, the Lesu (or Lossu), Lasigi, and Fissoa sites have yielded pottery similar to the late materials from Mussau.13 At Lasigi, with radiocarbon dates between 750 and 350 B.C., some dentate stamping is present, but much of the pottery is decorated with applied relief and fingernail- or thumb-impressed designs. At Fissoa, applied and incised ceramics date between 50 B.C. and A.D. 450. Off the east coast of New Ireland, on the Tanga Islands, Garling’s (2003) excavations at the Angkitkita site document a similar transition from Lapita to incised and applied relief ceramics between 450 and 50 B.C. On the small island of Watom between New Britain and New Ireland, the ceramic sequence begins with dentate-stamped Lapita and continues with incised, applied-relief, and fingernail-impressed (as well as plain) ceramics, as attested in the Kainapirina (SAC) and Vunavaung (SDI) sites.14

Ceramic production ceased altogether in many parts of the Bismarcks around the end of the first millennium B.C. This was the case in Mussau, which continued to import small quantities of plain ware ceramics from the Manus (Admiralty) Islands 250 kilometers to the west right up into historic times. In Manus, pottery production continued throughout the last 2,000 years, becoming specialized in local communities such as the small islands of Hus and M’Buke.15 Ceramic production on New Ireland apparently ceased around A.D. 450–950. On the southern coast of New Britain, pottery use in the Arawe Islands stopped around 1,500 years ago. Occasional pottery was then imported into this region from mainland New Guinea (Sio Ware), where a pottery industry continued.

The last two millennia of Manus prehistory have yet to be well defined, but some features are noteworthy. Ambrose investigated the Sasi site on Lou Island, an important obsidian source.16 Sasi, dating to 150 B.C., is buried under a massive tephra and ash deposit up to 5 meters thick, the result of an explosive eruption. The Sasi deposits, exposed by sea wave erosion, yielded pottery with incised, applied, and impressed decorations (another instance of late transformation of Lapita wares), along with obsidian blades, stone adzes, and other artifacts. Ambrose recovered from Sasi a small, flat, rectangular piece of bronze, indicating occasional contacts (direct or, more likely, indirect) with bronze-using peoples in island Southeast Asia, evidence paralleled by the discovery of Talasea obsidian in a site of similar age in Sabah (Borneo).17

Cultural change in Manus over the last 2,000 years remains to be worked out in detail. Wahome (1997) examined ceramic assemblages from 116 surface-collected and 10 excavated sites in the group. A correspondence analysis–based seriation of these assemblages yielded four main ceramic groups: (1) Lapita; (2) early post-Lapita from 150 B.C. to A.D. 300; (3) late post-Lapita from A.D. 300 to 1150; and (4) late prehistoric, dating after A.D. 1150. The early post-Lapita pottery is “largely distinguished . . . by the presence of shell impressions” (Wahome 1997:119), although some fingernail impressions are also present. Later-phase ceramics display “a diversification of the Early post-Lapita attributes and attribute combinations, lip and rim forms as well as an increase in the number of vessel forms” (119). Wahome (1997:122) concludes that there is “no evidence for a total break from classic Lapita to post-Lapita” and thinks that Manus parallels Mussau, Lasigi, and Watom with a transitional continuity from Lapita to what came after. At the contact period “ethnographic endpoint,” the archipelago harbored a diversity of localized societies, many of them economically specialized. For example, McEldowney (1995) studied two contrastive groups, the fishing peoples of Andra islet off the northern coast of Manus and the highly intensive yam gardeners of Baluan Island off the southern coast. On both islands, permanent facilities improved production efficiency; on Andra these were stone fish traps on the reef, while Baluan is covered in a reticulate grid of stone-walled garden enclosures.

Another kind of specialization occurred in the Vitiaz Strait region between mainland New Guinea (the Huon region) and New Britain, where the occupants of the tiny Siassi Islands operated as middlemen traders.18 Lilley’s (1986, 1988) archaeological investigation showed that trading connections have an antiquity extending back to Lapita times but that the highly specialized system as known ethnographically dates only to the last few hundred years. This develops out of a “proto-system” operative at about A.D. 400, marked by the appearance of new ceramic styles and by evidence for cross-straits transfer of pottery, obsidian, and chert.

In Mussau, the last 1,000 years are imperfectly revealed by deposits on Boliu Island (site EKE) and elsewhere. Distinctive adzes made from Terebra shell, with the basal whorl ground down to form a concave cutting edge (fig. 5.5), are first dated to A.D. 460–620 in the EHK site on Eloaua. Also common are Tridacna shell adzes made from the dorsal region of giant clam shell valves, an artifact type rare or lacking in earlier Lapita contexts. Terebra shell adzes appear in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu sites at about the same time, suggestive of some communication or interaction between the peoples in these regions. These distinctive artifacts might also signify contact with Micronesian societies to the north, where they are ubiquitous.19 Economic changes in late-period Mussau sites include high frequencies of pig bone, suggestive of the rise of local, prestige exchange systems focused on competitive feasting.




FIGURE 5.5 Terebra shell adzes from post-Lapita sites in the Mussau Islands. (Drawing by Margaret Davidson.)





A number of volcanic events in the Bismarcks during the last 2,500 years disrupted the region’s human populations, including outright destruction of some groups and displacement of others. I have already mentioned the explosive eruption on Lou Island that buried the Sasi site around 150 B.C. In the Hoskins area of West New Britain, there were major tephra-forming eruptions at roughly A.D. 200, 600, and 800 (Machida et al. 1996:77). The last produced a plinian tephra estimated at 20 cubic kilometers bulk volume, but even the lesser events deposited between 0.5 and 3 meters of pyroclastic materials up to 50 kilometers away from the eruption centers. At the northeastern tip of New Britain, Rabaul harbor resulted from a massive and violent eruption around A.D. 600. On Watom, 16 kilometers away, a tephra ashfall led to the temporary abandonment of the island. On New Britain itself, the Rabaul ignimbrite deposit is as much as 0.5 meter thick some 25 kilometers from the caldera. As Spriggs (1997:168) summarizes the effect of this massive eruption, “Anyone remaining on the Gazelle Peninsula would have been killed, a fact seemingly confirmed by the oral traditions of the Tolai people of the Rabaul area . . . who say they moved there from New Ireland subsequent to the eruption.”





THE SOLOMON ISLANDS


The main Solomon Islands extending from Bougainville through Choiseul, the New Georgia group, Santa Isabel, Guadalcanal, Malaita, to Makira—encompassing a total land area of 31,080 square kilometers—occupy a critical geographic position in Oceania. The archipelago is also notable for its ethnic and linguistic diversity. About seventy Austronesian languages are spoken in the Solomons, along with seventeen Non-Austronesian or Papuan languages distributed on Bougainville, in the New Georgia group, and on Russell and Savo Islands. Prior to the Lapita expansion there likely were more Non-Austronesian language groups throughout the Solomons, these being largely replaced or “overprinted” by the Austronesian expansion. The southeastern end of the main Solomons marks the boundary of Near Oceania (and thus of “Old” Melanesia), the limits to human penetration into the island Pacific prior to the late second millennium B.C.

The prehistory of the Solomons holds a key to all of Melanesia, yet this huge archipelago remains one of the least researched by archaeologists.20 While there has been considerable work in the western Solomons, and even more in the far eastern Temotu Province (the Santa Cruz group), large islands such as Choiseul, Santa Isabel, and Malaita in the central Solomons are for the most part archaeological terra incognita. Even though these intervisible islands were likely explored by humans in the Pleistocene (when, indeed, many of them were connected during times of lower sea level), at present we have but a single Pleistocene site in evidence (Kilu on Buka Island). While Lapita sites are well documented for the Santa Cruz Islands, only recently has a late Lapita record emerged for the New Georgia group; Lapita sites are entirely absent for the central Solomons (provoking arguments about whether the Lapita colonists simply “leapfrogged” over them [Sheppard 2011]).

Some of the best data from the Solomons come from its northwestern terminus in Buka, including Nissan Island, which lies halfway between the Bismarcks and the Solomons.21 This is one of the few regions in Near Oceania where a semblance of a continuous archaeological sequence spans the pre-Lapita to early historic periods (Wickler 2001). The phases in the two islands are to some degree correlated, in part reflecting the importation of Hangan-style pottery from Buka to Nissan. On Buka, the Sohano ceramic style represents a continuity out of late Lapita at around 200 B.C., much as there was continuity in post-Lapita ceramic styles in the Bismarcks. Around A.D. 600 another major ceramic style change occurred, marking the Hangan Phase, again a continuity from the previous phase, in turn giving way to the Malasang style (ca. A.D. 1200). The final Mararing/Recent style again reflects a transition from the Malasang style, so in aggregate we have a continuous pottery sequence linking Lapita with the “ethnographic present.”

On Nissan, the situation is slightly different, because there the Yomining Phase ceramics differ from the Sohano style of Buka; Spriggs (1997:170) suggests that Yomining ceramics were probably imported to Nissan from a source on New Ireland or one of the smaller islands off its coasts (e.g., Anir, Lihir, Tabar). According to Spriggs, on Bougainville, Sohano- and Hangan-style potsherds have been found as far south as Teop. Spriggs (1997:171) also reports that in the central Bougainville region he has recovered a “continuous ceramic and cultural sequence spanning the last 1500 years,” with three successive pottery styles (which he labels Sivu, Asio, and Pidia); the details remain to be published. At the southern end of Bougainville, Irwin (1972) documented a pottery sequence from the Shortland Islands that parallels the Buka sequence. To go beyond ceramics to larger patterns of cultural and sociopolitical change poses a challenge; Wickler (2001) discusses changes in nonceramic artifacts and economic patterns, but more research is required.

The New Georgia group of the western Solomons, including the large volcanic islands of Vella Lavella, Kolombangara, New Georgia, and Rendova, along with many smaller ones, has seen more archaeological study than any other part of the main Solomons.22 Surprisingly, there is no evidence for Pleistocene or even early Holocene human activities, with the oldest sites being a number of intertidal zone settlements along the coasts of Vella Lavella, Kolombangara, and New Georgia, all containing late forms of Lapita pottery (see chap. 3) dating from about 750 B.C. to perhaps the end of the first millennium B.C.23 The archaeological evidence is matched by data from pollen cores on Roviana, where a “dramatic rise in charcoal influx” appears at 650 B.C., interpreted as “slash and burn horticulture and the radical transformation of the economy based on a Lapita horticultural complex” (Sheppard and Walter 2006:63).

The first millennium A.D. in New Georgia remains dimly understood, but thanks to the work of the New Georgia Archaeological Survey project (Walter and Sheppard 2001, 2006, 2009), which focused on the Roviana Lagoon region, the period from about A.D. 1200 to European contact is now emerging. Walter and Sheppard (2009) call this the Munda Tradition, which marks the development of a distinctive cultural pattern throughout the New Georgia group (evidently extending as well to Choiseul), one that subsequently became enmeshed with early European trade and was partially described ethnographically in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (Sheppard, Walter, and Aswani 2004; Sheppard, Walter, and Nagaoka 2000; Walter, Thomas, and Sheppard 2004). This pattern involved interisland raiding, head-hunting, and the taking of slaves, with an emphasis as well on ancestor cults (archaeologically attested by shrines containing ancestral skulls), and large war canoes, as well as the production and circulation of shell valuables (fig. 5.6). The Munda Tradition is subdivided into two periods. The earlier Bao Period (A.D. 1250–1550) is marked by sites consisting “mainly of platforms interpreted as shrines in which basalt is used to create uprights, table stones, cobble flooring and wall components” (Walter and Sheppard 2009:64). An important complex of such platforms is located at Bao, on New Georgia, a place identified in the oral traditions of the Roviana people as the origin place for their religion and politics. The succeeding Roviana Period (1550–1850) is “represented by a much wider range of site types and by a rich material culture” (Walter and Sheppard 2009:64). Shrines continued to be constructed, but coral rubble rather than basalt was the preferred material. Walter and Sheppard (2009:64) report that “the shrines contain human bone, shell valuables and, in the historic period, ceramics, trade axes and muskets.”




FIGURE 5.6 Graphic model of some of the key cultural elements of the Roviana Period in the New Georgia Islands. (Illustration courtesy of Richard Walter, University of Otago.)





Early in my career, I was fortunate to carry out an archaeological reconnaissance on Kolombangara Island in 1971 with Doug Yen and Paul Rosendahl (Kirch 2015:51–54). In the Ndughore Valley of this jungle-clad strato-volcano, we surveyed and excavated hilltop fortified village and hamlet sites with ancestor shrines, indicating that the Roviana period cultural pattern extended beyond the political boundary of the Roviana chiefdom. At one site, the facades of stone-faced platforms were ornamented with human bas-relief face carvings, presumably representing ancestors (fig. 5.7). These hilltop sites were associated with extensive, technologically sophisticated pondfield irrigation in the valley bottoms, a kind of landesque capital intensification also found on parts of New Georgia Island. The ancestral shrines at the hilltop settlements contained burial crypts with human crania and substantial quantities of shell valuables (fig. 5.8), reflecting prestige-goods exchange only partly described in the ethnographic record (Hocart 1922). This settlement system dates to the immediate proto-historic period, and many of the sites contained European trade goods. Thomas (2009, 2014) reports the extension of this apparently widespread settlement pattern involving ridgeline fortified hamlets and ancestor shrines on the islands of Rendova and Tetepare.




FIGURE 5.7 A face sculpted from volcanic rock ornaments the facade of a stone platform on a hilltop site on Kolombangara Island. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.8 Ridgetop settlements in the Ndughore Valley, Kolombangara Island, frequently have stone-lined burial crypts containing multiple crania and various kinds of shell-exchange valuables. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Moving to the central Solomons, no Lapita or other ceramic sites have as yet been discovered. On Guadalcanal Island, David Roe (1993) reanalyzed materials originally excavated by British colonial administrators in 1966–68 at the Vatuluma Posovi rockshelter (also known as Poha Cave). Roe excavated a small area of undisturbed deposits in this important rockshelter, and at two new sites, Vatuluma Tavuro and Vatuluma Ngolu, all in the Poha Valley. Although none of these sites was rich in artifacts (and all lacked pottery), “the environmental material is quite eloquent in its expression of human activity in the Guadalcanal landscape” (Roe 1993:179). Roe (1993:182–84) proposed a three-phase cultural sequence for northwest Guadalcanal. In the Hoana Phase (450–250 B.C.), people occupying the Vatuluma Posovi cave used chert tools, along with fishhooks and arm rings of Trochus shells. Human impacts on the environment were “of a low level,” and the subsistence economy revolved around “hunting of forest taxa and the collection of mollusks from mainly fresh and brackish water environments,” along with some use of the Canarium almond (possibly the wild species C. salomonense). Toward the end of this phase, at around 3,000 years ago, there were changes in the sources of chert used for tools, and shell beads and fully polished stone adzes first appear. Were these changes, as Roe suggests, “an echo of changes known to be occurring both north and south of the Solomons and associated with the advent of Lapita?” (1993:182). Quite probably.

The succeeding Hamosa Phase (250 B.C.– A.D. 450) witnessed a major period of impact on the local environment. Roe thinks it is likely that there were “small open settlements” on ridge crests, as known ethnohistorically, although no such sites have been excavated. Sedimentary and pollen evidence from the northern Guadalcanal plains, however, indicates increased erosion on the hillslopes and higher sedimentation rates on the plains, as well as the establishment of extensive Themeda australis grasslands (Roe 1993:183). The pig may also have appeared at this time. Although preliminary, the evidence suggests that the Hamosa Phase witnessed a period of pioneering agricultural economy.

In the final Moru Phase (A.D. 450–1800) on Guadalcanal, inland forest areas were first occupied in a substantial manner, with caves and rockshelters near the coast again being utilized (Roe 1993:183). Agricultural intensification is indicated by irrigation systems in the valleys in the Visale area. According to Roe (1993:83), “Within the last 500 years there is evidence for a renewed assault on the forest,” and for the rise of the ethnographic distinction between “bush” and “salt-water” peoples, with a corresponding diversification of economic strategies. Future research on Guadalcanal and other islands of the central Solomons will doubtless expand and refine Roe’s pioneering effort.

In the southeastern Solomons, a handful of sites have been investigated on Ulawa, Makira (formerly San Cristobal), and Santa Ana, primarily during the first phase of the Southeast Solomon Islands Culture History Program (SSICHP), organized by Roger Green and Doug Yen during the 1970s.24 No Lapita sites are known, although significant quantities of Ulawa and Malaita chert in Lapita sites of the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands farther to the east suggest that Lapita settlements will ultimately be found in the main southeastern Solomons. On the northern coast of Makira, a midden site named Mwanihuki near the village of Pamua has yielded radiocarbon dates calibrated to 1000 B.C. (Blake, Gibbs, and Roe 2015). The site is aceramic but contains a chert lithic industry. A rockshelter on Santa Ana, a small island just to the east of Makira, yielded calcareous-tempered plain ware ceramics dating to the early first millennium B.C., similar to the Kiki Ware of Tikopia and other late Lapita plain wares. A deep midden site in Su‘ena Village on Uki Island off the coast of Makira, excavated by Roger Green, encapsulates a depositional sequence extending back to A.D. 1500 (Walter and Green 2011).25 This was entirely aceramic, indicating that the use of pottery in the region had ceased prior to that date. The Su‘ena midden yielded many chert adzes and a wide range of fishing gear, as well as finely decorated Trochus shell armbands. Green (1976c:191) remarks that “the important thing reflected by this assemblage is a high degree of general continuity between the most recent and the oldest items in the sequence.”

Some 450 kilometers east of Makira lie the Santa Cruz Islands (Nendö, the Reef Islands, Utupua, and Vanikoro) along with the Polynesian Outliers of Taumako, Tikopia, and Anuta. All of these islands were the focus of the SSICHP.26 On Nendö (the largest island in the Santa Cruz group) and in the nearby Reef Islands, the archaeological record commences with Lapita sites dating to roughly 1100–1000 B.C.27 Tikopia and Anuta were both colonized around 800 B.C., by peoples making and using late Lapita plain wares. Excavations on Nendö Island by P.C. McCoy and Cleghorn (1988) demonstrated a continuous plain ware pottery tradition persisting to about 100 B.C., when, as on Tikopia and Anuta (and probably in the Reef Islands), local production of pottery ceased. The later aceramic period on Nendö is partly known from the Mateone Dance Circle site in Graciosa Bay and from the late Dai Village site on Te Motu Island (fig. 5.9), as well as from an inland occupation site (Naiavila) on the limestone plateau above Graciosa Bay (Yen 1976b). A marker of this later period is the Terebra shell adz, also a feature of later prehistory in Mussau and in Vanuatu. Architecturally, stone-walled house foundations characterize the late period on Nendö, as well as unique, coral slab–outlined dance circles such as that at Mateone. Doherty (2009:208), who synthesized materials excavated during the SSICHP of the 1970s, augmented by more recent excavations, concludes that the prehistory of the Reef–Santa Cruz Islands exhibits continuity over three millennia, but at the same time one sees the incorporation of new ideas and technologies, as these islands were “geographically situated to receive castaways as well as purposeful visitors from east and west.”




FIGURE 5.9 Plan of Dai village, Nendö Island, Santa Cruz Islands. (After McCoy and Cleghorn 1988.)





The high volcanic islands of Utupua and Vanikoro, south of Nendö, remain incompletely studied. In 1978 I reconnoitered parts of Vanikoro (Kirch 1983) and excavated at the Emo site, which has a 1.9-meter-deep midden, extending back to A.D. 200. Emo contained incised pottery of nonlocal origin, nearly identical to the Sinapupu Ware of Tikopia, and like it apparently deriving from northern Vanuatu. This trade ware falls in the Mangaasi tradition, evidence of once more extensive connections between Vanuatu and the Santa Cruz Islands. Also present in Vanikoro are Tridacna shell adzes with stylistic features linking them to Vanuatu shell adzes of the post-Lapita period, but Terebra shell adzes appear only late, in the proto-historic period.





VANUATU


Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), almost as extensive as the Solomons, is equally diverse ethnographically and linguistically. Much recent archaeological research in the archipelago has focused on the early Lapita period, with the discovery and excavation of a number of Lapita sites including Teouma (see chap. 4). Initial Lapita arrival in Vanuatu is now dated to no earlier than 1150 B.C., with Lapita sites on Efate, Makelua, and Erromango all dating from 1050 to 750 B.C. (Bedford and Spriggs 2014:4).

Archaeological research on the post-Lapita period in Vanuatu has likewise expanded in recent years (Bedford 2006b). Pioneering field research commenced in 1963–64 with work by Mary Shutler and Richard Shutler (1965) on a number of islands and by José Garanger (1972a) on Efate and adjacent islands of the central region. Garanger established a ceramic sequence, with Lapita at the base, that developed into a locally variable set of incised and applied-relief ceramics that he labeled “Mangaasi” (fig. 5.10), after the site on western Efate where this pottery was recovered.




FIGURE 5.10 Potsherds from the Mangaasi site (EF-17) on Efate Island, Vanuatu. (Photo courtesy José Garanger.)





Significant advances in our knowledge of the post-Lapita ceramic sequences of Efate, as well as of Erromango and Malekula Islands, resulted from a multiyear project beginning in 1996 jointly organized by the Australian National University and the Vanuatu National Museum (Bedford 2006b; Bedford and Spriggs 2000, 2014). The team reinvestigated the eponymous Mangaasi site, extending fieldwork across the small Pwanmwou Creek and discovering even more extensive deposits in an area called Arapus. Mangaasi-Arapus forms a continuous and complex set of archaeological deposits that are stratified horizontally and vertically; the stratigraphy has also been affected by volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, and cyclones (Bedford 2006b:48). Bedford (2006b:161–68) defines five ceramic phases for the post-Lapita period on Efate. The first of these, called Arapus, dates from 950 to 850 B.C. and is characterized by globular pots with outcurved rims, the lips often displaying notching; this phase was short-lived, perhaps lasting less than a century. The following Erueti Phase is divided into early and late subphases, spanning in total the period from 850 to 250 B.C. Erueti ceramics, first recognized by Garanger, consist of a variety of vessel forms with incised motifs and some rim notching. This is succeeded by the Mangaasi Phase, again subdivided into early and late subphases, from 250 B.C. to A.D. 750. Mangaasi decoration includes incised and punctate motifs along with lip notching. According to Bedford (2006b:168), “The ceramic sequence on Efate was dynamic and changing throughout but can be largely shown to have followed a developmental trajectory, from Lapita to the later phases.” After A.D. 750 the manufacture and use of pottery on Efate ceased. Correlating with the end of pottery production in the central islands is the appearance of Terebra shell adzes, a discontinuous but widespread artifact of the past 1,000 years in island Melanesia and Micronesia.

On the large island of Malekula (see map 8), Bedford tested a series of small rockshelters in the limestone topography, along with several open sites. He reported, “The stratigraphy of the Malekulan cave sites was relatively consistent, generally representing intermittent occupation with ash lenses from cooking fires, fire-cracked basalt and or coral cobbles, shellfish, bone, and relatively sparse artifactual material,” although ceramics were present throughout the sequences (Bedford 2006b:71). Initial Lapita pottery is quickly followed by a plain ware phase with infrequent lip notching, termed the Malua Phase, dated to 750–550 B.C. After Malua, the ceramic sequence on Malekula remains poorly defined, although as in some other islands of northern Vanuatu, pottery making continued up until European contact.28

Research on Erromango Island, southeast of Efate, concentrated on the sites of Ponamla and Ifo. Ponamla, situated on a sheltered bay with good canoe access and a freshwater stream, is a “relatively undisturbed settlement site” dating to between 850 and 550 B.C. An areal excavation of a cooking area not only produced a great deal of charcoal, ash, and faunal material, but “thousands of sherds, along with an assortment of other artefacts, such as Tridacna adzes and arm rings, Conus shell rings, shell beads, a drilled shark tooth, bone needles, scoria abraders and stone flakes” (Bedford 2006b:32). The Ifo site contained deposits with Lapita pottery dating to 1050 B.C., followed by later occupations with distinctive fingernail and incised ceramics, which continued until around 250 to 150 B.C. Based on the materials from Ponamla and Ifo, the ceramic sequence on Erromango begins with a short Lapita Phase, followed by the Ponamla Phase (850–650 B.C.) with largely plain ware pots decorated only with lip notching. This is superseded by the Ifo Phase (650–50 B.C.), which is divided into two subphases, with the pottery characterized by fingernail impressions and incising. The last 2,000 years of the Erromango sequence lacks pottery entirely.

One of the most remarkable archaeological sites anywhere in Oceania is the burial ground on Retoka Island near Efate (fig. 5.11), according to local oral traditions the grave of a chief named Roy Mata, famous for instituting widespread peace in the region (Garanger 1972a, 1972b, 1996). According to these traditions, when Roy Mata died his body was displayed in the villages under his suzerainty and then interred on Retoka Island along with the bodies of kinsfolk and representatives of the various clans, some interred involuntarily. Retoka Island remains sacred to this day; it can be visited only during daylight as it is thought to be inhabited by the spirits of the dead.




FIGURE 5.11 Plan of the Roy Mata burial site on Retoka Island, Vanuatu. (From Garanger 1972a.)





Led to the site by his informants, who had related these traditions, Garanger excavated a burial ground (fig. 5.12) with a single central, male skeleton—certainly Roy Mata himself—surrounded by a macabre tableau of paired male and female skeletons, the males supine on their backs in relaxed positions, the females clutching at their partners in positions that strongly suggest they were buried alive. As Spriggs (1997:211) says regarding the Roy Mata tradition, “The men had been drugged with very strong kava, a drink forbidden to women, and so were unconscious at the moment of burial, while the women were fully conscious when they were buried alive and in a state of complete terror as shown by their pitiable contortions preserved in death. One young female appears to have tried to raise herself out of the ground after burial.” The significance of the central burial (Roy Mata) is shown by its position at the base of two large upright slabs, with a young woman laid out at his feet, another man on his right, and a couple on his left. A bundle burial was interred between the outstretched legs of Roy Mata, possibly the bones of one of his own ancestors. Radiocarbon dates place the site between A.D. 1300 and 1550.




FIGURE 5.12 The Roy Mata burial site. Note the prominent central burial with open legs, ornaments on the chest, and a secondary burial between the legs. (Photo courtesy José Garanger.)





The Retoka burials are richly ornamented with shell beads, pig tusks, and shell bands; differences in ornamentation patterns may reflect specific clan insignia. Roy Mata, an older man who had lost most of his teeth, had shell armbands on both arms, along with bracelets of Ovula shells, a bead necklace, a perforated Spondylus shell, and three whale-tooth beads. Rows of shell beads around his waist had presumably been attached to some kind of woven garment. On his wrists were pig tusk bracelets (produced by knocking out the upper incisors of pigs and allowing the lower incisors to grow in a circle), a practice known ethnographically. The Retoka site and Roy Mata’s burial demonstrate the historical validity and persistence of an indigenous oral tradition hundreds of years old.29

The Roy Mata burial ground represents a level of sociopolitical control and hierarchy not evident in earlier time periods in island Melanesia. The unanswered question is whether this was the result of in situ social changes or whether Roy Mata was an immigrant who introduced new social forms and was able to maintain them either by force or by persuasion. Garanger (1972a) thinks it likely that Roy Mata was a Polynesian immigrant. Spriggs (1997:212) points out that the Retoka burial ground—with its evident sacrificial interments—has parallels in a chiefly burial mound on ‘Uvea Island in Western Polynesia (see chap. 7).

As in the Bismarck Archipelago, massive volcanic eruptions devastated parts of the Vanuatu landscape within the period of human habitation, most notably the Kuwae eruption, which literally tore apart the southeastern part of Epi Island, separating it from Tongoa Island.30 The Kuwae eruption ranks as one of the ten largest volcanic events anywhere in the world during the Holocene, probably larger in scale than the well-known Santorini eruption in the eastern Mediterranean around 3600 B.C., which destroyed the Minoan city of Thera, perhaps giving rise to the Atlantis myth. The violent Kuwae eruption, resulting from the interaction of hot magma with seawater, probably occurred in A.D. 1452; it may be responsible for anomalies in the Greenland ice cores dating to A.D. 1452–60. Oral traditions refer to the Kuwae eruption, attributing its origin to a man named Tombuk or Toboka who, angry over being tricked into committing incest with his mother, in revenge used magic to cause the cataclysm (Spriggs 1997:212).

At the southeastern end of Vanuatu lies Aneityum Island, where Spriggs (1981, 1986) made a study of environmental change and agricultural intensification. A pollen core from the Anauwau swamp studied by Hope and Spriggs (1982) exhibits clear signals of human arrival on the island—disturbance to the rainforest and increases in charcoal particles—around 900 B.C., believed to reflect a Lapita colonization. Following initial settlement until around A.D. 1000, shifting cultivation on the island’s volcanic hillsides was the primary mode of subsistence. Centuries of swidden agriculture resulted in a degraded vegetation and heightened erosion rates, leading to alluvial valley infilling and progradation of the island’s coastal flats. During the last millennium, these newly created alluvial soils began to be used for intensive forms of agriculture, particularly irrigated cultivation of taro. During the latest 300 to 400 years especially canals were constructed to cross the divides between separate drainage systems (fig. 5.13). Spriggs traces the development of these irrigation systems in terms of transformations of Aneityumese sociopolitical systems:

The growth of chiefly power and the expansion of irrigation on the island went hand in hand. As a chief’s prestige grew he would become more able to command labor to expand the conditions of agricultural production by the building of new canals and the extension of irrigation systems to the flatter areas of the coastal plains. It was the chief’s power to appropriate surplus production for feasts in order to maintain his prestige which required the expansion of the irrigation systems. An expansion in one district or dominion would necessitate expansion in the others to match food presentations, taro for taro, up to the limits of the productive capacity of the island. (1986:16)




FIGURE 5.13 A prehistoric irrigation canal on Aneityum Island, after excavation. (Photo courtesy M. Spriggs.)





This sequence of late prehistoric agricultural intensification on Aneityum, like that in New Georgia, is one of several cultural developments in island Melanesia reflecting common processes of demographic and sociocultural change.

In sum, while considerable advances have been made in our understanding of the archaeology and prehistory of this extensive archipelago, much remains to be accomplished. Why pottery production persisted in some islands but disappeared in others is a question that has yet to be fully answered. Moreover, the emergence of considerable cultural and linguistic diversity from what appears to have been the same founding Lapita population—a remarkable demonstration of polygenesis—is a research topic that will keep archaeologists in Vanuatu engaged for many years to come.





THE POLYNESIAN OUTLIERS IN MELANESIA


In addition to the more than twenty Polynesian societies found within the “Polynesian Triangle” (with apices at New Zealand, Hawai‘i, and Easter Island), eighteen societies whose members speak Polynesian languages and whose cultural practices include markedly Polynesian features are located geographically west of the triangle. These Polynesian Outliers are found on smaller islands fringing the Melanesian island-arcs but with two also in Micronesia.31 Early twentieth-century diffusionists such as Churchill (1911) saw in the Outliers a trail of Polynesian migration from Asia direct to the main Triangle. More astute observers, such as the German ethnographer Thilenius (1902), recognized that Outlier oral traditions spoke of origins in the east, often resulting from accidental or drift voyages from homelands in “Tonga” or “Rotuma.”32 Indeed, the very names of some Outliers were clearly transferred from a homeland island to a new colony (e.g., Ouvea in the Loyalty group derived from ‘Uvea and Futuna in Vanuatu derived from Futuna in Western Polynesia). Thilenius (1902:83) hypothesized that “the populations of the northwestern Polynesian islands [the Outliers distributed along the Solomons chain] have arisen gradually from small beginnings through the landing of at most a single boat’s crew and through rarer voyages of conquest.” A high probability of drift voyages originating in Western Polynesia making successful landfall on one of the Outliers was demonstrated in computer simulations.33

Archaeological investigation of the Outliers commenced in the 1960s and early 1970s, with studies of Nukuoro (in Micronesia), Anuta, and Rennell-Bellona.34 The second phase of the SSICHP (1977–78) included intensive archaeological studies of Taumako and Tikopia in the outer southeastern Solomons. Fewer than half of the Outliers have been archaeologically investigated; their sequences vary, but they consistently have a late Polynesian phase, sometimes as an intrusion overlying earlier non-Polynesian phases.35

Tikopia encapsulates many key aspects of Outlier history, including interactions between Polynesian and non-Polynesian populations.36 A small (4.6 square kilometers) but topographically dramatic island—featuring steep volcanic hills rimming a deep crater lake (fig. 5.14) that resulted from a cataclysmic eruption—Tikopia is home to about 1,500 Polynesian speakers, organized into four clans (kainanga), each headed by a hereditary chief (Firth 1936). Our work in 1977–78 revealed a well-stratified archaeological record (Kirch and Yen 1982), especially in the Sinapupu sand dune site at Faea, where up to 3.5 meters of continuous deposit encapsulated a 3,000-year sequence, rich in artifacts and faunal materials (fig. 5.15).




FIGURE 5.14 Tikopia consists of a volcanic cone with a central crater lake, resulting from an explosive eruption about 80,000 years ago. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.15 The cultural sequence of Tikopia. (From Kirch and Yen 1982.)





Permanent settlement began around 800 B.C., by people making pottery of the Lapita ceramic series.37 The initial Kiki Phase lasted until about 100 B.C. and bears the usual Lapita signature, including a mixed horticultural-maritime economy and—at least in the earliest centuries—external exchange linkages, including the importing of obsidian, chert, and metavolcanic adzes (Spriggs, Bird, and Ambrose 2010). Angling with one-piece fishhooks made of large Turbo shells (fig. 5.16) was an important component of the island’s subsistence economy. Around 100 B.C., several cultural changes mark the beginning of the Sinapupu Phase, which persisted until about A.D. 1200. During the Sinapupu Phase, pottery ceased to be locally manufactured; instead, small quantities of incised and painted pottery were imported, probably from the Banks Islands or northern Vanuatu.38 Other artifact styles also changed, such as shell adzes, which exhibit a distinctive tapered-butt form prominent in Vanuatu adzes of comparable age (fig. 5.17). Most important, substantial quantities of obsidian were imported from the Vanua Lava and Gaua sources in the Banks Islands. In short, during the Sinapupu Phase, Tikopia was linked through regular long-distance exchange with communities in the Banks and northern Vanuatu Islands.




FIGURE 5.16 Turbo shell fishhooks excavated from archaeological sites on Tikopia Island. Both finished hooks and stages of manufacture are illustrated. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





FIGURE 5.17 Tikopia Tridacna shell adzes from the Sinapupu Phase (middle row) have a distinctive tapered and pointed butt similar to adzes from Vanuatu at the same time period. The upper row also illustrates two Terebra shell adzes. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





An abrupt cultural change again occurred around A.D. 1200, with the onset of the Tuakamali Phase and the intrusion of Polynesian-speaking populations from the east. Although contacts with the Banks Islands were not wholly abandoned (some obsidian continued to be imported), no ceramics are present in Tuakamali Phase sites. Distinctive Polynesian material culture appears at this time, such as basalt adzes brought on voyaging canoes from Samoa, ‘Uvea, or other Western Polynesian islands; the classic two-piece Polynesian trolling lure rig; and bone beads. Turtles and sharks—foods that had evidently been taboo during the preceding Sinapupu Phase but that are relished by Polynesian peoples—were once again captured and eaten.

Tikopia oral traditions speak of multiple lineage origins in Western Polynesia (Firth 1961). These traditions relate a series of internal social conflicts and upheavals, some spurred by ecological changes (in particular, the conversion of a marine embayment to the brackish crater lake) but others reflecting aggression by the Polynesian newcomers against the indigenous occupants. Archaeological evidence testifies to the veracity of these traditions, such as the expulsion of the Nga Faea people, whose village site we mapped and excavated. Although after A.D. 1200 Tikopia became culturally and linguistically a distinctly Polynesian place, there was no wholesale replacement of its original population. Genetic continuity is indicated by the presence in modern Tikopia of at least one and probably more marker genes found in Vanuatu but not in Western Polynesia.39

Diminutive Anuta (only 80 hectares in area), 137 kilometers northeast of Tikopia, had regular social relations with the latter; its archaeological sequence in some respects parallels that of Tikopia. Colonization of Anuta occurred around 900 to 800 B.C., with a group making calcareous sand–tempered pottery virtually identical to that found in Kiki Phase sites on Tikopia. Sometime between 500 B.C. and A.D. 580 this population either abandoned Anuta or was wiped out, possibly as a result of a cyclone that left a massive sand deposit in the main An-6 site. Anuta appears to have been unoccupied for some time, then recolonized around A.D. 600, presumably by one or more Polynesian-speaking groups (Kirch 1982b).

Taumako, a Polynesian Outlier situated 300 kilometers northwest of Tikopia, consists of a small chain of nine volcanic islands. The largest of these is just 6 kilometers long and is notable for an artificial islet, Tahua, constructed of coral blocks on the fringing reef, where most of the population resides. The Taumako people were skilled canoe makers and navigators, sailing their large te puke outrigger canoes throughout the Santa Cruz Islands, transporting various exchange valuables within the famed red feather “money” circuit (Davenport 1962; Lewis 1972).

Foss Leach and Janet Davidson (2008) investigated Taumako in 1977–78 as part of the SSICHP, digging at four sites, including a large rockshelter called Te Ana Tavatava and a remarkable burial ground at Namu where 201 skeletons were arrayed with various grave goods, including shell discs, ivory reels, shell money, and “birdman amulets.” The prehistoric sequence begins with the Tavatava Phase, from 800 to 400 B.C. (Leach and Davidson 2008:fig. 8.1).40 Mostly plain pottery, apparently manufactured locally, was found at Te Ana Tavatava, although as at the Kiki site on Tikopia there are a handful of sherds with dentate stamping and incised designs. The Tavatava Phase material culture includes Tridacna shell adzes and Trochus shell trolling hooks similar to those of the Kiki Phase on Tikopia. Pottery ceased to be manufactured after the end of the Tavatava Phase. The succeeding Lakao phase, from 400 B.C. to A.D. 1000, is less well attested, and the Namu Phase, A.D. 1000–1800, is known primarily from the extensive burial assemblage at Namu. The funerary artifacts of the Namu Phase exhibit many parallels with the ethnographically attested material culture of the Santa Cruz Islands, suggesting that the te puke canoe complex and exchange with Nendö, Utupua, and Vanikoro were in place by this period. Stone adzes, most likely of Samoan origin, along with distinctive bone reel ornaments, also appear during the Namu Phase, indicating contact with Western Polynesia or the arrival of drift voyagers from that region. Although as Leach and Davidson (2008:322) point out that “influences from the central Pacific could have been arriving on Taumako at irregular intervals since the time of first settlement,” it seems likely that the incorporation of Polynesian-language speakers into the Taumako population was a phenomenon of the past thousand years.

Contact between Polynesian and Melanesian groups occurred not just in the southeastern Solomons but also in Vanuatu, the Loyalty Islands, and New Caledonia. Spriggs (1997:187–222) discusses the social and cultural effects resulting from interaction between Polynesian Outlier populations and the peoples of eastern Melanesia. Although this is not conclusive, both Garanger and Spriggs attribute the Roy Mata burial site to a Polynesian immigrant group. Although the five documented Polynesian Outliers in central and southern Vanuatu (Emae, Mele, Fila, Aniwa, West Futuna) have yet to be investigated in any detail, they may have had considerable cultural influences during the past 500 years of Vanuatu history. In the Loyalty Islands, a migration from ‘Uvea in Western Polynesia resulted in the takeover of Ouvea Island by Polynesian speakers. Sand (1995:203–12) suggests that the Xetriwaan group of people with immediate origins in southern Vanuatu, who were influential both on Lifou and on La Grande Terre proper, may have had Polynesian associations. As Spriggs (1977:221) remarks, “The migrants inserted themselves within the indigenous economic systems and took them over from the inside.”





ETHNOGENESIS IN LA GRANDE TERRE


At the southeastern terminus of Melanesia lies La Grande Terre (New Caledonia), a long, skinny remnant of ancient Gondwanaland stretching 400 kilometers from northwest to southeast (the total land area is 24,436 square kilometers). To the east, the Loyalty Island chain, comprising Ouvea, Lifou, and Maré, lies about 100 kilometers distant. These islands were administratively joined to La Grande Terre when the French claimed “possession” in 1853, but even prior to European influence the societies of the two island groups had close contacts and relationships.

New Caledonia’s mountainous terrain and mineral-rich soils (it is one of the world’s main sources of nickel) support a unique biota with Gondwanan roots. In the late second millennium B.C., when Lapita voyagers sailed their canoes through the island’s marvelous barrier reef lagoons and hauled ashore, they encountered such bizarre creatures as giant flightless megapodes, terrestrial crocodiles, varanid lizards, and large horned tortoises. These and other creatures, lacking any fear of the new bipedal predators, did not withstand the human onslaught for more than a few centuries; we know them today only from subfossils and remains in archaeological contexts.41 Unlike La Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands consist of upraised makatea limestone. Maré and Lifou have cliff-bound coasts and extensive flat plateaus with arable soils formed by decomposition of the limestone and organically enriched.

In this new and biotically strange land the Lapita colonists of La Grande Terre and the Loyalties—and the generations of descendants they spawned—gave rise to a remarkable diversity of societies and language groups.42 While all of the languages spoken in these islands are of the Oceanic branch of Austronesian, there are thirty-seven distinct languages classified within seven primary subgroups. And although there is much cultural homogeneity (in material culture, for example, and in subsistence practices), the islands’ populations seem to have consciously differentiated among themselves sociopolitically and ethnically. New Caledonia thus challenges the anthropologist with the extent of ethnogenesis that occurred within a mere three millennia.

This linguistic and cultural diversity intrigued the pioneer ethnographers, who were at a loss to explain it other than through numerous and repeated migrations by groups with varied ethnic and biological origins.43 E.W. Gifford and his student Dick Shutler Jr. carried out the first modern archaeological excavations on La Grande Terre in 1952 (Sand and Kirch 2002). Finding no evidence of a “pre-pottery cultural level,” they rejected any notion of a “Paleolithic stage of culture” in the archipelago’s history (Gifford and Shutler 1956:94). While this should have been the end of the matter, when Jack Golson as well as Luc Chevalier discovered earthen mounds or “tumuli” on the Île des Pins, with radiocarbon ages as old as 10,950 B.C., the question of a preceramic, pre-Austronesian occupation was resurrected. Based on excavations in these mounds by Chevalier (1963) and Golson (1963), Green (1988) came to the realization that the “tumuli” were nonhuman artifacts created by the extinct giant megapode (Sylviornis neocaledoniae). These birds are known to scrape up heaps of earth and leaf litter with their powerful legs, in which they incubate their eggs (pieces of egg shell as well as terrestrial Placostylus snails were found in the mounds).

Thanks to the energetic work of French archaeologists—including Daniel Frimigacci, Jean-Christophe Galipaud, and Christophe Sand—our knowledge of New Caledonian prehistory has improved by leaps and bounds, as extensive excavations and surveys have been carried out throughout the archipelago.44 As elsewhere in the Remote Oceanic parts of island Melanesia, initial settlement of the archipelago was by Lapita people. An extensive series of radiocarbon dates (Sand 2010; Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2002) now fixes the date of first settlement of New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands between 1100 and 1050 B.C. The initial Lapita Phase, characterized by diverse vessel forms decorated with the classic dentate-stamped technique, ended by 800 B.C.

The production of pottery, however, did not cease with the end of Lapita proper. As Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2011:59) write, “The end part of the Lapita phase is characterised by an increase and diversification of incised motifs, the appearance of a series of simplified dentate-stamped motifs, and the development of more shell-impression in some sites.” The New Caledonian ceramic tradition began to differentiate, with new vessel forms and decorative styles emerging and with the northern and southern sectors of La Grande Terre exhibiting different trajectories. These different ceramic styles provide the basis for a cultural sequence of four periods (fig 5.18). Aside from providing important chronological signposts, the sequence of New Caledonian ceramics offers a material index to the ongoing processes of ethnogenesis or polygenesis.




FIGURE 5.18 The ceramic sequence of New Caledonia, according to Sand et al. (2011). (Courtesy of Christophe Sand.)





Following Lapita, the Koné Period is marked first by the emergence of Podtanean pottery, characterized by paddle-impressing, “mostly on thin-walled pots with light carination and rims with a flat lip” (Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2011:60).45 Regional differences first emerge within the Koné Period, with the incised Puen Tradition in the south46 and the Pindai Tradition in the north, the latter marked by “simple ovoid pots with incurved rims, bearing shell-impressed and applied clayband decorations” (60).

The Koné Period ends around 2,000 years ago, and although the transition may not have been simultaneous throughout the archipelago, the succeeding Naïa Period starts at the beginning of the second millennium A.D. and continues until about A.D. 1000. In the northern part of La Grande Terre, a new Balabio ceramic tradition emerges, with roots in the preceding Pindai pottery. Balabio pots are mostly characterized by simple shell impression and incision. In the south, the Puen Tradition gives rise to the Plum Tradition, which has round-bottomed vessels with handles under the rim, decorated with often crude incising (Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho 2011:62). Noting the design similarities between Plum ceramics and a style of petroglyphs, Sand (1995:144) suggests that the rock art might have served as boundary markers, possibly a reflection of growing ethnolinguistic differentiation within the island.

The ceramic chronology enters its final phase at the beginning of the second millennium A.D., with what Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2011) call the Traditional Kanak Cultural Complex, which continues into the “ethnographic present” following European contact. The north-south divide continues, with the Nera Tradition emerging out of Plum in the south and with the Oundjo Tradition in the north.47 The Nera Tradition is marked by spherical vessels lacking everted rims, with simple decorations consisting of rows of nubbins and some incising. The Oundjo Tradition has pots with incised, stamped, and relief decorations on the upper parts of the globular pots, below the rim. Indeed, it seems likely that ceramics, as well as other forms of material culture, were actively manipulated by local peoples as symbols of ethnic identity.

This kind of social differentiation, it should be said, had as one underlying basis the growth and expansion of the archipelago’s population (fig. 5.19). The early Koné Period, which lasted perhaps 1,200 years, witnessed the gradual expansion of human settlement throughout New Caledonia and the Loyalty archipelago, at first concentrated along the coasts and in the more horticulturally suited humid sectors but toward the end of the period expanding into interior valleys. Sand (1995:112–13) estimates that by the close of the Koné Period the island’s aggregate population had reached 50,000. Stratigraphic evidence from the Bopope region indicates that by the first few centuries of the Christian era, even interior valleys were permanently occupied, with landscapes increasingly transformed by human actions.




FIGURE 5.19 Major trends in the evolution of New Caledonian culture, according to Sand (1996a).





Significantly, the earliest material signals of social transformation—specifically, indications of hierarchy, competition, and warfare—are found not on La Grande Terre but on the central plain of Maré Island. Two monumental stone structures, built of coral blocks weighing up to 5 tons each, were defensive sites or forts; the rectangular enclosure of Hnakudotit (site LMA016) incorporates 23,000 cubic meters of stone (fig. 5.20). This remarkable construction dates to the first two or three centuries A.D. According to Sand (1995:133), these structures indicate the prior existence of a “political system . . . very different from that known ethnographically in New Caledonia.” The ecological setting of these structures is critical: the upraised, karst limestone plateau of Maré Island is a “dry” and somewhat marginal environment for an agriculturally based economy. The model of contrastive “wet and dry” agroecological regimes proposed for Polynesia by Kirch (1994) predicts that in such environments—where the choice of agricultural strategies is highly constrained toward labor-intensive short-fallow swidden—competition for land and aggressive territorial warfare are most likely to arise. It is not surprising then to find these early indications of competition and territorial marking on Maré, rather than on La Grande Terre, which had a much greater potential for alternative forms of intensification, such as terracing.




FIGURE 5.20 Stacked walls of massive limestone boulders make up the Hnakudotit fortification site on Maré, Loyalty Islands. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Yet if the first signals of ecological and/or demographic stress—and consequent sociopolitical response—arose on the makatea plateaus of the Loyalties, other kinds of intensification soon appeared on the main island. Evidence from sediment cores reveals that the initial Lapita colonists, practicing shifting cultivation, had a noticeable impact on New Caledonia’s vegetation, while the faunal records show that several endemic animals, including the large flightless megapode, a terrestrial crocodile, and the giant horned tortoise, rapidly went extinct.48 But as population increased, the cumulative effects of human actions on the landscape mounted. La Grande Terre has long been noted for its permanent landscape transformation, or what Blaikie and Brookfield (1987) called landesque capital intensification. These include taro irrigation systems—the most extensive in all of Oceania—as well as Dioscorea yam mound systems.49 Anyone who has viewed the magnificently sculpted hillsides of the Col de la Pirogue, with row upon row of descending terraces for taro planting irrigated by a complex network of canals and ditches (fig. 5.21), must be impressed at the scale of landscape manipulation achieved by this preindustrial society.




FIGURE 5.21 Flights of formerly irrigated taro terraces, now in grasslands, cover large sections of the New Caledonian landscape. (Photo by P. V. Kirch.)





Archaeology has offered some indications of the prehistory of these impressive landscapes. Excavations in taro terraces (site WPT069) at the famous Col de la Pirogue irrigation complex near Nouméa yielded a radiocarbon age of A.D. 670–990, the oldest date for a Melanesian irrigation complex.50 Other terraces gave more recent ages, within the last two or three centuries. The Païta data suggest that intensive, canal-fed irrigation was a development of the middle to later phases of island sequences, linked both to demographic pressures and to sociopolitical transformations. Of equal note are vast areas of ancient dryland terracing and mounding that mark formerly intensive systems of “dry” cultivation, focused primarily on Dioscorea yams. The New Caledonian dryland systems rival in scale and complexity those of the New Guinea Highlands. At Tiwaka, a single dryland system includes more than 150 large mounds, totaling at least 35 hectares. Mounds may be 1 to 3 meters high, 10 meters wide, and up to several hundred meters long. The prehistory of these dryland systems remains a problem awaiting further research.

New forms of inland habitation arose during the Naïa Period and the following Traditional Kanak period, in close spatial association with the intensive agricultural systems. While the coastal regions—marked by extensive shell middens—continued to be occupied, the interior valleys and coastal plains came to be dotted with elevated house mounds, frequently organized in linear arrangements of fifteen or more around a central alleyway. The plan of Tipalet (site ETO018) in the Bopope region (fig. 5.22) shows such mounds on either side of an elongate plaza, with a substantially larger mound at each end. Other habitation mound complexes reflect a hierarchy of mound sizes and heights, possible evidence for social stratification or at least for ranking of households. Few such complexes have been excavated, but a charcoal sample from the base of a mound at Pwapwadouhi yielded a calibrated radiocarbon age of A.D. 1290–1470.




FIGURE 5.22 Plan of house mounds at Tipalet in the Bopope region of New Caledonia. (Courtesy Christophe Sand.)





According to Sand (1995:200), “It is the intensification of horticulture which appears the most characteristic” of the last two thousand years of New Caledonian prehistory. He accepts a primary causal role for demographic pressure but cautions that population growth by itself is too limiting an explanatory factor. Indeed, the very existence of these intensive agricultural systems—which are found throughout the interior valleys and plains of New Caledonia—provoked Sand to question long-held ethnographic notions concerning traditional Kanak societies (e.g., Guiart 1963). Rather than regard the sociopolitical systems associated with these intensive systems of agricultural production as “weak chiefdoms,” and the sites themselves as only intermittently occupied by a peripatetic population, Sand asks whether the archaeological evidence might not better support an interpretation of “strong chiefdoms” bolstered by substantial surplus extraction and driven by prestige rivalry.

How can we account for the disparity between the New Caledonian archaeological record, which speaks to the former existence of highly complex sociopolitical formations, and twentieth-century ethnography, which refers at best to “weak” chiefdoms? The answer—still somewhat contentious—may lie in a demographic collapse of hitherto-unappreciated magnitude, immediately after European contact. The crux of the argument is as follows. Based on a narrow reading of the available textual sources—and in particular favoring census data that did not become available until after missionization in the mid-nineteenth century (more than sixty years after initial European contact)—academic demographers maintained that the precontact population of La Grande Terre never exceeded 50,000. In contrast, archaeological data (while too thin to attempt regional population estimates) suggest that the latter figure is way too low to account for the density and intensity of the agricultural and residential landscape. In a case study of the Païta region near Nouméa, Sand (1995) shows that while the ethnologist Guiart estimated the maximum population at perhaps 1,200 persons, the archaeological vestiges of intensive terracing and habitation lead one to a conservative estimate of 8,000, with a strong likelihood of double that number. Sand, Bolé, and Ouétcho (2007:325) conclude that even the estimate by the geographer J.C. Roux of 80 to 100,000 persons for New Caledonia at European contact “is far too low.”

How can we account for the disparity in estimates? Sand argues that not only the effects of diseases for which the indigenous Kanaks had no resistance but also the political and military strategies of several decades of whalers, sandalwooders, and outright colonists had far greater impacts than hitherto recognized. The French colonials pursued a strategy of outright destruction of agricultural infrastructure, leading to famine and social collapse. Sand’s dissection of the arguments of Norma McArthur (1968) for low population densities deserves to be read by all anthropologists and historians working in Melanesia. In Sand’s words, “To appreciate the extent of the demographic collapse is to revisit the autopsy of the destruction of a society” (1995:248).





FIJI: AN ARCHIPELAGO “IN BETWEEN”


Fiji offers striking contrasts yet intriguing similarities with New Caledonia (map 9). The archipelagoes are of comparable scale (24,436 square kilometers for New Caledonia, 18,272 for Fiji) and have been inhabited for the same length of time (they were both settled by Lapita peoples), but Fiji’s history does not display the emphasis on small-scale ethnolinguistic differentiation seen in La Grande Terre and the Loyalties. There is, to be sure, intra-archipelago diversity within Fiji, but this is more limited. For example, the Fijian peoples speak only two main dialects, Western and Eastern Fijian; there is a third discrete language on isolated Rotuma Island.51 Culturally, there were important differences between coastal and offshore island dwellers and the “bush people” of the interiors of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. In addition, the people of the Lau Islands had their own distinctive characteristics, in part derived from regular contact and interaction with Tonga.




MAP 9 The Fiji archipelago, showing the location of key archaeological sites.





Anthropologists have never quite known how to deal with Fiji. It is a sort of “between” archipelago, situated geographically closer to Western Polynesia (with whose societies there were important historical interactions), yet usually classified as a “Melanesian” culture. Of course, such nineteenth-century classifications are of little real historical or analytical value, and perhaps the Fijian case is the best example (see the introduction). Settled at the close of the second millennium B.C.—by a founding Lapita population that quickly expanded to colonize nearby Tonga and other Western Polynesian islands—Fiji shares the same foundation culture with Western Polynesia. At the same time, Fiji continued in later millennia to receive both genetic and cultural influences from the west (i.e., from “Melanesia”), inputs that in part set its historical trajectory apart from those of Tonga, Samoa, or Futuna. There is ample evidence—archaeological, linguistic, and cultural—that the peoples of Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, Futuna, Lau, and other smaller islands in this part of the central Pacific had regular exchanges (material, social, and genetic) throughout prehistory. Thus, in contrast to New Caledonia (which, while not wholly isolated, is set apart in its corner of the southwestern Pacific), Fiji was a sort of “between place”—a foyer of exchange and interaction.

Gifford (1951) pioneered archaeological excavation in Fiji, focusing on the main island of Viti Levu. He dug two sites: Navatu (site 17) on the north coast under the shadow of the imposing volcanic monolith Uluinavatu, an important place in Fijian origin traditions; and Vunda (site 26), near Lautoka. Both sites yielded materials spanning the last two millennia of Fijian prehistory, and later excavations, in the 1960s and 1970s, at the Sigatoka dunes, the Yanuca rockshelter, Natunuku, Naigani Island, and other sites filled in earlier phases of the sequence.52 The Sigatoka site, a sprawling and complex stratified dune of alluvial sands at the mouth of Sigatoka Valley, has continued to yield materials important to defining the Fijian sequence.53 The Australian National University’s Early Prehistory of Fiji Project (1996–2000) added a wealth of new data on early sites, landscape transformations, and faunal changes (G. Clark and Anderson, eds., 2009). In addition to the focus on Lapita and early sites, much emphasis has been placed on inland settlements and fortifications, in such areas as the Rewa and Navua deltas and the Sigatoka River valley on Viti Levu and on Taveuni, Wakaya, and Lakeba Islands.54 Nonetheless, given its geographic scale and number of islands, the Fiji archipelago remains archaeologically underexplored.

Gifford (1951:189) observed that pottery is the “chief characteristic of Fijian archaeology.” As in New Caledonia, ceramics are found throughout the prehistoric sequence and continued to be manufactured after European contact (MacLachlan 1940; Thompson 1938). Based on his excavations at Navatu and Vunda, Gifford defined an early period with “relief”-decorated sherds (fig. 5.23) and a late period with dominantly “incised” sherds. Green (1963b) later showed that Gifford had missed the first third of the Fijian sequence, marked by Lapita pottery, and renamed the phases as follows: Sigatoka (ca. 1200–100 B.C.), Navatu (100 B.C.–A.D. 1100), Vunda (A.D. 1100–1800), and, after European contact, the Ra Phase. This terminology, described by Frost (1979), has been adopted by most investigators and remains a useful culture-historical schema for the archipelago.55




FIGURE 5.23 A paddle-impressed pot from the Sigatoka dune site, Fiji. (After Birks 1973.)





The Fijian archipelago was settled as a part of the Lapita expansion into Remote Oceania at the close of the second millennium B.C. (see chap. 4). Bayesian calibration of radiocarbon dates from the sites of Bourewa, Naigani, and Yanuca put initial settlement at 1100 to 1000 B.C. (G. Clark and Anderson, eds., 2009:175).56 From Fiji, the Lapita expansion continued—seemingly without significant pause—eastward into Tonga and Samoa; contacts between these groups are indicated both in archaeological materials and by historical linguistic evidence.57 As elsewhere in the Eastern Lapita region, decoration of pottery with dentate stamping rapidly declined, so that Sigatoka Phase assemblages of the first millennium B.C. consist largely of plain wares, although with some paddle impressing.

The transition from Sigatoka to Navatu Phases is fairly gradual in terms of the ceramics, marked by an increase in carved-paddle impressions on globular vessels. Shaw, Frost, and others view such ceramic changes as the result of local stylistic developments. However, stylistic changes marking the boundary between the Navatu and Vunda Phases at roughly A.D. 1100 are more abrupt, with the introduction of a whole new array of incised designs. Archaeologists have debated whether these changes reflect external influences, such as the movement or migration of a new group of people into Fiji at this time, most likely from Vanuatu. Green, Bellwood (1979:264–65), and others regarded such a population intrusion likely, pointing to close stylistic similarities between Vunda Phase ceramics and those of the Mangaasi complex of Vanuatu.58 The appearance of Vanuatu obsidian in rockshelters on Lakeba Island around A.D. 250 supports this interpretation (Best 1984: 643). In contrast, Rechtman (1992) expressed profound skepticism about explanations that invoke external influences or migrations, preferring to see all change in the Fijian sequence as stemming from internal dynamics (see also Bedford and Spriggs 2008).

Burley and Edinborough (2014; see also Burley 2005) show that the transition from plain ware to Navatu Phase ceramics at Sigatoka was abrupt, with the interval between these phases having a duration of no more than forty-three years. Given the magnitude of ceramic differences between these phases, they argue that “the abruptness of this change can be explained only by exogenous replacement” (2014:295). Burley (2013) has revisited the issue of Fijian “polygenesis,” and the question of how—given a common Lapita ancestry for Fijians and Polynesians—“Fijians became Fijian and not Polynesians.” Whereas Burley sees the gradual transition from early dentate-stamped Lapita to later plain ware ceramics as a gradual continuum, the sudden appearance of Navatu-style pottery can only be explained, he argues, by intrusion of a new group of people: “The Navatu-phase ceramic assemblage represents an abrupt change, one that succinctly marks a different population of potters living on this site. Whether this population originates ultimately from central Island Melanesia or represents a population movement from within the Fijian archipelago is a central question” (Burley 2013:445). However, given the strong similarities between Navatu ceramics and pottery of similar age in Vanuatu, such a connection seems highly likely.

The cultural developments of the Vunda Phase—roughly the last thousand years—include fascinating parallels with New Caledonia in the extensive modification of landscapes for food production, yet striking differences in residential patterns. Excavations in fortified sites on Taveuni and Wakaya Islands demonstrate that these were a dominant feature of the Vunda Phase. Perhaps the most common form is the “ring-ditch” style enclosing a cluster of habitation sites, the latter often elevated on earthen or stone-faced mounds. Terraced fortifications are present in more hilly topography. Figure 5.24 illustrates a particularly complex ring-ditch site at Lomolomo in the Sigatoka River valley. Ring-ditch fortifications are ubiquitous in low-lying terrain, as on the fertile deltas and floodplains of the Rewa, Navua, Sigatoka, and other drainages. Parry (1977, 1981, 1987) identified large numbers of fortified sites, closely associated with extensive agricultural remains, using aerial photographs. The agricultural remains include reticulate systems of raised beds and intervening ditches, called vuci in Fijian, used to grow Colocasia taro as well as giant swamp taro (Cyrtosperma chamissonis). In hilly areas such as the interior of the Sigatoka Valley, extensive pondfield terraces cascade down hillsides, similar to those in New Caledonia (Parry 1987:pl. 20).




FIGURE 5.24 Plan of a village fortified with ring-ditches, at Lomolomo (site VL 16/57) in the Rewa Delta of Viti Levu, Fiji. (After Parry 1987.)





In an extensive GIS-based survey of the Sigatoka drainage, Field (1998, 2003, 2004) described three modes of habitation/subsistence: territorial strongholds, remote refuges, and constructed fortifications on the valley bottom. Test excavations at various sites indicate that inland habitation and agriculture in the valley did not begin until many centuries after Lapita colonization, between 20 B.C. and A.D. 80. Fortifications making use of natural topography first appear around A.D. 600 and continue throughout the sequence. Roos, Field, and Dudgeon (2016) used stratigraphic records of charcoal and carbon stable isotopes obtained from a core in the lower Sigatoka Valley, finding that “archaeological indicators of resource stress co-occur with persistent swiddening after 1450 cal BP, although these precede the collapse into degraded grassland conditions at 1000 cal BP” (535). Extensive agricultural modifications, along with shifting cultivation, heightened erosion rates in the Sigatoka Valley, leading to increased sediment loads in the Sigatoka River and resulting in the formation of the massive dune field now located at the valley mouth, itself an important archaeological site (Anderson et al. 2006; Dickinson et al. 1998).

The cultural processes associated with the construction of the literally thousands of fortified sites that appeared over the Fijian landscape in the Vunda Phase have been debated. Frost (1974, 1979) invoked the arrival of an immigrant population, bringing the new incised ceramic styles, who “clashed” with the indigenous people, leading to a major period of fort building and warfare. However, while abrupt ceramic changes at around A.D. 1100 may have resulted from external migration, they need not be directly linked to the settlement pattern changes, for which internal demographic, economic, and sociopolitical processes provide more likely explanations. Parry (1981, 1987) and Rechtman (1992) argue that the intensified landscape modifications of later Fijian prehistory are linked to increasing population density, competition for resources (especially prime agricultural lands), and an involutionary spiral of intergroup warfare. Roos, Field, and Dudgeon (2016:550) likewise point to the cumulative effects of landscape transformation: “It is in the context of degraded landscapes of the last millennium that evidence for socio-political inequality is most robust, in the context of further population growth and intercommunity conflict in the last 500–700 years. This pattern generally conforms to the scenario described by Kirch (1994, 2010), in which landscape degradation from swidden intensification drives cycles of interpolity conflict and socio-political complexity.” Field (2004) and Field and Lape (2010) have drawn attention to climate change effects, such as the Little Ice Age (A.D. 1300–1850) and pronounced ENSO conditions, as drivers of change in settlement pattern and fortification. Field (2004:95), for example, notes that in the Sigatoka Valley, the founding of “environmental refuge sites” corresponds temporally with the onset of the Little Ice Age, when cooler and drier conditions may have exacerbated drought and food scarcity.

Rechtman (1992:46–52) regarded the origin of fortified sites in Fiji as owing to “internal development,” spurred in the first instance by population growth and by an increased need for resources. In his view, these processes led, after A.D. 1100, to interregional contact and conflict, marked both by fortification and by the proliferation of ceramic styles, the latter presumably as an index of increased social or ethnic differentiation. As conquest warfare became increasingly common, Rechtman believes, a shift occurred in leadership, from ideological control by sacred leaders to secular control based on force. A corollary of this change was the development of highly institutionalized cannibalism.

While some anthropologists have expressed skepticism that cannibalism actually existed anywhere in the world, the case for cannibalism in late Fijian prehistory seems particularly sound. Gifford (1951:208) observed in his usual terse fashion that “man was the most popular of the vertebrate animals used for food” based on the faunal materials from his Navatu and Vunda excavations. Reanalysis of Gifford’s Navatu collections using modern criteria for evaluating cannibalistic practices confirms his view (DeGusta 1999, 2000). Based on faunal and taphonomic studies of human materials from Wakaya Island, Rechtman is equally convinced that the archaeological evidence supports cannibalism as a major practice in later Fijian prehistory. In his Lakeba Island sites, Best (1984:534) found that bones of Homo sapiens could be interpreted as “food remains,” based on frequent charring, cut marks, and “the underrepresentation of hands, feet, and heads.” Of course, the contact-period historical sources speak to the ritualized and extensive nature of Fijian anthropophagy, which until recent years has not been questioned. In my view, the issue is not whether the Fijians practiced cannibalism but why such practices should have become so pervasive and institutionalized. They may represent a kind of “competitive involution” in sociopolitical evolution parallel to that hypothesized for the Marquesas Islands (Kirch 1991a), where cannibalism is also evidenced archaeologically (see chap. 7).

To the east of the main islands of Fiji, the Lau group consists of dozens of smaller islands (see map 9), some of which have been archaeologically studied. Best (1984) investigated Lakeba, a nearly circular high island of 56 square kilometers in central Lau. Lakeba, as with other Lau islands, had important proto-historic connections to Tonga. Best’s survey of 209 sites and his excavations at six of these produced a cultural sequence commencing in the early Lapita period (ca. 1000 B.C.) that displays many of the key stylistic changes in ceramics found elsewhere in Fiji. Best suggests that population numbers were low in the early phase (settlement may even have been seasonal or intermittent for the first two centuries) but began to increase significantly in his Period II (ca. 500 B.C.), as marked by “a spectacular spread of sites across the landscape” (1984: 592). Given this inland expansion, there is by A.D. 1 a perhaps not surprising degree of environmental degradation, with a “regime of inland burn-off.”59 A population maximum was reached by about A.D. 1000, by which time large forts such as Ulunikoro (site 101/7/47) were constructed. Thus, in the Lakeba sequence, the rise of both forts and cannibalism came after a phase of initial population expansion and possible overexploitation of agricultural resources.

S. Jones (2009; Jones, Steadman, and O’Day 2007) augmented our understanding of Lau prehistory with ethnoarchaeological research on the small islands of Nayau, Aiwa Levu, and Aiwa Lailai, situated north and south of larger Lakeba. Jones’s research focused on marine exploitation and subsistence and on gender roles. Jones and Quinn (2009) used stable isotopes from human skeletal remains combined with faunal analysis to determine that throughout prehistory the Lauan diet was composed of 60 to 70 percent plant foods (primarily root crops), with the remainder made up of reef fishes, shellfish, and reptiles.

Clark and Cole (1997) used archaeological survey combined with palynological analysis of sediment cores to construct a tentative cultural and environmental history of Totoya Island, in the Yasayasa Moala group southeast of Viti Levu. Initial settlement was again by people with Lapita ceramics, “perhaps close to 3000 years ago” (1997:150). Human-induced forest clearance began shortly after colonization, leading to the expansion of grasslands and secondary forest. Settlement was concentrated around the coastal areas until about 50 B.C. to A.D. 250, when there was a “significant move inland and the establishment of inland villages” (1997:152). This change in settlement patterns is coupled with another “round of substantial vegetation disturbance.” Finally, in the second millennium A.D., the final decline of the inland forest—leading to extensive grasslands covering the central hills—corresponds to a period when hilltop forts were constructed at several locations. Clark and Cole (1997:152) suggest that “the expansion of warfare on the island may have been related in part to a large population and pressure on limited resources.”

While internal dynamics such as population growth and resource competition were surely key factors in the transformation of Fijian society over the course of three millennia, there were also external connections that linked Fijian populations with adjacent islands and archipelagoes. In Lapita sites of Fiji, there is evidence for the movement of obsidian, chert, stone adzes, pottery, and other material items between islands, some from outside the Fijian archipelago itself. Fijian potsherds have occasionally been found in Tongan sites,60 and in the proto-historic period there is ample ethnographic and oral tradition evidence for a complex network of exchange relationships linking Fiji with Tonga and Samoa.61 The people of Lau, in particular, served as intermediaries between the chiefly lineages of Tonga and Fiji, and groups of Tongan canoe builders were allowed to take up residence in Lau in order to have access to large timber trees.62 Such regular and frequently systematized contacts no doubt facilitated the spread of innovations ranging from the material to the ideological, and account for parallel cultural developments in Fijian and Western Polynesian cultures.63





LARGER THEMES IN MELANESIAN PREHISTORY


In this concluding section, I draw attention to three themes that run through the prehistory of this vast region, cross-cutting geographical divisions. These are certainly not the only patterns that others may find of interest, but to my mind they are salient.


CHANGE IN CERAMIC SEQUENCESArchaeologists are interested in ceramic change, not only because pottery styles are sensitive temporal indicators and thus form the bases of chronology, but also because ceramic styles may indicate cultural connections over space and time. Throughout island Melanesia, a well-marked ceramic horizon—Lapita—links the entire region at the beginning of the first millennium B.C. Lapita proper, in the sense of dentate-stamped ceramics, did not persist beyond the first two to three centuries, giving way to ceramics decorated with new techniques. In some localities, ceramic production is abandoned altogether after about A.D. 1–200, although pots were frequently imported from neighboring groups who continued to manufacture pottery. This is the case in both Mussau and Tikopia. More interesting, however, are the parallel style changes that occurred from the Bismarcks to Vanuatu and New Caledonia and that are echoed to some degree in Fiji. These are the decline and abandonment of the classic Lapita dentate-stamped technique of decoration and its replacement, initially with paddle impressing and then mostly with incised designs but also with designs executed using other techniques, such as end-tool impressing, fingernail impressing, relief, and appliqué. The Mangaasi ceramic complex of central Vanuatu was one of the first such post-Lapita ceramic groups to be identified, although Garanger (1972a) was uncertain of its relationship to Lapita proper. With the discovery of parallel sequences in Mussau, Manus, New Ireland, Watom, Nissan-Buka, and New Caledonia, however, we now know that Mangaasi is only one of a number of such ceramic transitions. The question thus arises whether these developments—most of which seem to occur in the period from about 550 B.C. to A.D. 250—were in any way related.

One possibility is that similarities in these style changes reflect continued interisland and intersocietal contacts and thus the sharing of technical and stylistic innovations. But incising as a technique was certainly a part of the older Lapita design repertoire; notably, it is far less labor-intensive than dentate stamping. Thus the shift from dentate stamping to incising throughout island Melanesia beginning around 550 B.C. and continuing until about A.D. 250 may simply reflect common responses on the part of potters to the changing social and economic roles and values of ceramics. As the initially widespread Lapita network began to break apart into a series of geographically less extensive, regional networks, the high value formerly placed on the elaborately decorated forms of Lapita pots could have decreased, and indeed the role of ceramics in exchange systems is likely to have declined. Since there is continuity in motifs from Lapita ceramics to the early phases of incised (“Mangaasoid,” or Mangaasi-like) pottery, it may be that potters were no longer interested in, or willing to invest long hours in, decorating their pots.

The shift to incised pottery occurred later in Fiji than in the Melanesian archipelagoes to the west. This raises the question of whether the change in Fiji—which did not proceed, as elsewhere, directly from dentate stamping to incising but rather via an intermediate phase dominated by paddle-impressed pottery—was the result of a population movement or intrusion, possibly from Vanuatu or New Caledonia. This is the position of Best (1984), Frost (1979), Green (1963b), and, most recently, Burley (2005, 2013) but one that is contested by others such as Rechtman (1992) who prefer to see the Fijian sequence in isolationist terms. No doubt the debate will continue. Much more basic field and laboratory work must be done to fill out the ceramic sequences of Melanesia before these fundamental questions will be definitively answered. We must always keep in mind, however, that ceramics have as much to tell us of ancient cultural and social processes as they do of mere chronology.


DEVELOPMENT OF SPECIALIZED TRADE AND EXCHANGE NETWORKSAnother recurrent theme in the prehistory of the “New” Melanesia concerns the rise of highly intensified forms of external exchange and of high-volume specialist trade.64 Several examples are (often still incompletely) known from the archaeological record, including the coastal Papuan systems with their pottery-producing central places (Mailu or Motupore), the antecedents of the ethnographic kula in the Massim, the Siassi middlemen traders, the “red feather money” network of the Santa Cruz Islands and Taumako, the mid–first millennium A.D. network(s) linking Tikopia and Vanikoro to northern Vanuatu, and networks connecting Fiji with the Lau Islands.

Arguably, all of these later exchange or trade systems developed out of antecedents that can ultimately be traced back to the Lapita cultural complex, itself marked by extensive exchange, including at times highly complex (multinodal) and geographically extensive systems. In the Lapita networks as we currently understand them, there was an important social or ritual component, reflected in the movement of such material items as elaborately decorated pottery and a range of finely made shell valuables. In some post-Lapita systems, this pattern was continued and elaborated. Shell valuables, for example, remained an important component of Papuan trading even after the shift to high-volume ceramic production. And one cannot fail to mention the classic kula exchange in armshells and bead necklaces, material forms that may well trace their ultimate ancestry to Lapita shell valuables.

As societies in the archipelagoes of “New” Melanesia began to differentiate and diverge in the centuries following the initial Lapita diaspora, the original widespread exchange linkages retracted to become regionalized or localized. Thus in Papua and the Massim, an earlier system that possibly linked both areas broke down into several regional networks (two of which focused on Motupore and Mailu) about A.D. 800. Jim Allen (1977, 1984b, 2017) developed a model of such transformations in which the spatial extent of networks decreases over time as their complexity (or degree of specialization) increases. This model fits the Papuan data well; further work is required to test its validity for other sequences of changing exchange and trade in eastern Melanesia.


LANDESQUE CAPITAL INTENSIFICATION AND SOCIOPOLITICAL TRANSFORMATIONIn the late phases from New Georgia, Santa Ana, Aneityum, New Caledonia, and Fiji, as well as in the New Guinea Highlands, there were parallel developments of highly intensive agricultural production systems, often accompanied by changes in settlement and residential patterns. The agricultural systems are all types of landesque capital (Blaikie and Brookfield 1987), involving the permanent transformation of a landscape through the construction of facilities such as terraces, canals, and walled garden plots. Once such transformations have been accomplished, landscapes may be put back into use even after periods of disuse or abandonment. Although they may have relatively high associated labor costs during construction, these systems have the benefit of conferring high yields, often at labor input levels that are considerably less than those seen with shifting cultivation and certainly with short-fallow swidden regimes.65

These intensive agricultural systems were something entirely new on the face of post-Lapita Melanesia. We have no evidence that the Lapita peoples themselves practiced anything other than classic shifting cultivation, along with arboriculture and probably the planting of naturally swampy areas in Colocasia or Cyrtosperma aroids. An older notion that the first Austronesian-speaking peoples who moved into Oceania brought with them Asiatic forms of terracing and irrigation technology does not stand up to the scrutiny of either archaeological or linguistic evidence (Kirch and Lepofsky 1993).

Were the terraced, canal-fed irrigation systems of New Georgia, Aneityum, New Caledonia, and Fiji the result of interarchipelago communication and the diffusion of technological innovations, or were they independent but convergent responses to common sets of pressures or challenges? I am inclined toward the latter, seeing these intensive forms of agricultural practice as logical developments out of widespread agronomic and ethnobiological knowledge having an antiquity going back to Lapita, and perhaps earlier.

If this interpretation is correct, what were the push or pull factors, and the changing sociopolitical contexts, that led to these convergent agricultural developments? An underlying factor in all cases is probably to be found in population numbers and densities, but to put the full or even the primary onus on demography is unwarranted. Environmental factors such as resource variability and degradation of landscapes over centuries of shifting cultivation are also salient factors, as both the New Guinea Highlands and Aneityum cases (and probably the New Caledonian one as well) suggest. Moreover, we cannot ignore the complex linkages between production for subsistence and “social” production (Brookfield 1972, 1984; Kirch 1994). As the societies of “New” Melanesia became larger and gradually shifted from being heterarchical to hierarchical, elites benefited incrementally from the surpluses they could extract from intensive agricultural systems and put to social and political ends through competitive feasts or other means.

I have not dealt directly with the topic of sociopolitical transformation in post-Lapita Melanesia, largely because the state of our knowledge of prehistoric social formations remains for the most part rudimentary. But implicit in much of what I have discussed is the notion that the past two and a half millennia witnessed significant transformations of Melanesian societies, with small-scale “house” societies of the Lapita period (see chap. 4) giving rise to large-scale aggregations under the control of elites whom early explorers, missionaries, and later ethnographers were frequently to label “chiefs.”66 The archaeological records of these islands hint at these changes, such as the massive forts of Maré Island, which must have taken centralized labor control to construct; the differentiated habitation mounds of later New Caledonian settlements, in which the residences of elites seem to be set off from or command higher elevations than those of commoners; or the elaborate funerary rites associated with Roy Mata. The challenge for archaeology in Melanesia is to develop the tools of a sophisticated “social archaeology” that can tease out the evidence for such sociopolitical transformation.





SIX


Micronesia


