EXPLORATIONS IN ANTHROPOLOGY
A University College London Series

Series Editors:     Barbara Bender, John Gledhill and Bruce Kapferer
Joan Bestard-Camps, What's in a Relative? Household and Family in Formentera
Henk Driessen, On the Spanish-Moroccan Frontier: A Study in Ritual, Power
and Ethnicity
Alfred Gell, The Anthropology of Time: Cultural Construction of Temporal Maps
and Images
Tim Ingold, David Riches and James Woodburn (eds), Hunters and Gatherers
   Volume 1. History, Evolution and Social Change
   Volume 2. Property, Power and Ideology
Bruce Kapferer, A Celebration of Demons (2nd edn.)
Guy Lanoue, Brothers: The Politics of Violence among the Sekani of Northern
British Columbia
Jadran Mimica, Intimations of Infinity: The Mythopoeia of the Iqwaye Counting
System and Number
Barry Morris, Domesticating Resistance: The Dhan-Gadi Aborigines and the
Australian State
Thomas C. Paterson, The Inca Empire: The Formation and Disintegration of a
Pre-Capitalist State
Max and Eleanor Rimoldi, Hahalis and the Labour of Love: A Social Movement
on Buka Island
Pnina Werbner, The Migration Process: Capital, Gifts and Offerings among
Pakistanis in Britain
Joel S. Kahn, Constituting the Minangkabau: Peasants, Culture, and Modernity in
Colonial Indonesia
Gisli Polsson, Beyond Boundaries: Understanding, Translation and
Anthropological Discourse
Stephen Nugent, Amazonian Caboclo Society
Barbara Bender, Landscape: Politics and Perspectives
Christopher Tilley (ed.), Interpretative Archaeology
Ernest S. Burch, Jr. and Linda J. Ellanna, Key Issues in Hunter-Gatherer Research
Daniel Miller, Modernity — An Ethnographic Approach: Dualism and Mass
Consumption in Trinidad
Robert Pool, Dialogue and the Interpretation of Illness: Conversations in a
Cameroon Village
A Phenomenology of Landscape
Places, Paths and Monuments



Christopher Tilley




BERG
Oxford/Providence, USA
First published in 1994 by
Berg Publishers
Editorial offices:
150 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JJ, UK
221 Waterman Road, Providence, RI 02906, USA

© Christopher Tilley

All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form
or by any means without the written permission of
Berg Publishers Limited.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

ISBN 0 85496 919 5 (Cloth)
     1 85973 076 0 (Paper)

Printed in the United Kingdom by WBC Bookbinders, Bridgend.
Contents
List of Illustrations                                       vii


List of Tables                                              xi


Introduction                                                 1


Part I: Landscape - Theoretical and Contemporary
Perspectives
 1   Space, Place, Landscape and Perception:
     Phenomenological Perspectives                           7
     Introduction: Spatial Science to Humanized Space
     A Phenomenological Perspective                         11
     Space and Place                                        14
     Locales, Social Action                                 17
     The Politics of Space                                  20
     Landscape and the Scape of Praxis                      22
     Powers of Place                                        26
     Time, Memory and Movement                              27
     Paths, Inscriptions, Temporality                       29
     Spatial Stories, Landscape and the Arts of Narrative   31
     Conclusion                                             34


      The Social Construction of Landscape in
      Small-Scale Societies: Structures of Meaning,
      Structures of Power                                   35
      Introduction                                          35
      Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers and Landscape                 37
      Subsistence Cultivators and the Land                  57
      Conclusion                                            67


Part II: Prehistoric Landscapes
      Introduction: Human Space and Prehistoric Landscapes 71
vi                                                       Contents

 3   An Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments
     in South-west Wales                                  76
     Introduction                                         76
     Locales in the Earlier and Later Mesolithic          77
     The Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'                86
     Monument Construction and the Significance of Place 87
     Conclusion                                          109

 4   Escarpments and Spurs: Places and Monuments
     in the Black Mountains                                   111
     Introduction                                             111
     Mesolithic Locales                                       111
     Flint Scatters and Occupational Continuity               117
     Chambered Cairns and the Landscape                       118
     Orientation and Ritual Axis                              123
     Looking Out and Going In: Burials, Chambers and
     Topography                                               136
     Conclusion                                               142

 5   Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk
     Downland                                                 143
     Introduction                                             143
     The Mesolithic Landscape                                 144
     Locales and the Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'        147
     Earthen Long Barrows                                     150
     Patterns of Intervisibility                              156
     Hambledon Hill                                           166
     The Dorset Cursus                                        170
     Walking the Cursus                                       172
     The Empty Place - A Ritual Passage                       196
     Conclusion                                               200

 6   Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Restructuring the
     Connections                                              202
     References                                               209

Index                                                         219
List of Illustrations
2.1.    Dreamtime tracks, Balgo territory, Western Australia.      42
2.2.    'Small names' within the big name locality Luwana
        Spring or Lake Lucas.                                       42
2.3.    Ayers rock from the south.                                  44
2.4.    The totemic geography of Ayers rock.                        45
2.5.    Tracks of fleeing carpet snakes, Ayers rock.                46
2.6.    Walbiri circle-line design as cosmic model.                 49
2.7.    Landscape and meanings in Yolngu art.                       50
2.8.    Landscape and cosmology in the Tewa world.                  64

 3.0.   Location of the study areas.                                72

 3.1.    The distribution of earlier and later Mesolithic locales
        in south-west Wales.                                         78
 3.2.    Nab Head seen from the north-west.                          79
 3.3.    Whitesands Bay seen from the chambered tombs at
        Cam Llidi to the north.                                      81
 3.4.    View of the south Pembrokeshire coast from St.
        Govan's Head, looking west.                                  82
 3.5.    The distribution of Mesolithic locales ('chipping floors')
        south of Milford Haven.                                      85
 3.6.    The distribution of Neolithic monuments in south-west
        Wales.                                                       88
 3.7.    The Neolithic settlement of Clegyr Boia seen from the
        north-west.                                                  89
 3.8.    View to Carn Llidi, looking north from the top of
        Clegyr Boia.                                                 91
 3.9.    Looking east from the megalithic cemetry at Morfa
        Bychan to Gilman Point.                                      95
3.10.    Plan of the Morfa Bychan cemetery.                          96
3.11.    Looking north from Morfa Bychan cairn B. to the
        Druid's Altar, below which cairn C. is situated.             97
3.12.    Garnwnda chamber from the north.                            98
3.13.    Ffyst Samson chamber with 'circular' rock outcrop
        beyond to the east.                                         100
viii                                            List of Illustrations


3.14.   Looking north from Ffyst Samson to rock outcrops on
        skyline.                                               101
3.15.   Looking south across Manorbier Bay to King's Quoit
        chamber by the path above the cliffs.                  102
3.16.   Track up to the Carn Llidi chambers built up against the
        end of the rock outcrop to the left of the photograph. 103
3.17.   Carreg Samson looking east to 'circular' rock outcrop
        behind and to the left of the farm.                    104
3.18.   Pentre Ifan looking south-west to circular rock
        outcrops beyond.                                       106
3.19.   Pentre Ifan looking west to Cam Ingli.                 107
3.20.   Llech y Dribedd looking south to Carn Ingli
3.21.   Gwal y Filiast from the north-east.                    110

 4.1.   The distribution of Mesolithic locales in south-east
        Wales.                                                 112
 4.2.   Mesolithic locales at the head of the Rhondda valleys. 112
 4.3.   Pant Sychbant valley from the north-east.              114
 4.4.   The head of the Rhondda valleys looking south.         115
 4.5.   Craig y Llyn.                                          116
 4.6.   Groundplans of selected 'Cotswold-Severn' long
        cairns in the Black Mountains.                         119
 4.7.   The distribution of long cairns in the Black
        Mountains.                                             122
 4.8.   View along the Wye valley to the north of the
        Pipton long cairn.                                     125
 4.9.   Looking north from Garn Coch to Table Mountain.        126
4.10.   Looking south from the end of Little Lodge long
        cairn.                                                 128
4.11.    Ffostyll north long cairn with long axis directed
        towards spur of Lord Hereford's knob in the
        background.                                            129
4.12.   Mynydd Troed from the south-east terminal end of
        Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth long cairn.                     130
4.13.    Looking north from the northern end of Mynydd
        Troed long cairn.                                      131
4.14.    Looking south from the southern end of Mynydd
        Troed long cairn.                                      132
4.15.   Patterns of intervisibility between the long cairns in
        the Black Mountains.                                   133
4.16.    Looking south from the end of Ffostyll South long
        cairn to Mynydd Troed.                                 135
List of Illustrations                                            ix


4.17.   Mynydd Troed from the road near to Talgarth.           137
4.18.   Arthur's Stone.                                        141


 5.1. The distribution of Mesolithic locales in central areas of
      Cranborne Chase and finds of early Neolithic leaf-
      shaped arrowheads in relation to surface geology.         145
 5.2. Penbury Knoll seen from the north-west.                   151
 5.3. Selected groundplans of long barrows on Cranborne
      Chase.                                                    153
 5.4. The distribution of early Neolithic monuments on
      Cranborne Chase.                                          155
 5.5. Intervisibility between the long barrows on Cranborne
      Chase.                                                    156
 5.6. The northern long Barrow on Gussage Cow Down seen
      from the south-west from the site of long barrow on
      Parsonage Hill                                            160
 5.7. A barrow on the periphery of the Cranborne Chase
      group, Donhead St. Mary, near to Ashmore.                 162
 5.8. Track up to the ploughed down Drive Plantation
      barrow situated with its long axis running along the
      top of a localized ridge, seen from the north-west        163
 5.9. The northern long barrow running along a spine of
      Hambledon Hill.                                           164
5.10. View looking west from the barrow at Sutton Down
      along the northern escarpment of Cranborne Chase. 165
5.11. Aerial photograph of Hambledon Hill main
      causewayed enclosure.                                     167
5.12. Plan of the earlier Neolithic enclosures on
      Hambledon Hill.                                           168
5.13. The Dorset Cursus and associated long barrows.            170
5.14. Longitudinal profile and plan of the Dorset Cursus.       171
5.15. Sketch plan of features of the Pentridge section of the
      Dorset Cursus.                                            174
5.16. The long barrow (No 15) on the northern terminal
      spur of Penbury Knoll                                      176
5.17. Bank barrow or barrow with 'tail' marking the start
      of the Pentridge section of the Cursus, (No. 16/17)
      seen from the prominent barrow (No 15) to its north. 177
5.18. View towards Penbury Knoll from a position just
      to the south of the Cursus by Salisbury Plantation in
      the Pentridge section.                                     179
                                                List of Illustrations


5.19.   Looking south-west along the Pentridge section of
        the Cursus down the dry valley and up to Bottlebush
        Down.                                                  182
5.20.   Sketch plan of features of the Gussage section of the
        Cursus.                                                185
5.21.   View along the Gussage section of the Cursus from
        its beginning on Bottlebush Down up to the northern
        long barrow on Gussage Cow Down.                       186
5.22.   View back along the Gussage section of the Cursus
        to Bottlebush Down with the Pleistocene river
        cliff visible in the centre of the picture with round
        burrows beyond.                                        187
5.23.   The northern long barrow in the centre of the Cursus
        on Gussage Cow Down.                                   191
5.24.   The southern long barrow on Gussage Cow Down
        seen from the northern barrow.                         192
5.25.    View south-west from the Gussage North barrow
        along the final stretch of the Cursus up to Thickthorn
        Down.                                                  193
5.26.   The terminal end of the Cursus on Thickthorn Down
        seen from the end of the Thickthorn North long
        barrow.                                                195
List of Tables
4.1.   Altitudes, orientation and length of the long cairns in
       the Black Mountains group.                              121
4.2.   The directional orientation of the terminal ends of the
       Black Mountains long cairns in relation to
       topographically dominant landscape features.            127
4.3.   The frequency and orientation of internal chambers in
       the long cairns of the Black Mountains Group.           139
5.1.   Morphological characteristics of the long barrows on
       Cranborne Chase.                                        152
Introduction

This book, in many ways, is an exercise in a 'blurred genre',
involving insights acquired through a reading of works of a
phenomenological approach in philosophy, cultural anthro-
pology, and human geography and recent interpretative work in
archaeology. It is not intended to 'represent' any of these fields,
or individual positions taken within them, but rather aims to set
elements of them to work pragmatically in a consideration of pre-
historic landscapes.
   The book is divided into two Parts. In the first, Chapter 1 sets
out a general theoretical perspective on the significance of spaces,
places and landscapes in small-scale, non-Western societies.
Chapter 2 considers issues of landscape use and perception in
relation to hunter-gatherers and subsistence cultivators from a
consideration of ethnographic literature. The second Part of the
book is an empirical exercise in attempting to develop a frame-
work with which to understand long-term relationships between
people and features of the landscape. Chapters 3, 4 and 5 discuss
the development of archaeological landscapes from the
Mesolithic to the Neolithic. The key question addressed is decep-
tively simple: why were particular locations chosen for habitation
and the erection of monuments as opposed to others? It is of cen-
tral importance for the interpretative reconstruction of prehis-
toric lifeworlds. The standard approach to such a question within
the archaeological literature has concentrated on factors of the
environment such as relief, climate, soils, water supply and the
seasonal availability of exploitable resources. These have been
related to factors such as demographic patterns, technologies,
transhumance systems, territoriality, and control over exchange
networks and forms of social organization facilitating environ-
mental exploitation as a means of adaptation (e.g. Binford 1978,
 1980; Hodder and Orton 1976; Jarman, Bailey and Jarman 1982;
Webley 1976; Roese 1982). The location of sites thus becomes
explained as a result of a mix of 'rational' decision-making

                                                                  1
2                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


processes involving some or all of these factors. The statistical
correlations and functional interdependencies arrived at are the
function of a contemporary myth-making in which an exclusive-
ly modernist Western logic has simply become superimposed on
the past. In the process how people may have perceived the land-
scape in which they lived is either regarded as irrevocably lost, or
irrelevant, or both. Cultural meanings are only unimportant for
those who choose to make them so. Here I wish to stress two fea-
tures in particular - the symbolics of landscape perception and
the role of social memory in choice of site location. In so doing I
do not wish to set up a polar divide between a supposed eco-
nomic rationality and a cultural or symbolic logic but rather to
suggest that each helps to constitute the other. People do not, of
course, deliberately occupy inhospitable habitats or those with
few resources by virtue of some slavish accommodation to a
symbolic scheme; but the places that they do occupy take on,
through time, particular sets of meanings and connotations
which are at least partially interpretable from archaeological evi-
dence and appear to be too important to be ignored.
   Three study areas provide the substantive data-base for the
discussion: Pembrokeshire in south-west Wales, the Black
Mountains area of south-east Wales, and Cranborne Chase in
Dorset. These comprise one coastal and two inland regions of
markedly different topography. All three major classes of
Neolithic monuments are represented in these regions: a western
tradition involving the construction of portal dolmens and cham-
bered cairns in Pembrokeshire; Cotswold-Severn type cham-
bered long cairns in the Black Mountains; and earthen long
barrows covering timber or turf mortuary houses in Cranborne
Chase. All three areas have Mesolithic sites represented, in the
main, by surface flint scatters.
    The regions considered are all, in their different ways, distinc-
tive natural landscapes with marked differences in local relief
highlighting the relationship between sites and their settings,
which, I will argue, is of fundamental importance. The primary
concern in the book is the location of Mesolithic sites and
Neolithic cairns and mounds and their internal chambers in rela-
tion to dominant features in the surrounding landscape - rivers,
the coast, spurs, escarpment edges, rock outcrops and ridges.
This is a type of analysis that has hardly been explored in any
 detail previously. Attention has tended to focus either on the sites
Introduction                                                        3


themselves, in the form of ground plans and excavation reports,
or at the much broader spatial scale of the overall distribution
map or the presumed 'site catchment territory', where locations
become simply dots in a two-dimensional space situated in rela-
tion to drainage patterns, perhaps soil types, and a choice of con-
tour intervals. The archaeologist appears as a mole whose head
hardly rises above the site itself to consider wider sets of relation-
ships between it and the environment in which it is situated or,
alternatively, surveys everything on the distribution map as if
from an aircraft. This is even reflected in the form of published
photographs in books and journals, which almost always tend to
concentrate on the sites themselves to the exclusion of their sur-
roundings. The research discussed in this paper might be
described as 'middle-range' in so far as it is aimed at filling a gap
between the site plan and the distribution map.
   I am grateful to George Nash for help in surveying the
Neolithic monuments in Wales, Julian Thomas for constructive
comments on an early draft of parts of the manuscript and Stuart
Laidlaw for developing and printing the photographs at short
notice. Barbara Bender, Mark Edmonds and Mike Rowlands
were kind enough to read through a second draft of the entire
manuscript and I thank them for their constructive criticisms and
comments, to which I have tried to respond in the published
version.
                                                  Christopher Tilley
                                                       London, 1994
Part I
Landscape - Theoretical and
Contemporary Perspectives
Chapter 1
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception:
Phenomenological Perspectives

Introduction: Spatial Science to Humanized Space

During the past thirty years a striking series of parallels and con-
vergences have taken place in human geography and archaeolo-
gy. Until the 1960s both disciplines were largely empiricist in
outlook and concerned with distinctiveness and difference in var-
ious ways. Human geography was dominated by the study of
regions at various spatial scales - North America, Africa, Asia,
regions of Britain or Canada, etc., treated in a holistic manner.
The resulting syntheses tended to start by discussing geology, cli-
mate and soils and ended by considering such matters as welfare
provision and political systems. This was the geographical equiv-
alent of the anthropological monograph in which 'everything'
was brought together into a whole. In a similar way archaeology
was concerned with space-time systematics and the ordering of
artefacts and other evidence into cultural units within a delimited
territorial area with a putative ethnic significance.
   The 'revolutions' of the 'new' geography and the 'new' archae-
ology consigned such a perspective to an unenlightened Dark
Age of superstition and misunderstanding. Replacing it all was
the white heat of positivism coupled with functionalism, in
which a notion of geography as spatial science and archaeology
as a science of the past were borne. The history of and the subse-
quent disillusionment with this approach are well known, and
there is no need to rehearse them here in any detail.
   As a component of the retheorization of human geography
from the 1970s onwards and in archaeology during the 1980s the
usefulness of a 'scientific' conception of space abstracted from
human affairs has systematically been called into question (e.g.
Harvey 1973; Relph 1976; Gregory 1978; Gregory and Urry 1985;

                                                                  7
8                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


Soja 1989; Hodder 1982a,b, 1986, 1987, 1992; Miller and Tilley
1984; Shanks and Tilley 1987a,b,1989; Bender 1992,1993; Tilley
1994). The major differences between a 'scientific' or abstract and
a 'humanized' or meaning-laden space can be summarized as fol-
lows:
    container                    medium
    decentred                    centred
    geometry                     context
    surfaces                     densities
    universal                    specific
    objective                    subjective
    substantial                  relational
    totalized                    detotalized
    external                     internal
    system                       strategy
    neutral                      empowered
    coherence                    contradiction
    atemporal                    temporal
    ABSTRACT SPACE               HUMAN SPACE




    materialist, rational        idealist, irrational
The list might be considerably extended, or the couplets abbrevi-
ated, since they clearly overlap. I have added a cross-over
between the lists of terms at the bottom in order to indicate that
the approach which has usually been claimed as the hallmark of
an objective, rational and materialist approach to space (the left-
hand column) now appears, in view of the weight of contempo-
rary arguments, as a form of irrational idealism and vice versa.
   It is from the general perspective of the terms listed in the
right-hand column that this book both takes its starting-point and
attempts to develop in relation to a consideration of landscape.
While not wishing to dwell too much here on the antagonistic
history of past debates it seems necessary to explain and unpack
the columns of oppositions as a background to the rest of the
book.
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                              9


   New geography and new archaeology considered space as an
abstract dimension or container in which human activities and
events took place. The implication of this perspective was that
activity and event and space were conceptually and physically
separate from each other and only contingently related. Such a
view of space decentred it from agency and meaning. It was
something that could be objectively measured in terms of an
abstracted geometry of scale. Space was quite literally a nothing-
ness, a simple surface for action, lacking depth. This space was
universal, everywhere and anywhere the same, and had cross-
cultural impact on people and society. People had to move across
this space, and movement through it, for example, created 'friction'
limiting human potentialities. The effects of distance and the
varying potentialities of site locations could be objectively speci-
fied on one and the same spatial scale of measurement. Space as
container, surface and volume was substantial inasmuch as it
existed in itself and for itself, external to and indifferent to human
affairs. The neutrality of this space resulted in its being divorced
from any consideration of structures of power and domination. A
space divorced from humanity and society provided a coherent
and unitary backdrop for any analysis, since it was always the
same. The space of the palaeolithic was the same as the space of
late capitalism, that of Vancouver identical to that of Canberra.
As a dimension in which human action took place it was directly
equivalent to and separate from time, the second primary and
abstracted scale according to which societal change could be doc-
umented and 'measured'.
   The attraction of this perspective was, no doubt, its purity and
simplicity and the potential it offered for comparative studies of
the organization of artefacts, sites, populations, and flows of
information and exchange across regions and landscapes. All
could be objectively plotted on maps, distances measured and
expressed according to the same rigorous and quantitative scale.
   Quantification, mathematization and computer modelling
seemingly offered unlimited potential for unravelling the spatial
fix of human affairs. Burning issues of the day in geography and
archaeology became what sampling fractions to use, how to con-
struct appropriate boundaries for a nearest-neighbour analysis,
what were the best statistics to use and the development of alter-
native methodologies for measuring and describing the abstract
geometry of space. Lurking beneath the distribution of the dots
on a map was a spatial process and causality to be discovered.
10                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


    The linkages between new geography and new archaeology
were quite explicit. Clarke's Models in Archaeology (1972) was
itself modelled on Chorley and Haggett's Models in Geography
(1967), Harvey's Explanation in Geography (1969) found its archae-
ological counterpart in Explanation in Archaeology (Watson et al.
1971). Clarke (1972) identified a 'geographical paradigm' to
archaeological research which was simply the extension of the
spatial methodology of the new geography to archaeological evi-
dence, while Renfrew (1969) predicted that the texts of new geog-
raphers would provide source books in methods for future
generations of archaeologists.
    Accordingly 'new' geography was systematically used to pro-
vide the basis for a mathematical spatial archaeology (Hodder
and Orton 1976; Clarke 1977). The traditional archaeological dis-
tribution map of sites and artefacts now became clothed with
thiessen polygons, site catchments, regression lines, trend sur-
faces and gravity models, all reflecting in various ways the 'fric-
tion' and impact of space on human affairs (for reviews see
Goudie 1987; Wagstaff 1987a).
    The alternative view starts from regarding space as a medium
rather than a container for action, something that is involved in
action and cannot be divorced from it. As such, space does not
and cannot exist apart from the events and activities within
which it is implicated. Space is socially produced, and different
societies, groups and individuals act out their lives in different
spaces. Space in itself no longer becomes a meaningful term.
There is no space, only spaces. These spaces, as social produc-
tions, are always centred in relation to human agency and are
amenable to reproduction or change because their constitution
takes place as part of the day-to-day praxis or practical activity of
individuals and groups in the world. They are meaningfully con-
 stituted in relation to human agency and activity. A humanized
 space forms both the medium and outcome of action, both con-
 straining and enabling it. A centred and meaningful space
involves specific sets of linkages between the physical space of
 the non-humanly created world, somatic states of the body, the
 mental space of cognition and representation and the space of
 movement, encounter and interaction between persons and
 between persons and the human and non-human environment.
 Socially produced space combines the cognitive, the physical and
 the emotional into something that may be reproduced but is
 always open to transformation and change. A social space, rather
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                           11

than being uniform and forever the same, is constituted by differ-
ential densities of human experience, attachment and involve-
ment. It is above all contextually constituted, providing
particular settings for involvement and the creation of meanings.
The specificity of place is an essential element in understanding
its significance. It follows that the meanings of space always
involve a subjective dimension and cannot be understood apart
from the symbolically constructed lifeworlds of social actors.
Space has no substantial essence in itself, but only has a relation-
al significance, created through relations between peoples and
places. Space becomes detotalized by virtue of its relational con-
struction and because, being differentially understood and pro-
duced by different individuals, collectivities and societies, it can
have no universal essence. What space is depends on who is
experiencing it and how. Spatial experience is not innocent and
neutral, but invested with power relating to age, gender, social
position and relationships with others. Because space is differen-
tially understood and experienced it forms a contradictory and
conflict-ridden medium through which individuals act and are
acted upon. The experience of space is always shot through with
temporalities, as spaces are always created, reproduced and
transformed in relation to previously constructed spaces provid-
ed and established from the past. Spaces are intimately related to
the formation of biographies and social relationships.
    Such a notion of space is undoubtedly complex. There is and
can be no clear-cut methodology arising from it to provide a con-
cise guide to empirical research. The approach requires, rather, a
continuous dialectic between ideas and empirical data. From this
perspective, the intimate connection of space with the social, with
the formation of biographies, with action, event, power, context
and subjectivity, materializes or concretizes its specificity and
impact in the social world. We move from the irrational abstracted
 idealism of a geometrical universal space to an ontological
 grounding of space in the differential structuring of human expe-
 rience and action in the world: a perspective which now requires
 examination in more detail.


A Phenomenological Perspective

The key issue in any phenomenological approach is the manner
in which people experience and understand the world.
12                                         A Phenomenology of Landscape


Phenomenology involves the understanding and description of
things as they are experienced by a subject. It is about the rela-
tionship between Being and Being-in-the-world. Being-in-the-
world resides in a process of objectification in which people
objectify the world by setting themselves apart from it. This
results in the creation of a gap, a distance in space. To be human
is both to create this distance between the self and that which is
beyond and to attempt to bridge this distance through a variety
of means - through perception (seeing, hearing, touching), bodi-
ly actions and movements, and intentionality, emotion and
awareness residing in systems of belief and decision-making,
remembrance and evaluation.

     Let us think for a while of a farmhouse in the Black Forest, which was
     built some two hundred years ago by the dwelling of peasants. Here
     the self-sufficiency of the power to let earth and heaven, divinities
     and mortals enter in simple oneness into things, ordered the house. It
     placed the farm on the wind-sheltered mountain slope looking south,
     among the meadows close to the spring. It gave it the wide overhang-
     ing shingle roof whose proper slope bears up under the burden of
     snow, and which, reaching deep down, shields the chambers against
     the storms of the long winter nights. It did not forget the altar corner
     behind the community table; it made room in its chamber for the hal-
     lowed places of childbed and the 'tree of the dead' - for that is what
     they call a coffin there: the Totenbaum - and in this way it is designed
     for the different generations under one roof the character of their
     journey through time. A craft which, itself sprung from dwelling, still
     uses its tools and frames as things, built the farmhouse (Heidegger
     1972: 338).

     The fact is that if we want to describe it, we must say that my experi-
     ence breaks forth into things and transcends itself in them, because it
     always comes into being within the framework of a certain setting in
     relation to the world which is the definition of my body ... Any per-
     ception of a thing, a shape or a size as real, any perceptual constancy
     refers back to the positing of a world and of a system of experience in
     which my body is inescapably linked with phenomena. But the sys-
     tem of experience is not arrayed before me as if I were God, it is lived
     by me from a certain point of view; I am not the spectator, I am
     involved, and it is my involvement in a point of view which makes
     possible both the finiteness of my perception and its opening out
     upon the complete world as a horizon of every perception (Merleau-
     Ponty 1962: 303-4).
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                           13

   I have let Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty set the scene. From
rather different phenomenological perspectives, they have both
stressed important ontological characteristics of the relationship
between inhabited space and social Being-in-the-world. For
Heidegger 'spaces receive their essential being from locations
and not from "space"' (1972: 332). A mathematical 'space' of mea-
surement contains no spaces, places or locations, for it is not
humanized. Spaces open up by virtue of the dwelling of humanity
or the staying with things that cannot be separated: the earth, the
sky and the constellations, the divinities, birth and death. Space
is that something for which room is made. Building produces
things as locations and building and thinking both belong to
dwelling. Heidegger proposes a topological model for thinking
about the relationship between people and the landscape as a
matter of the 'thereness' of the self-disclosure of Being in and of
the world. Cognition is not opposed to reality, but is wholly
given over in the total social fact of dwelling, serving to link
place, praxis, cosmology and nurture.
    If 'dwelling', in Heideggerian terms, forms a primordial part
of that which it is to be human, this necessarily requires a consid-
eration of the body as the privileged vantage point from which
the world is apprehended. The kinetic activities of human beings
orientate apprehension of the landscape and create it as human.
Space is existential, and existence is spatial in that it opens onto
an 'outside', a series of reference points (Merleau-Ponty 1962:
293). Merleau-Ponty, like Heidegger, attempts to chart a middle
course between an empiricist objectivism and a cognitive ideal-
 ism. With empiricist objectivism, the perception of space and the
 environment, like everything else, is an event in nature.
Perception is the causal physical or chemical action of a thing on
 an organ which sensation registers. Everything takes place in a
 world of pure objectivity, and there is no subject who perceives.
 Conversely, a cognitive idealism posits an absolute subjectivity
 involving a transcendental Ego who is the subject of experience.
 In a relation of pure interiority the objective world exists only in
 relation to a consciousness which projects that world before itself.
 For Merleau-Ponty the problem of both of these positions is that
 they systematically evade the problem of the phenomenon of
 perception, empiricism because it makes an object of the subject,
 cognitive idealism because it reduces the perception of the object
 to an operation of thought (ibid.: 39). Merleau-Ponty argues that
14                                       A Phenomenology of Landscape


the human body provides the fundamental mediation point
between thought and the world. The world and the subject reflect
and flow into each other through the body that provides the liv-
ing bond with the world. Notions of 'object' and 'subject',
'nature' and 'consciousness' are dialectically related moments of
a totality which is constituted through the Being of the body in
the world. The body constitutes a way of relating to, perceiving
and understanding the world. It is the manner in which a subjec-
tive attitude comes to both know and express itself. Perceptual
consciousness is not just a matter of thought about the world, but
stems from bodily presence and bodily orientation in relation to
it, bodily awareness: 'far from my body's being for me no more
than a fragment of space, there would be no space at all for me if
I had no body' (ibid.: 102).
    While 'dwelling' occurs in different varieties and textures of
humanly created space, this social existence is, of course, rooted
in natural and non-humanly created environments. The concept
of dwelling, with its fourfold ontological implications as pointed
out by Heidegger, the human body as a focus for the perception
of a humanized world, and the groundedness of social Being in
that which is not humanly created constitute the fundamental
presuppositions for beginning to think about the relationship
between people and landscape in a fresh manner. Subjectivity
and objectivity connect in a dialectic producing a place for Being in
which the topography and physiography of the land and thought
remain distinct but play into each other as an 'intelligible land-
scape', a spatialization of Being, which I will now examine in a
less abstract manner.


Space and Place

     If space allows movement, place is pause (Taun 1977: 6).

The relationship between space and place has been discussed and
theorized from one particular perspective within a phenomeno-
logical 'school' of geographical research (Taun 1974, 1975,1977;
Pickles 1985; Relph 1976; Buttimer and Seamon 1980; Seamon
and Mugerauer 1989). The key concern in this approach is the
manner in which places constitute space as centres of human
meaning, their singularity being manifested and expressed in the
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                             15

day-to-day experiences and consciousness of people within par-
ticular lifeworlds. Such an approach starts from an initial presup-
position claiming the wholeness and indivisibility of a human
experience of place, and that meaning, defined in terms of struc-
tures of intentionality, is central to any understanding of place.
Knowledge of place stems from human experiences, feeling and
thought. Space is a far more abstract construct than place. It pro-
vides a situational context for places, but derives its meanings
from particular places (Relph 1976: 8). Without places there can
be no spaces, and the former have primary ontological signifi-
cance as centres of bodily activity, human significance and emo-
tional attachment. The meaning of place is grounded in
existential or lived consciousness of it. It follows that the limits of
place are grounded in the limits of human consciousness. Places
are as diffuse and differentiated as the range of identities and sig-
nificances accorded to them. People are immersed in a world of
places which the geographical imagination aims to understand
and recover - places as contexts for human experience, construct-
ed in movement, memory, encounter and association. There may
be a strong affection for place (topophilia) or aversion (topopho-
bia), but places are always far more than points or locations,
because they have distinctive meanings and values for persons.
Personal and cultural identity is bound up with place; a topo-
analysis is one exploring the creation of self-identity through
place. Geographical experience begins in places, reaches out to
others through spaces, and creates landscapes or regions for
human existence.
   Attempts have been made in the literature to generalize the
specificity of place by erecting typologies of particular kinds of
spaces through which the identities of place are constructed.
Such classifications can only act as heuristic devices, since it can
be argued that places, by their very nature, contain sedimented
meanings which resist such boxing and bracketing of their
 natures and significance. The following forms of space might be
identified:

   1. Somatic space
   2. Perceptual space
   3. Existential space
   4. Architectural space
   5. Cognitive space
16                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


   Somatic space is a space of habitual and unselfconscious
action. It is the space of sensory experience and bodily move-
ment. An understanding of this space takes as its starting-point
the upright human body looking out on the world. Space opens
out before the body and is differentiable in terms of front/back;
left/right; vertical/horizontal; top/bottom; within reach/
beyond reach; within hearing/beyond hearing; within sight/
beyond sight; here/there polarities (Relph 1976: 9; Taun 1977:
35-50). The very physicality of the body imposes a schema on
space through which it may be experienced and understood. An
experience of space is grounded in the body itself; its capacities
and potentialities for movement. Through time-space routines of
movement a person knows where she or he is in relation to famil-
iar places and objects and 'how to go on' in the world. Lived
body-space incorporates not only habituated movement in gener-
al but also modes of walking, turning, reaching in performing
particular acts: body-ballets (Seamon 1979,1980).
    Perceptual space is the egocentric space perceived and
encountered by individuals in their daily practices. The centre of
such a space is grounded in individual perception of distances
and directions, natural objects and cultural creations. This space
is always relative and qualitative. Distance and direction are per-
ceived as near or far, this way or that way, moving along one
track or another. A perceptual space is one that links patterns of
individual intentionality to bodily movement and perception. It
is a space of personality, of encounter and emotional attachment.
It is the constructed life-space of the individual, involving feel-
ings and memories giving rise to a sense of awe, emotion, won-
der or anguish in spatial encounters. Such a space may as often as
not be felt rather than verbalized. It creates personal significances
for an individual in his or her bodily routines - places remem-
bered and places of affective importance.
    Perceptual space is intricately interlinked with existential
space or the lived space as it is constructed in the concrete experi-
ences of individuals socialized within a group. The meanings of
existential space transcend the individual and form a grounding
for perceptual space rather than being some kind of summation
of individualized perception. Existential space is in a constant
process of production and reproduction through the movements
and activities of members of a group. It is a mobile rather than a
passive space for experience. It is experienced and created
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                             17


through life-activity, a sacred, symbolic and mythic space replete
with social meanings wrapped around buildings, objects and fea-
tures of the local topography, providing reference points and
planes of emotional orientation for human attachment and
involvement. Places in existential space are foci for the produc-
tion of meaning, intention and purpose of societal significance.
Boundaries are of major significance in structuring existential
space both in and between places and regions. Boundaries are to
do with creating distinctions and marking out social oppositions,
mapping social and cultural difference and Otherness. The pres-
ence of boundaries, obvious natural prototypes being river cours-
es, mountain chains, or rock outcrops, and the coast, may be of
major significance in delimiting territories, the choice of locales
and the networking of paths through a landscape.
    Architectural space only makes sense in relation to pragmatic,
perceptual and existential space, but involves a deliberate
attempt to create and bound space, create an inside, an outside, a
way around, a channel for movement. Architecture is the deliber-
ate creation of space made tangible, visible and sensible. This is
why buildings play a fundamental role in the creation and recre-
ation, production and reproduction of existential space and have
profound structuring effects on perceptual space.
    Finally, cognitive space provides a basis for reflection and the-
orization with regard to understanding the others. It is the 'space'
of this discussion and analysis.
    Space can only exist as a set of relations between things or
places. In this sense there is no space that is not relational. Space
 is created by social relations, natural and cultural objects. It is a
production, an achievement, rather than an autonomous reality
 in which things or people are located or 'found'. Having been
constituted by things and places spatial relations affect the way in
which they relate. In other words, there is a sociospatial dialectic
 at work - space is both constituted and constitutive.


Locales, Social Action

Places may, of course, be experienced and conceptualized at any
number of spatial levels, from personal space to community
space to regional space and so on. Places overlap according to
scales of action, interest, movement and concern. Place is an
18                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


irreducible part of human experience, a person is 'in place' just as
much as she or he is 'in culture'. Place is about situatedness in
relation to identity and action. In this sense place is context, and
there can be no non-contextual definition of context or place. The
specificity of space always has to be understood from a particular
viewpoint.
    In small-scale non-Western societies place, defined as a centre
for action, intention and meaningful concern, can be best consid-
ered in terms of locales and the wider context in which these
locales occur - the cultural and natural landscape. Most signifi-
cant places are located or positioned in space. Locales are places
created and known through common experiences, symbols and
meanings. They may be rooms, houses, monuments, meeting-
places, camps or settlements. Locales may offer a distinct quality
of being inside, or part of, a place. People both live out their lives
in place and have a sense of being part of it. Consequently, place
is fundamental to the establishment of personal and group iden-
tities and the formation of biographies. Place is both 'internal'
and 'external' to the human subject, a personally embedded cen-
tre of meanings and a physical locus for action. All places thus
have metonymic qualities (places and their contents consist of
part-whole relations) and differential densities of meanings to
their inhabitants according to the events and actions they wit-
ness, partake in and remember. A sense of attachment to place is
frequently derived from the stability of meanings associated with
it.
    The naming and identification of particular topographical
features, such as sand dunes, bays and inlets, mountain peaks,
etc., settlements and sites is crucial for the establishment and
maintenance of their identity. Through an act of naming and
through the development of human and mythological associa-
tions such places become invested with meaning and signifi-
cance. Place names are of such vital significance because they act
so as to transform the sheerly physical and geographical into
something that is historically and socially experienced. The
bestowing of names creates shared existential space out of a
blank environment (Basso 1984: 27; Weiner 1991: 32). By the
process of naming places and things they become captured in
 social discourses and act as mnemonics for the historical actions
of individuals and groups. Without a name culturally significant
 sites would not exist, but only as a raw void, a natural environ-
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                           19

ment. In a fundamental way names create landscapes. An
unnamed place on a map is quite literally a blank space. Names
may create places of human import; but they do so in relation to
the raw material at hand. For example, the vast majority of
Western Apache place-names are lengthy and made up of
descriptions of the locations to which they refer, for example tsekd
tú yahilíí (water flows downward on top of a series of flat rocks)
or 'coarse-textured rocks lie above in a compact cluster' (Basso
1984: 28, 37). Place-names are used in Apache story-telling as sit-
uational or contextualizing devices for locating narrative events
in physical settings. The description of the setting is accom-
plished by the use of the place-name itself (see below).
    From the perspective of structuration theory Giddens has
emphasized the role of locales in processes of social production
and reproduction (Giddens 1979, 1981, 1984). Structure consid-
ered as a set of rules and resources for action is the medium
through which action is produced, both enabling and constrain-
ing it. Structure is also a product of action, and is created, repro-
duced and changed through the meaningful action of agents.
Action affects structure by virtue of its temporal and spatial
specificity. Time and space are components of action rather than
containers for it. Space plays an important part in defining the
manner in which social interaction takes place and the signifi-
cance it has for agents. Locales are settings in which interaction
takes place. 'A setting is not just a spatial parameter, and physical
environment, in which interaction occurs: it is these elements
mobilized as part of the interaction. Features of the setting of
interaction, including its spatial and physical aspects ... are rou-
 tinely drawn upon by social actors in the sustaining of communi-
 cation' (Giddens 1979: 206). Spatial contingency and difference in
 this formulation have clear effects on the manner in which agents
interrelate, but this needs to be viewed as a dialectic rather than a
 causal relationship in order to avoid the pitfalls of a spatial
 fetishism or an environmental determinism (Saunders 1989;
 Duncan 1989). Actors draw on their settings; and the manner in
 which they do so depends upon the specificity of their relation-
 ship to place. In this manner locales, in the most general sense,
 can be defined as a presencing of potentialities on which actors
 draw in the daily conduct of their activities.
    Giddens extends the usage of the term locale to include large-
 scale territorial aggregations such as nation states or empires. It
20                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


thus becomes a nested concept on a sliding spatial scale, in which
distinctions between locale, locality, region, etc. become blurred.
It is far better to confine the usage of the term to the small-scale
and the specific. Locales occur in localities, regions or landscapes.
Duncan (1989) seriously questions whether there is anything
such as locality which can be meaningfully distinguished from
the non-local recounting the quip that regional geographers are
'trying to put boundaries that do not exist around regions that do
not matter' (Duncan 1989: 238). But he is writing within the con-
text of the development of a theoretical geography of the modern
world system. While we might accept that it is virtually impossi-
ble to distinguish distinctive spatial parameters of whatever
might be defined as 'locality' within contemporary Britain such a
conclusion is anachronistic and unhelpful when transferred to
the past. A sense of 'placelessness' referred to by Relph (1976)
and others in contemporary society is, in essence, to do with the
systematic erosion of locality as meaningful. This discussion
inevitably brings us to the politics of space.

The Politics of Space
If space is to be regarded as a medium for action, a resource in
which actors draw on in their activity and use for their own pur-
poses, it inevitably becomes value-laden rather than value-free
and political rather than neutral. At a high level of generality it is
possible to distinguish between essential characteristics of
Western and capitalist 'spaces' and non-Western and pre-capital-
ist 'spaces':
     infinitely open                  different densities
     desanctified                     sanctified
     control                          sensuousness
     surveillance / partitioning      ritualized /anthropomorphic
     economic                         cosmological
     'useful' to act                  'useful' to think
     architectural forms resemble     architecture an embodiment
     each other in 'disciplinary'     of myth and cosmology
     space
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                               21

  landscape as backdrop to             landscape as sedimented
  action                               ritual form
  time linear and divorced from        time constitutive of rhythms
  space                                of social action in space-time
  CAPITALIST/WESTERN                   PRE-CAPITALIST/
  SPACE                                NON-WESTERN SPACE

The distinctions made above might be considered dominant
trends or 'ideal types', in that it is clearly not the case that capital-
ist or Western spaces are devoid of meanings or significances (see
for example the studies in Gold and Burgess 1982; Penning-
Rosewell and Lowenthal 1986); and pre-capitalist spaces were, of
course, 'useful to act', 'economic' places equally subject to
exploitation. However, it remains the case that numerous
authors, a massive environmental lobby, and a 'green movement'
have consistently remarked on the manner in which landscapes,
buildings, places and localities in contemporary society seem to
have lost, or be in the process of losing, their value and signifi-
cance. The space created by market forces must, above all, be a
useful and rational place. Once stripped of sedimented human
meanings, considered to be purely epiphenomenal and irrele-
vant, the landscape becomes a surface or volume like any other,
open for exploitation and everywhere homogeneous in its poten-
tial exchange value for any particular project. It becomes desanc-
tified, set apart from people, myth and history, something to be
controlled and used.
    Foucault (1986) remarks on the manner in which the work of
Galileo and others 'opened out' a medieval space of emplacement
in which microcosm mirrored macrocosm, the celestial providing
a map for the worldly and vice versa. In the new space thus cre-
ated the division and 'rational' utilization of space comes increas-
ingly to the fore, and in modern Western 'disciplinary' societies
 (Foucault 1977) the control and distribution of people in space
becomes of central concern. The map becomes a means of
 inquiry, of examination and control - electoral maps, maps of
 ethnic groups, taxation maps, etc. Discipline can only be effective
 through the control and structuring of space; and hence it is not
 surprising that prisons resemble hospitals, which resemble
 schools, and factories, which resemble prisons (Foucault 1977:
 228).
22                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


   Relph comments that 'the paradox of modern landscapes is
that they are dehumanising because they are excessively human-
ised. There is almost nothing in them that has not been conceived
and planned so that it will serve those human needs which can be
assessed in terms of efficiency or improved material conditions.
But there is almost nothing in them that can happen sponta-
neously, autonomously or accidentally, or which expresses
human emotions and feelings' (Relph 1981: 104). This opposition
between a past of supposed 'spontaneity' and 'freedom' and a
present of rational calculation and control seems somewhat over-
drawn. If the political qualities of a capitalist landscape relate to a
dominant cultural construction of a 'useful', disciplinary space of
social control, pre-capitalist spaces are no less invested with
forms of power, but within a qualitatively different landscape
invested with mythological understandings and ritual knowl-
edges intimately linked with bodily routines and practices.


Landscape and the Scape of Praxis


Spaces and places relationally constitute wider contexts for social
practices-landscapes. Anthropologists and archaeologists have
been interested for a long time in the relationships between peo-
ple and the landscape, conceived rather narrowly as 'environ-
mental milieu', but for the most part research has tended to focus
on functional and supposedly adaptive parameters of these rela-
tionships, with matters such as population levels, resource 'ceil-
ings' and environmental constraints. The vast majority of studies
of hunter-fisher-gatherers have tended to concentrate rather nar-
rowly on issues such as the ranges of food resources exploited,
food-getting technologies, seasonality and scheduling in relation
to settlement size, location and group composition, and degree of
mobility. In this approach myths, cosmologies and symbolism
are largely deemed irrelevant to what is really going on. What
people think about the environment has little or no affect on the
practical exigencies of having to live in it. On the other hand,
there exists a vast body of literature concerned with the analysis
of ritual performance and cosmological and social structures in
which the environment is equally irrelevant, a mere backdrop to
the unconstrained ramifications of the human mind.
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                              23

   A naturalistic view of landscape as a neutral backdrop to activ-
ity is clearly of recent origin in thought, an irrelevance in consid-
ering pre-capitalist landscapes, and a hindrance in their
conceptualization. It is also a highly ideological construct which
requires deconstruction even in the context of capitalist land-
scapes. A culturalist view of landscape as a highly specific, sym-
bolic and cognitive ordering of space offers far more potential in
understanding but, as Ingold argues (Ingold 1992,1993), encloses
humanity into a series of separate cultural worlds constituted as
structured sets of shared representations divorced from 'nature'
or the physical world. This external world provides a source of
raw sense data, without order or meaning and, in perception,
these data become 'detached (as "stimuli") from the environment
and attached (as "sensations") to human subjects' (Ingold 1992:
51). They are then ordered into cultural schemata. The line of
argument taken here is akin to parts of that recently advanced by
Ingold, which he terms a 'dwelling perspective'. People and envi-
ronment are constitutive components of the same world, which it
is unhelpful to think of in terms of a binary nature/culture dis-
tinction. In the perception of the world and in the consumption of
resources (utilitarian or symbolic) from that world meanings
embodied in environmental objects are drawn into the experi-
ences of subjects. Perception of the world and the constitution of
that which is important or unimportant to people does not work
in terms of a 'blank environmental slate' on which perception
 and cognition sets to work, but in terms of the historicity of lived
 experiences in that world. The landscape is an anonymous sculp-
 tural form always already fashioned by human agency, never
 completed, and constantly being added to, and the relationship
between people and it is a constant dialectic and process of struc-
 turation: the landscape is both medium for and outcome of action
 and previous histories of action. Landscapes are experienced in
 practice, in life activities.
    Ingold argues that 'the cultural construction of the environ-
 ment is not so much a prelude to practical action as an (optional)
 epilogue' and 'culture is a framework not for perceiving the world,
 but for interpreting it, to oneself and others' (Ingold 1992: 52-3). It
 seems unhelpful to polarize, as Ingold appears to do, perception
 and interpretation, practical activity and the cultural work of
 explication and discourse. To ask: 'Which comes first: practical
 activity or cultural knowledge?' is to set up artifical barriers
24                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


between practical activities and discursive levels of conscious-
ness that go to constitute each other, neither of which is amenable
to prioritization. The cultural construction of the environment is
both 'prelude' and 'epilogue', and it does not necessarily involve
'explication' or 'discourse', as Ingold assumes.
    Features of the natural landscape may be held to have provid-
ed a symbolic resource of the utmost significance to prehistoric
populations. A number of ethnographies of small-scale societies,
discussed in Chapter 2, of both hunter-gatherers and subsistence
cultivators, indicate that rather than simply providing a back-
drop for human action the natural landscape is a cognized form
redolent with place names, associations and memories that serve
to humanize and enculture landscape, linking together topo-
graphical features, trees, rocks, rivers, birds and animals with
patterns of human intentionality. Significant locations become
crystallized out of the environment through the production and
recognition of meanings in particular places and through events
that have taken place. Humanized places become fashioned out
of the landscape through the recognition of significant qualities
in that which has not in itself been culturally produced (rocks,
rivers, trees, etc.) by association with current use, past social
actions or actions of a mythological character.
    It is important not to forget that the contemporary term 'land-
scape' is highly ideological. Cosgrove and Daniels define land-
scape as 'a cultural image, a pictorial way of representing,
structuring or symbolising surroundings' (Cosgrove and Daniels
1988: 1). Such an image may be structured on canvas, in writing
and on the ground through earth, stone and vegetation.
Landscapes, in this rather limited definition, are images which
are created and read, verbal or non-verbal texts. Raymond
Williams (1973:120) notes that the very idea of landscape implies
separation and observation. A concern with landscape is one of
patrician control manifested in landscape painting, writing, gar-
dening and architecture. Cosgrove (1984) locates the origins of
 the idea of landscape in early capitalist Italian Renaissance city
 states: the city gives birth simultaneously to capitalism and land-
 scape. Landscape is a particular way of seeing, the linear tech-
 niques of perspective developed in landscape painting at this
 time to create a 'realistic' image parallel the development of prac-
 tices such as cartography, astronomy, land surveying and map-
 ping involving formal geometrical rules. The whole notion of
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                                25

landscape, Cosgrove argues, propagates a visual ideology mask-
ing the social forces and relations of production, relations of
exploitation and alienation.
   Yet in a seemingly contradictory fashion Cosgrove also extols
the virtues of landscape as concept and image:
  landscape is a uniquely valuable concept for a humane geography.
  Unlike place it reminds us of our position in the scheme of nature.
  Unlike environment or space it reminds us that only through human
  consciousness and reason is that scheme known to us, and only
  through technique can we participate as humans in it. At the same
  time landscape reminds us that geography is everywhere, that it is a
  constant source of beauty and ugliness, of right and wrong and joy
  and suffering, as much as it is of profit and loss' (Cosgrove 1989:122).

Daniels (1989), discussing the work of Williams and Berger in
relation to landscape and its representation through artworks,
brings out a similar tension in their relation to the concept.
Representations of landscape have the potential to both obscure
and articulate lived experience. In other words landscape as
image has both ideological and ontological implications for the
way in which we think about the world. Daniels rightly con-
cludes that 'we should beware of attempts to define landscape, to
resolve its contradictions; rather we should abide in its duplicity'
(Daniels 1989: 218).
   It is the ontological connotations of landscape stressed by
Cosgrove, in the passage cited above, that make it important to
retain the term, to abide in the duplicity of using it at all. As
should be clear from the preceding discussions, I reject a notion
of landscape as inhering solely in the form of mental representa-
tion and cognition. By 'landscape' I want instead to refer to the
physical and visual form of the earth as an environment and as a
setting in which locales occur and in dialectical relation to which
meanings are created, reproduced and transformed. The appear-
ance of a landscape is something that is substantial and capable of
being described in terms of relief, topography, the flows of con-
tours and rivers, coasts, rocks and soils, and so on. It is most usu-
ally clearly defined features, such as mountain peaks, ridges,
bogs and plains, that occur in geographical descriptions. The
locales in a landscape may be natural features such as bays or
inlets on a coastline or high points, or humanly created places
such as monuments or settlements. Humanly created locales, I
26                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


want to argue in this book, draw on qualities of landscape to cre-
ate part of their significance for those who use them, and the per-
ception of the landscape itself may be fundamentally affected by
the very situatedness of these locales. A fundamental part of
daily experience in non-industrial societies is the physical and
biological experience of landscape - earth, water, wood, stone,
high places and low places, the wind, rain, sun, stars and sky. The
rhythms of the land and the seasons correspond to and are
worked into the rhythms of life. A landscape has ontological
import because it is lived in and through, mediated, worked on
and altered, replete with cultural meaning and symbolism - and
not just something looked at or thought about, an object merely
for contemplation, depiction, representation and aestheticization.


Powers of Place

Precisely because locales and their landscapes are drawn on in
the day-to-day lives and encounters of individuals they possess
powers. The spirit of a place may be held to reside in a landscape.
Familiarity with the land, being able to read and decode its signs
allows individuals to know 'how to go on' at a practical level of
consciousness or one that may be discursively formulated.
People routinely draw on their stocks of knowledge of the land-
scape and the locales in which they act to give meaning, assur-
ance and significance to their lives. The place acts dialectically so
as to create the people who are of that place. These qualities of
locales and landscapes give rise to a feeling of belonging and
rootedness and a familiarity, which is not born just out of knowl-
edge, but of concern that provides ontological security. They give
rise to a power to act and a power to relate that is both liberating
and productive.
   The relationship of individuals and groups to locales and land-
scape also has important perspectival effects. The experience of
these places is unlikely to be equally shared and experienced by
all, and the understanding and use of them can be controlled and
exploited in systems of domination - a consideration strikingly
absent in virtually all phenomenological theory and one that con-
stitutes a major theoretical void. In small-scale societies the major
axes of spatial domination are usually organized along the axes
of age, gender, kin, and lineage. Knowledge and experience of
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                          27

particular locales and tracts of the landscape may be restricted
and hidden from particular individuals and groups. The powers
of spatial experience are clearly related to the manner in which
they are realized, to whom, when and how. Features of the set-
tings of social interaction may constitute 'disciplinary' spaces
through which knowledge is controlled or acquired in a highly
structured manner. The ability to control access to and manipu-
late particular settings for action is a fundamental feature of the
operation of power as domination.


Time, Memory and Movement

Human activities become inscribed within a landscape such that
every cliff, large tree, stream, swampy area becomes a familiar
place. Daily passages through the landscape become biographic
encounters for individuals, recalling traces of past activities and
previous events and the reading of signs - a split log here, a
marker stone there.
   All locales and landscapes are therefore embedded in the
social and individual times of memory. Their pasts as much as
their spaces are crucially constitutive of their presents. Neither
space nor time can be understood apart from social practices
which serve to bind them together. The human experience of
encountering a new place or knowing how to act or go on in a
familiar place is intimately bound up with previous experiences.
Places are always 'read' or understood in relation to others.
While places and movement between them are intimately related
to the formation of personal biographies, places themselves may
be said to acquire a history, sedimented layers of meaning by
virtue of the actions and events that take place in them. Personal
biographies, social identities and a biography of place are inti-
mately connected. Memories of previous moves in a landscape
are as essential to understanding as they are in playing a game of
chess. Remembrance is a process solidified from things and spa-
tial encounters. Movement in the world always involves a loss of
place, but the gaining of a fragment of time. It sets up a series of
expectations for the paths of the future. Memories continually
provide modifications to a sense of place which can never be
exactly the same place twice, although there may be ideological
attempts to provide 'stability' or perceptual and cognitive fixity
28                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


to a place, to reproduce sets of dominant meanings, understand-
ings, representations and images.
    There is an art of moving in the landscape, a right way (social-
ly constrained) to move around in it and approach places and
monuments. Part of the sense of place is the action of approach-
ing it from the 'right' (socially prescribed) direction. To mention
just one example here, the Gabbra camel herders of the
Kenyan-Ethiopian borderlands undertake ritual pilgrimages and
perform periodic rituals at holy mountain sites surrounded by
plains. These jila journeys are a return to the origin sites of indi-
vidual Gabbra lineages. The journeys establish spatial linkages
between different mountains or mountain peaks and given lin-
eages. Through the journey the lineage becomes 'mapped' in the
terrain. The shortest route to a ritual mountain from any point on
the plain is not taken but rather a prescribed walk in which it can
be approached and seen from the propitious direction (Schlee
1992).
    A walk is always a combination of places and times- seasonal
and social times. De Certeau (1984: Part III) has described an art
of walking which is simultaneously an art of thinking and an art
of practice or operating in the world. Movement through space
constructs 'spatial stories', forms of narrative understanding.
This involves a continuous presencing of previous experiences in
present contexts. Spatial knowledge requires the coupling of an
accumulated time of memory to overcome an initially hostile and
 alienating encounter with a new place. Flashes of memory, so to
 speak, illuminate the occasion.
    Pedestrian 'speech acts' may be likened to the speech acts of
 language. Walking is a process of appropriation of the topo-
 graphical system, as speaking is an appropriation of language. It
 is a spatial acting out of place, as the speech act is an acoustic
 acting out of language. Walking, like language use, implies rela-
 tionality in terms of an overall system of differences. It is a move-
 ment with reference to a differentiated series of locales, just as
 language is constituted as a system of differences between signs -
 'dog' is dog because it is not cat, and so on (de Certeau 1984: 98).
     A spatial order of walking can be characterized in terms of an
 order of possibilities - various ways in which an actor can move,
 and a series of restrictions, for example walls or other boundaries
 inhibiting passage. A walker actualizes only some of the possibil-
 ities, which may be relatively open or closed in terms of the over-
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                                 29


all 'grammatical' system. These possibilities remain only as
potentialities in so far as they only exist in the act of their realiza-
tion through movement in the world. Through movement parts
of the system - places or paths - are ignored, condemned to iner-
tia, while others are activated through use or presence. De
Certeau goes further than this to refer to a 'rhetoric' and 'tropes'
of walking, which can be likened to turns of phrase. An art of
'turning phrases' provides an analogy for an individual's follow-
ing or diverging from paths; both of them constituting ways of
being, thinking and operating in the world. Synecdoche is an art
of speaking in which a part stands for a whole (sail for ship, tree
for forest, monument for landscape). In walking a street may sub-
stitute for a community, a path for a network of paths. The part is
expanded into something more, a totality. Asyndeton, an art of
speaking involving the suppression of linking words such as con-
junctions between or within sentences, finds a spatial expression
in the cutting out of places. Synecdoche then creates spatial den-
sities; asyndeton undermines or cuts through continuities.

   A space treated in this way and shaped by practices is transformed
   into enlarged singularities and separate islands. Through these
   swellings, shrinkages, and fragmentations, that is through these
   rhetorical operations a spatial phrasing of an analogical (composed of
   juxtaposed citations) and elliptical (made of gaps, lapses and allu-
   sions) type is created. For the technological system of a coherent and
   totalizing space that is 'linked' and simultaneous, the figures of
   pedestrian rhetoric substitute trajectories ... [which are a] stylistic
   metamorphosis of space (de Certeau 1984:101-2).

   The important aspect of this argument is its revelation of an art
of walking as simultaneously an art of consciousness, habit and
practice, that is both constrained by place and landscape and con-
stitutive of them. Walking is the medium and outcome of a spa-
tial practice, a mode of existence in the world. The analogy can be
taken further in the consideration of paths.


Paths, Inscriptions, Temporality

If writing solidifies or objectifies speech into a material medium,
a text, which can be read and interpreted, an analogy can be
drawn between a pedestrian speech act and its inscription or
30                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


writing on the ground in the form of the path or track. Both are
sedimented traces of activity, and both provide ways to be fol-
lowed. A strong path is inscribed through a forest or across a tract
of heathland through a multitude of pedestrian speech acts that
keep it open; a strong text is also one that is kept open, read many
times. Just as the writing of a text is dependent on previous texts
(it has the characteristic of intertextuality), the creation or mainte-
nance of a path is dependent on a previous networking of move-
ments in particular, and reiterated directions through a
landscape; it works in relation to a previous set of precedents.
    The metaphor of the path is a common one in many small-
scale societies, and refers beyond itself to patterns of activity and
social organization. A path may be a way of doing something as
method, technique, pattern or strategy. In Oceania and Indonesia
fishing techniques, oratorical skills, patterns of exchange and
strategies of warfare are also termed 'paths'. Paths are also fun-
damentally to do with establishing and maintaining social link-
ages and relations between individuals, groups and political
units. Social paths and the paths followed through the forest may
become overgrown through lack of use in any particular (physi-
cal or social) direction.
    Parmentier (1987: 109-11) notes three general features of the
 semantic fields of paths on the island of Belau derived from
reflections on movements made along them. First, points linked
by a clear path have achieved a degree of structural homology
 and hence positive cultural identity. The points linked by paths
 share sets of common elements - sacred stones, trees, artefact
 depositions, names and titles referred to in myths and stories and
 linked to the activities of ancestors who stopped on the journey
 which created the path. Second, linked places on paths can be
 understood in terms of sequential precedence, a hierarchy of
 ancestral origin points from which paths radiate to others.
 Priority in time is linked to the ceremonial precedence and power
 of places linked by paths. Third, paths structure experiences of
 the places they link, they help to establish a sense of linear order.
 A path brings forth possibilities for repeated actions within pre-
 scribed confines. Only a high-ranking or wealthy person is likely
 to be daring enough to invent a path or plant a relationship not
 established before. Such action is most usually the domain of the
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                            31

gods or heroic ancestors. Expert knowledge of ancient paths is
part of the responsibility of chiefs who can harness great power
by narrating stories recounting previous patterns of ancestral
movements (ibid.: 114-15).
   A journey along a path can be claimed to be a paradigmatic
cultural act, since it is following in the steps inscribed by others
whose steps have worn a conduit for movement which becomes
the correct or 'best way to go'. Spatiotemporal linkages thus
established become obvious templates for future movements and
the maintenance of relationships. Linked places along the journey
may be read in terms of temporal relationships of precedence and
power. There is usually a good reason for following in a particu-
lar direction linking places in a serial trajectory, and the more
people who have shared in the purpose of the path the more
important it becomes. Paths form an essential medium for the
routing of social relations, connecting up spatial impressions
with temporally inscribed memories.


Spatial Stories, Landscape and the Arts of Narrative

In movement on a path through the landscape something is con-
stantly slipping away and something is constantly gained in a
relational tactile world of impressions, signs, sights, smells and
physical sensations. To understand a landscape truly it must be
felt, but to convey some of this feeling to others it has to be talked
about, recounted, or written and depicted. In the process of
movement a landscape unfolds or unravels before an observer.
Beyond one chain of hills another is revealed; the view from a
locale makes sense of its positioning. The importance and signifi-
cance of a place can only be appreciated as part of movement
from and to it in relation to others, and the act of moving may be
as important as that of arriving. The path may be a symbol not
only of interconnectedness and social relations but of movement
through life. If places are read and experienced in relation to
others and through serial movement along the axes of paths it
follows that an art of understanding of place, movement and
landscape must fundamentally be a narrative understanding
involving a presencing of previous experiences in present
contexts. Spatial and textual stories are embedded in one another.
32                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


   Narrative structure and emplotment can easily be claimed to
have ontological significance for human existence, to be as uni-
versal as language itself. It is precisely because narrative is seem-
ingly so 'natural' a part of human existence that it is both an
important resource for analysis and understanding and some-
thing whose non-critical use as merely description is something to
be wary of. A critical understanding of spatial narrative requires
that we investigate precisely why we prefer some plots or config-
urations of things rather than others. In other words attention
must be played to the manner in which the story is creatively
orchestrated, how it guides, and what it passes through.
   Narrative is a means of understanding and describing the
world in relation to agency. It is a means of linking locales, land-
scapes, actions, events and experiences together providing a syn-
thesis of heterogeneous phenomena. In its simplest form it
involves a story and a story-teller. In its mimetic or phenomeno-
logical form narrative seeks to capture action not just through
description but as a form of re-description. Events are given
meaning through their configuration into a whole requiring the
emplotment of action. A narrative must of necessity always be
written from a certain point of view. In relation to the past and
written from the standpoint of the present, narrative structures
play a similar role to metaphor - they describe the world in fresh
ways, bringing new meanings and new senses, and the produc-
tivity is, in principle, endless. Ricoeur (1983) rightly emphasizes
the poetic qualities of narratives in producing configurations of
events and objects that go far beyond a simple matter of succes-
sion, i.e. this occurs after or because of that.
    De Certeau (1984) points out that every story not only involves
some kind of temporal movement, but is also a spatial practice.
Stories organize walks, making a journey as the feet perform it,
organizing places by means of the displacements that are
described. They are part of a human labour that transforms an
abstract homogeneous space into place - 'you go round the cor-
ner, turn left and you'll see...'. In other words the story is a dis-
 cursive articulation of a spatializing practice, a bodily itinerary
and routine. Spatial stories are about the operations and practices
 which constitute places and locales. The map, by contrast,
 involves a stripping away of these things: 'it alone remains on the
 Stage. The tour describers have dissappeared´ (de Certeau 184
Space, Place, Landscape and Perception                          33

121). If stories are linked with regularly repeated spatial prac-
tices they become mutually supportive, and when a story
becomes sedimented into the landscape, the story and the place
dialectically help to construct and reproduce each other. Places
help to recall stories that are associated with them, and places
only exist (as named locales) by virtue of their emplotment in a
narrative. Places, like persons, have biographies inasmuch as
they are formed, used and transformed in relation to practice. It
can be argued that stories acquire part of their mythic value and
historical relevance if they are rooted in the concrete details of
locales in the landscape, acquiring material reference points that
can be visited, seen and touched.
    If naming is an act of construction of landscape, constituting
an origin point for it, then narratives introduce temporality, mak-
ing locales markers of individual and group experiences. Basso
(1984), in an excellent paper, demonstrates how individual
Apaches experience oral narratives: 'the land is always stalking
people. The land makes people live right' (Annie Peaches, cited
in Basso 1984: 21). Narratives establish bonds between people
and features of the landscape such as mountains, creating moral
guidance for activity. Both land and language are equally sym-
bolic resources drawn on to foster correct social behaviour and
values. In narratives geographical features of the landscape act as
mnemonic pegs on which moral teachings hang. The landscape is
full of named locations that act so as to fuse time and space.
Through the use of historical tales events are located at named
points, and the tales themselves are about correct codes of moral
conduct. 'Shooting someone with a story' is relating a historical
tale about misconduct that reflects back on their misdemeanours,
a tale that becomes anchored in space through specifying a
named geographical location where the event took place. Stories
are intimately connected with physical places on the land, fused
with geological elements: 'you cannot live in that land without
 asking or looking at or noticing a boulder or rock. And there's
 always a story' (Silko 1981: 69, cited in Basso 1984). Features of
 the landscape become deeply symbolic of cultural lifeworlds,
 omnipresent moral forces rather than mere physical presences
 (Basso 1984: 46). Through narratives conceptions of the land
 affect the way in which the Apache think of themselves and vice
 versa.
34                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Conclusion

A landscape is a series of named locales, a set of relational places
linked by paths, movements and narratives. It is a 'natural'
topography perspectivally linked to the existential Being of the
body in societal space. It is a cultural code for living, an anony-
mous 'text' to be read and interpreted, a writing pad for inscrip-
tion, a scape of and for human praxis, a mode of dwelling and a
mode of experiencing. It is invested with powers, capable of
being organized and choreographed in relation to sectional inter-
ests, and is always sedimented with human significances. It is
story and telling, temporality and remembrance. Landscape is a
signifying system through which the social is reproduced and
transformed, explored and structured - process organized.
Landscape, above all, represents a means of conceptual ordering
that stresses relations. The concept emphasizes a conventional
means of doing so, the stress is on similarity to control the under-
mining nature of difference, of multivocal code, found in the con-
cepts of place or locale. A concept of place privileges difference
and singularity; a concept of landscape is more holistic, acting so
as to encompass rather than exclude. It is to a discussion of vari-
ous ways in which landscapes may be organized that the next
chapter turns.
Chapter 2
The Social Construction of Landscape
in Small-Scale Societies: Structures of
Meaning, Structures of Power

Introduction

In this chapter I want to discuss relationships established
between people and the landscape in small-scale 'traditional'
societies, reviewing some of the discussions in the ethnographic
literature relating to hunter-fisher-gatherers and subsistence cul-
tivators. The aim is to underline the affective, emotional and sym-
bolic significance of the landscape and highlight some of the
similarities and differences in the relationship between people
and the land, and the manner in which it is culturally construct-
ed, invested with powers and significances, and appropriated in
widely varying 'natural' environments and social settings.
    A caveat is in order: in general terms the anthropological liter-
ature, in contrast with that of human geography, is not exactly
replete with discussions of the significance of landscape. It is rare
to even find an entry in an index referring to 'landscape', or use
of the term in a book, article or chapter title. Landscape has
remained a neglected area of study, and detailed accounts are
few and far between. Two books, currently in press as I write, are
exceptions which prove the rule (Bender 1993; Hirsch and
O'Hanlon, in press). One, I think erroneous, conclusion that
might be drawn from this is that the landscape simply does not
matter, or the category is irrelevant to understanding the manner
in which populations in small-scale societies interact with, under-
stand and relate to their physical surroundings.
    However, a great number of texts do make mention of the" sig-
nificance of the land. For example, Barth in his introduction to a
monograph on the Baktaman of Papua New Guinea notes that
'Baktaman are highly oriented towards space in ordering their

                                                                  35
36                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


experience. The vocabulary and grammar of their language impel
a speaker constantly to specify relative location (distance, direc-
tion, and above/below on a slope) of observer and actor in
describing events; and they have a variety of means to describe
landscape features and shapes. There is also a wealth of place
names of differing order by which to designate area and specific
location. Places also serve to recall events in the past - stories and
anecdotes that I was unable to elicit in conversation in the men's
house would suddenly surface in the forest with the opening 'this
is the spot where ...' (Barth 1975: 18). Yet despite the evident sig-
nificance of the land for the Baktaman this remains unelaborated
in Barth's otherwise excellent account. Similarly, although Hugh-
Jones (1979) devotes a great deal of attention to discussing the
paramount symbolic, cosmological and social significance of the
river for the Pira-parana of North-west Amazonia, it remains
uncontextualized in terms of a wider concept of the landscape, its
topographic and physiographic features, cultural and symbolic
significances through and by means of which these peoples live
out their lives.
    Turnbull (1961, 1965, 1983), discussing the Mbuti hunter-
fisher-gatherers of the Ituri rain forest, Zaire, emphasizes the
generalized significance of the forest as provider, spiritual entity
and mystical force. He contrasts the Mbuti attitude to the forest
with that of the Bantu farmers, who fear and loathe it, people it
with evil forces and constantly struggle to maintain their hard-
won clearings against its encroachment. To the Mbuti the forest is
a vital life-engendering and empowering force, to the Bantu a
symbol of everything they are struggling against. For the Mbuti
the land is a subject of labour, for the Bantu an object of labour.
The Mbuti are constantly moving about and changing their
encampments within the space of the forest. They view their
world from the perspective of following and creating tracks and
paths through the forest. The Bantu, on the other hand, have a
 fixed relationship to their environment, viewed from the vantage
 point of the village clearing. The ordered life of the village is sur-
 rounded by the chaotic, malevolent and unseen world of the for-
 est into which they are loath to venture. Yet this is about as far as
 Turnbull's fascinating account goes on the subject of the land-
 scape, and it would be unwise to generalize from it, viz: all
 hunter-gatherers tend to view the land from a decentred
 perspective in which many places within it are of equal rele-
 vance, while farmers have a more centred or concentric frame of
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         37

reference, focused on the village looking out. These are more
likely to represent two extremes along a continuum of variation
of cultural responses.
    While the significance of the landscape, glossed by the use of
terms such as 'space' or 'environment' in the anthropological lit-
erature, receives widespread acknowledgement as constituting a
fundamental part of existential existence among both hunters
and farmers, it is rarely foregrounded in any discussion (with
some exceptions, see below). Why this apparent lacuna? As indi-
cated in Chapter 1, the answer would seem to be that 'landscape'
is an unstable category, sitting uneasily between opposed ecolog-
ical or 'naturalistic' and ideological or 'culturological' approaches
to human society in the literature. In my view this is precisely the
contemporary interest and power of employing such a category
today. It may provocatively be used to draw together approaches
that tend to be held apart in the literature or are conceptualized
as occupying radically different domains of human action and
experience which are only tangentially related. Rather than
attempting any extensive discussion of the literature as a whole
in so far as it explicitly or otherwise addresses the issue of land-
scape, its physical forms, perception and meanings, an enormous
and possibly not very illuminating task, I have decided to con-
centrate in this chapter on a number of specific examples drawn
from widely separated geographical locations.
    It would be difficult to find two more contrasting areas in
terms of topography, climate and resource availability than
Australia and Alaska and subarctic North America; but despite
these differences the existential relationship between the
Koyukon, the Mistassini Cree and the Aborigines and the land-
 scape is remarkably similar in some respects, a point whose sig-
nificance I attempt to emphasize in the discussion below of the
 relationship between hunter-fisher-gatherer communities and
 the land. In discussing subsistence cultivators my examples are
 drawn from the Tewa of New Mexico and a number of
 Melanesian societies.


Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers and Landscape

Landscapes of the Dreamtime
It is impossible to consider the Australian Aborigines adequately
without considering landscape, so strong is their relationship
38                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


with it. As Morphy points out (1993: 206) this appears to be one of
those cases in which indigenous perceptions, as opposed to theo-
retical preoccupations, have actively and consistently determined
rather than constrained the nature of anthropological representa-
tions of society. The Aboriginal landscape is one replete with a
highly elaborate totemic geography linking together place and
people. Formed in the Dreamtime, the landscape provides an
ancestral map for human activity. It is sedimented in history and
sentiment. The landscape is not something 'natural' and opposed
to people, but totally socialized. It is a symbolic form, a series of
signs relating to the ancestral past on which people draw in day-
to-day experience and through which they live. According to
Stanner (1965: 215), the grounding basis of Aboriginal mythology
and enduring proof of its correctness was the evidence of design
in the world in the sense of pattern, shape, form and structure,
which was itself proof of intent. This design was manifest in the
landscape itself, its topographic features and physiographic pat-
terns, flora and fauna, constituting a vast sign system whose sig-
nificance was to be read and interpreted. In the process
populations emotionally bound themselves to the land and the
design inherent in its ordering.
    Each group of Aborigines originally moved around a particu-
lar area of territory in a traditional pattern, exploiting the fauna
and flora of their environments. A striking feature of Aboriginal
life that cannot be over-emphasized is the intense personal bond
between groups and their home territories. Attachment to and
knowledge of a particular stretch of land was a fundamental part
of existence. The desert, described by Strehlow (1965), Berndt
 (1972) and others, is by no means uniformly arid, and includes
low undulating ridges, sand-dunes covered by grass and scrub,
claypans and shallow creek beds, stretches of dry sand-hills,
 expanses of pebbles and rocky outcrops. During wet seasons the
whole area abounds in edible plants, roots and game. In protract-
 ed dry seasons populations are forced to aggregate close to per-
 manent water sources. A great deal of traditional Aboriginal life
 was focused on the theme of water. Berndt notes that the Balgo
 population of the southern Kimberleys of Western Australia dis-
 tinguish eight physiographic features which are water-produc-
 ing, including soaks, temporary and virtually permanent creeks,
 swamps and rockholes (Berndt 1972: 179). People identify specif-
 ic tracts of land as their 'country' not just in terms of an area with
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          39

demarcated boundaries, but much more intimately in terms of
specific locales, such as waterholes, sand ridges, claypans and
camping grounds. Specific sites are claimed to belong to individ-
ual social units, and the total of these constitutes the territory of a
group. Territories are made up of significant sites, rather than
being conceived in a more abstract spatialized manner as rela-
tively well-defined areas of land with boundaries containing sites.
As Ingold puts it: 'land does not contain sites; rather the sites con-
tain the land' (Ingold 1986:150). People do not, therefore, restrict
themselves to delimited territorial areas, but may wander over
areas claimed in the same way by other groups. Most usually
groups do not range beyond 300 km. from their traditional terri-
torial area.
   According to Dixon (1976) tribal boundaries in Australia are of
two basic kinds. Over large tracts of Australia they are centred on
waterlines, separated by tracts of drier relatively infertile country
along which imprecisely defined boundaries occur. In less arid
country they may more typically lie along river courses them-
selves. In a discussion of Yolngu social boundaries Williams
(1982) comments that they are always marked by natural fea-
tures, many of which may be far from obvious to an outsider. The
more obvious boundaries are related to prominent land forms
such as hills, mountains, cliffs, streams, rivers and watersheds.
Other boundaries may be marked by changes in gradient on a
slope or changes in vegetation or soil or rock types (Williams
1982:141-3). Combinations embracing different types of physical
characteristics may be employed. A boundary may be located, for
example, just below the crest of a hill, where a slight change in
gradient occurs in association with a change in soil type or vege-
tation. In general terms a bounded area of land bears the name of
a dominant and striking physiographic feature which is the pri-
mary referent point, and may be the most important site, such as
a large pool of water in a billabong (intermittent stream).
Boundaries of coastal land defined by physical features such as
clusters of rocks jutting out into the sea or even changes in the
colours of offshore waters are used to extend land boundaries
outward across the sea to the horizon (ibid.: 144-5).
   Boundaries, as with virtually everything else in the Aboriginal
system of knowledge, are related to mythologies. Strehlow (1965)
shows how the boundaries of each njinana (local section group) of
the Aranda in the Western desert were demarcated by episodes
40                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


in myths which relate the points at which ancestors travelling
across the landscape reached boundary points. Boundary points
were known as 'barriers', and beyond them myths could not be
told, songs sung nor a series of ceremonies be performed by
members of a section area who shared these traditions with
neighbours (Strehlow 1965:138).
    The whole landscape is criss-crossed by a multitude of tracks
following the main watercourses and extending in a variety of
directions from one site to the next, incorporating all topographi-
cal features that are symbolically and economically significant.
Mythical beings created these tracks, and present-day popula-
tions move along them while hunting and gathering. Topographic
features of the landscape act not only as boundary-marking
devices of varying types and orientation points on tracks, but
play a central role as a sign system and are crucial in the forma-
tion of Aboriginal concepts of creation, spiritual power and
world order (Berndt 1972,1974,1976; Morphy 1991, Morphy n.d.;
Munn 1970,1986; Stanner 1966). The landscape both constitutes a
referent for much of the symbolism and acts as a sign system for
mythological events. It simultaneously passes on and encodes
information about the ancestral past and is integral to the mes-
sage. The landscape is the fundamental reference system in
which individual consciousness of the world and social identities
are anchored. Emotional ties with the land are obviously related
to economic dependencies, the exigencies of gathering and hunt-
ing; but just as significantly to mythic beings, who create and sus-
tain the fertility of the land and stimulate the natural increase of
species. For the Aborigines the earth came into being as a result of
the actions of the ancestors. These ancestors continue to exist in
spirit form, and in the era of creation they travelled the earth, and
in their doings created the topographical features. The move-
ments of the ancestral snake created the meanderings of the
watercourses, the blood of the ancestors formed red ochre and so
on. Objects used by the ancestors, such as baskets or digging
sticks, may be left behind when they went into the earth.
Ancestors may therefore leave behind a wide variety of indica-
tions of their presence, and are not uniquely related to any one
type of transformation or metamorphosis. The landscape was one
in which the ancestors hunted and gathered, and so every aspect
of it has generalized ancestral connotations. It contains the bodies
 of the ancestors inside it and is also the metamorphosed forms of
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          41

the ancestors, the tracks they made and the imprint of their bod-
ies. For example, where an ancestor sat down a waterhole may be
created. The ancestors both created the world and interacted with
it. They gave birth to human beings and their correct form of
social organization and religious practices. Ancestors may be
wholly human or part human and part non-human, male or
female. Their number is indefinite. The initial naming of ancestral
sites is attributed to the ancestors, like their physical creation, and
the names of the sites may be thought of as ancestors' proper
names. 'Ancestral naming and transformation create a determi-
nate fixed phenomenal reality grounded in the specificity of form
and verbal sign (proper names)' (Mum 1970: 143).
    The tracks of the ancestors cross the territories where the
Aborigines live, and each patrilodge controls a number of tracks
and the ancestors associated with them. Clans can be distin-
guished on the basis of the particular nexus of dreaming tracks
they control. Munn notes that 'narratives bind events to an objec-
tive geographical space through the listing of named places. This
spatial localization yields the basic symbolism of transgenera-
tional continuity, since the sense of continuity over the genera-
tions is "carried" in the experience of the country as a network of
objectively identifiable places, the prime "givens" of the external
environment' (Munn 1986: 214-15). The landscape is thus filled
with meaning and memories, redolent with the actions of the
past. The ancestral beings fixed in the land itself, in the trees,
hills, lakes, sand-dunes and watercourses, become timeless refer-
ent points for the living, according to Morphy (n.d.), outside the
politics of daily life. Through day-to-day life activities individu-
als learn of this ordered world of ancestral activity, which
becomes part and parcel of their experience of place.
    Berndt has described in detail the complexity of the dreaming
tracks or 'water-lines' and their relationship to the topography.
Three major tracks in a small slice of Balgo territory in the
Western desert contained no less than 73 different named loca-
 tions (Fig. 2.1). These locales are 'big names', each of which may
be associated with a number of 'smaller names' that are no less
 significant (Fig. 2.2). At any place part of the essence of the
 mythic being referred to is materially manifested in one way or
 another. On Elcho island in north-eastern Arnhem land Berndt
 records 164 named places with ancestral associations, noting that
 this is only a partial list. Here, where the main economic resource
42                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 2.1. Dreamtime tracks, Balgo territory, Western Australia. Three
major tracks are shown. Numbered topographic locales are all 'big
name' places with a variety of mythological and ancestral associations,
e.g. 6: Gilanggilang lake where the great Rainbow serpent emerged; 21:
Dedi rockhole associated with Wilbin, wild cat.
                                           Source: Berndt 1972, Fig. 5.2.
                      By kind permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston.




Figure 2.2. 'Small names' within the big name locality Luwana Spring or
Lake Lucas (Fig. 2.1 No. 54). Each of these 12 names relates to a specific
topographic feature, e.g. site 1 is a soak and rockhole associated with
Wadi Bududjuru, a small kangaroo rat who sits within a hole at this
place and is represented by a stone into which he turned.
                                            Source: Berndt 1972: Fig. 5.3.
                      By kind permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         43

was fish, the concentration of named locales is coastal, with rela-
tively few inland sites (Berndt 1976:147-55). Local people belong
to a territory and to sites within it by means of patrilineal descent,
and use the word djaga in relation to it, meaning 'looking after' or
'cherishing', the same word used by parents in relation to their
children (Berndt 1976: 156). Thus all persons are linked in an
enduring way with a series of locales, and can never of their own
accord sever this association. Temporarily unoccupied tracts of
territory will always have someone 'looking after' the named sites
(Berndt 1972: 193; 1976: 160). This is not a matter of ownership,
but rather that living populations act as custodians. The sites are
visible and tangible expressions of segments of myth told in sto-
ries and in song. These myths not only concern the activities of
the ancestors, but also encode information about locales vital to
group survival locating in space sources of water and other char-
acteristics of the environment relevant to its economic exploita-
tion. Myths 'represent in toto the experience and heritage of the
people concerned, a basis for social as well as economic living'
(Berndt 1972:188).
    Perhaps the most striking example of topography embodying
living mythology is Ayers Rock in the middle of Australia, an
enormous dome-shaped rock monolith with a flattened top rising
almost vertically from an extensive desert plain (Fig. 2.3). Ten dif-
ferent totemic mythical beings created the topography of the
rock. Most of the southern face was created by a battle between
liru (poisonous snakes) and kunia (carpet snakes). Minor portions
were also created by linga (sand lizards) and metalungana (sleepy-
lizards). The activities of the mala (hare-wallabies) created most
of the northern face, with other ancestors creating highly specific
parts of the topography. Other ancestors created the western face,
 such as the marsupial mole, who was responsible for creating pot
 holes and caves (Mountford 1965) (Fig. 2.4 ). The mythic associa-
 tions of the rock are of two basic types. The first relate to ances-
 tors who rested and performed activities there and then passed
 on for hundreds of kilometres along their dreaming tracks. The
 second refer to ancestors who originated at the rock and stayed
 there. There is virtually no place on the surface of the rock,
 whether it be a striated surface, boulder, declivity, rockhole or
 cave that is not a named ancestral locality (Fig. 2.5). Ayers rock
 was not only a total mythological fact for the surrounding popu-
 lations, a perceptual field encoding knowledge of the world, but
44   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies   45
46   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         47

a focus for linking present populations to the past ancestral
forces, involving rock engraving, painting and initiation rites.
Both the external surfaces of the rock were decorated at specific
points with ancestral associations, and twelve caves on the north-
ern and southern sides contain paintings depicting dreamtime
events (Mountford 1965:157 ff.).
   Morphy (1991, n.d.) describes the Yolngu of North-east
Arnhem Land as having a particularly rich vocabulary for topo-
graphic and environmental description which serves to segregate
environmental zones which are linked both to seasonal resource
exploitation and the mythological system. There is a close corre-
spondence between topographical zone and ancestral track, and
the distribution of ancestral beings is related to that of natural
species. Major ritual sites correspond closely to paths of move-
ment. The dreamtime tracks, as elsewhere, tend to follow the
watercourses, and the greatest density of mythological activities
is generally associated with major camp sites. The landscape is
thus represented in myth and represents the myth. It is a
mnemonic for past generations and a means of establishing conti-
nuity with the past. Time becomes collapsed into space, in that
the time it took ancestral beings to take their journeys is never a
part of the myth. Time becomes a sequence of named places with-
out the 'befores' and 'afters'. Disrepectful behaviour towards the
land and its species can cause illness or death.
   Layton (n.d.) discusses the intense personal and biographical
relationship between people, the land and ancestral beings in
central Australia. While places are intimately related to ancestral
activity, so are the living. All individuals are first identified with
one of the Tjukurpa beings at birth according to where the puli
(stub of their umbilical cord) fell off, and their personalities are
expected to follow those of the ancestors of which they are an
embodied part. In this manner people are identified with places,
a connection which cannot be severed. Persons 'hold' land by
means of this intimate personal association and by continuing to
live in and care for it. Proof of this 'holding of the land' is bound
up with detailed knowledge of and interpretation of physio-
graphic features linked to ancestral activities. Failure to protect
 songs, ceremonies and sacred objects is equivalent to giving the
land away. In other words the ancestral past has to be continual-
ly brought into and related to activity in the present. Anyone who
regularly forages in a region needs to be intimately acquainted
48                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


with ancestral lore, ceremony, song and sacred objects, which
become the grounding basis for all life movements. People can-
not 'hold' a country as children, but only when they have become
'big'. Those who own an estate have pre-eminent rights to it by
(i) controlling access to it through controlling knowledge of
ancestral lore associated with the terrain; (ii) demanding some-
thing from people from another country who temporarily come to
hunt there; (iii) punishing trespassers on sacred sites (Layton
n.d.). At death the living must relinquish their claims to a country,
and their descendants must take care of it, perform the correct
ceremonies and guard the ancestral relics. Alienation of any part
of the country from its rightful owners and their heirs is a viola-
tion of the entire moral order, a desecration (Munn 1970:150).
    Physiographic features of the landscape play a crucial role in
ritual practices. Within any clan territory localized sacred sites
occur to which unauthorized access is forbidden. Only those who
know the land can call and prepare ceremonies. Sacred sites
always occur near to water, and while access to the water itself is
not physically defended the sites are. Senior men only may visit
these sites, take care of them, and perform rituals. Rock art locales
form one such category of sites. Layton (n.d.) notes that depic-
tions of the landscape in Australian Aboriginal art are notable for
the bird's-eye view they adopt, a decentred perspective in which
numerous points have equal value. Sacred sites and ancestral
tracks linking them become laid out as on a map, but these 'maps'
have much more in common with the sensuous places of
medieval 'cartography' than they do with a Euclidean geometric
space of modern cartographic representation.
    Painting rocks was an important part of a process by which
populations could tap into ancestral powers at specific topo-
graphical locations. Sites of particular importance in representa-
tions of landscape frequently refer to the places where the
ancestors came out of and (having grown tired) went back into
the land, between these two events creating their dreaming tracks
and localized features of the topography. Munn (1973, 1986)
regards the processes of 'coming out' and 'going into' the land
 (an inside/outside distinction) as a fundamental principle of
Walbiri cosmology that is used to explain and structure the spa-
 tiotemporal ordering of human existence. Each of the Aranda sec-
 tion areas contained at least one important ceremonial centre at
 which ancestors are believed to have emerged from the ground to
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies           49


populate the surrounding countryside. All the main mythologi-
cal characters associated with emergence from these sacred sites
were revealed through dramatic performances re-enacting ances-
tral doings, and each site had its own ceremonial cycle involving
the revelation of sacred objects, songs, rites, poetry, dance and
drama (Strehlow 1965: 140). The ancestral beings had the power
of bringing into existence the plants and animals of their totem
when induced to 'emerge' by the rites. Having created the land
their continuous presence ensured its regeneration.
   In the art of the Walbiri the circle is the locus out of which the
Dreaming emerges and finally returns. The circle and the line
provide a kind of spatial and conceptual model linking the
dreamtime with the present. The circle (with female sexual con-
notations) is the present-day country, with the dreamtime ances-
tors at the centre and hidden inside it. The line conjoined to it
(with male sexual connotations) is the path or track moving
beyond the boundaries of place into the landscape beyond, repre-
senting a constant association between past and present (Fig. 2.6).
In more general terms an inside/outside distinction is crucial in
understanding Walbiri concepts of and relationships to land. The




Figure 2.6. Walbiri circle-line design as cosmic model.
Source: Munn 1973: Fig. 8. By kind permission of Oxford University Press
50                                            A Phenomenology of Landscape




South




North




Feature Block
     A    Beach, Female, Nyapililngu, Sandhills, Burrkun.
     B    Lake, Marrawili.
     C    Bush, Male, Guwak, Sandbank, Burrkun.

Meanings Associated with Loci in the Manggalili Template.
     1. North end of lake, gullies in the sandhills, burrkun.
     2. Nyapililngu, burrkun complex.
     3. Nyapililngu, burrkun complex.
     4. Marrawili tree, cloud,guwak.
     5. Wild plum tree grove, burrkun complex.
     6. Cashew tree grove, ngaarra ceremony ground,
        burrkun.
     7. Lake, emu, spears, menstrual blood.
     8. Dry lake bed, emus and spears.
Figure 2.7. Landscape and meanings in Yolngu art. Nyapililngu on the
sand dunes. Artist: Bokarra. Clan: Manggalili.
                                        Source: Morphy 1991: Fig. 10.9.
      By kind permission of the author and University of Chicago Press.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies        51




       Figure 2.7, cont.

dreamtime ancestors still exist inside the earth or under the
ground, they are 'covered over' and lie beneath the visible physi-
cal surfaces of the land. Art applied to the body or to the surfaces
of rocks may, in the context of ceremonies, act so as to 'pull out'
ancestral forces (Munn 1973: 198). In increase rites ancestral
forces have generative powers which serve to replenish the land.
For these rites to be fully effective they had to take place at the
original geographical sites (Strehlow 1970:132).
   This inside/outside distinction is a prominent theme in some
Aboriginal body art and in barkcloth paintings. Yolngu paintings
refer simultaneously to mythological events and topographic fea-
tures. They both record in visual form a narrative of dreamtime
events and present a 'map' of a particular area of land. The land-
scape created by ancestral actions provides the primary medium
for encoding mythological events by ordering them in space, and
52                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


boundaries and design elements in the paintings refer to this
landscape (Fig. 2.7); but, as Morphy points out, the ordering of
landscape representations in art and in mental representations
and understandings of it is a product of continual interpretations
and reinterpretations of place. The positions of places 'corre-
spond to the relative positions of places in the landscape ... but
the topographical plotting of positions would produce a very dif-
ferent shape' (Morphy 1991: 237). Landscape and art are both
models of and models for reality, i.e. they are both ordered by
something beyond themselves (the landscape as it actually exists)
and serve to order that external reality and make sense of it.
   One particular type of art, X-ray paintings, depict the internal
body organs and bones of ancestral beings at an 'outside' denota-
tive level of meaning. At another 'inside' level of meaning they
refer to spatial relationships between important topographic fea-
tures of clan lands. As Taylor puts it 'the metaphors of these
paintings express the way Kunwinjku (Aborigines of western
Arnhem Land) conceive of the spatial organization of sites in
their lands in terms of an abstract model of the divided yet organ-
ically related body parts of the ancestral being that created those
lands' (Taylor 1989: 381). There is an intimate connection
between body parts of the ancestral being in these paintings and
locales of significance in the landscape. This mode of experienc-
ing the world may even extend to the human body itself, through
painting designs on it and even in relation to features such as
birthmarks' being seen as equivalent to sacred sites within clan
lands. The body becomes a metaphor for the topographic organi-
zation of clan lands. The significance of landscape is thus
inscribed not only in day-to-day encounters with its topographic
and physiographic features but in portable and non-portable art
and in relation to the scars, marks, painting and surfaces of indi-
vidual human bodies. It would indeed be hard to find a more
encompassing sensibility of the relationship between biography,
identity and place than this. Since every person carries within
him- or herself a life force ultimately derived from ancestral
powers, living populations and ancestral forces are inseparably
 connected. People do not, for example, actively create designs in
artworks; but these designs are passed to them through dreams
and are derived from the ancestors. Among the Walbiri, women
 who sleep together may share the same yawalyu designs (Munn
 1986).
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          53

    Taçon (1991) has discussed the manner in which the land and
its ancestral significances may be actively appropriated through
technologies such as systems of stone-tool production and use.
The most significant tools, such as stone axes and spear points,
controlled and used by men, embodied ancestral powers. A large
number of these ancestors turned into stone at their final resting
point. The Rainbow Serpent, one of the most potent of the ances-
tors in western Arnhem Land, swallowed other ancestors and
then was forced to vomit their bones, forming rocky sandstone
and quartzite escarpments. Quarrying stone for axes is, therefore,
quarrying the bones of the ancestors. The axes are themselves
formed from ancestral bones - hence their potency. Quartz tools
are particularly potent, as brightness and iridescence are highly
valued. Objects and substances that shimmer and 'emit' light,
such as quartz, white pigment, fat and blood, are spiritually
charged with power (Morphy 1989; Taçon 1991). It is not surpris-
ing that quarries were dangerous places, and access to them and
their products was tightly controlled in many cases. The killing
power of a stone tool is significantly linked to its ancestral source,
and it is the power within it that saps the life out of the victim,
causing a searing, burning pain (Jones 1990: 27, cited in Taçon
 1991:203-4). Stone is considered to be a male substance, while the
earth and its products, such as pigments used for painting, are
gendered as female. Ceremonial objects could be empowered by
painting, which created a symbolic linkage between male and
female essences. By contrast, tools used for killing would be
dulled through decoration. It was 'necessary that their "male"
 qualities not be covered over so that they remain potent to pene-
 trate flesh and, in the process, to be "painted" with blood' (Taçon
 1991: 205). Stone and bone were both symbols of persistence, and
 hence it is not surprising that clefts and holes in rock escarpments
were frequently used for secondary burial, a placing of the bones
 of the dead back inside the bones of the ancestors.
    The landscape constitutes for the Aborigines a fundamental
 form of mediation, in which the experience of self is rooted in the
 objectified forms of ancestral transformations. Human subjectivi-
 ty is constituted in relation to the land. There is a constant linkage
 effected between subject and object, object and subject, which
 provides a sense of an enduring moral and social order. The land
 is both separated from the self and incorporated. The land is a
 collective resource constantly being drawn on in daily life experi-
54                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape


ences, a collective representation stabilizing the world through
the authority of precedence and other selves embodied within it.
The identities of individuals are constructed in and through the
material remains of ancestral transformations linking them to
previous generations and their contemporaries, a world in which
every prominent feature is associated with a mythological event.
Life-spans are locked into the experience of an ancestral past that
binds the universe in a limited topographical space. The narrative
of myth is a model of and for social action.

Forests of Eyes, Rivers of Identities
Tanner (1979), in a discussion of religious ideology in relation to
hunting practices among the Mistassini Cree Indians of Quebec
province, Canada, notes at the beginning of his account that
Mistassini is the name of a village and of a band of Indians. The
village is situated by a large lake, Lake Mistassini, meaning 'big
rock' and referring to a large rock along the western shore of the
lake, a name traditionally also used to refer to the Indians inhab-
iting the region (Tanner 1979: 6). They are thus immediately 'situ-
ated' in the landscape and with reference to the details of its
topography. Tanner notes that boundaries (notional rather than
fixed or absolute) between hunting territories are generally locat-
ed along high ground or large rivers, and their overall pattern is
influenced by travel routes, themselves strongly related to inter-
connected lake and river systems. Mistassini also refer to their
hunting grounds by saying 'my path' or 'my road' or 'my river'
(Speck 1932: 460), indicating the temporary social appropriation
of terrain within a path of movement which may vary from one
year to the next. Territory is intimately bound up with life-paths
and movements.
    Within any particular hunting territory a patchwork of differ-
ent habitat types exists, each of which favours a particular mix of
animal populations. The Cree make great use of their intimate
knowledge of the vegetation in planning hunting and trapping. A
complex system of classification exists for water bodies according
to the type of lake or river bottom, the nature of the banks and
shores, the form of the currents and types of vegetation (Tanner
1979: 45). Hunting and trapping require frequent residential
change in terms both of types of dwellings and of locales; yet in
Cree ideology the illusion is fostered that the place of residence is
always the same, and this is effected by a standardized internal
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          55

arrangement of domestic space. Whatever the type of dwelling -
log cabin, large dome tent or wooden-framed canvas-covered
tent - it is arranged internally in terms of a rigid division of space
related to gender, age and authority, and family units, so as to
appear to occupy the same space. Whatever the actual camp-site
the Cree, then, are always staying in the same place. Coupled
with this idea of stability despite movement there is a general
reluctance to use old camp-sites in the forest when the group is
hunting. A camp-site should be placed on ground that is clean
and unpolluted by previous occupation, a place that will not be
offensive to the spirits of game animals and other magical entities
that aid hunting. Abandoned camps should be cleaned of refuse,
and they become sacred places. A short time after the camp-site is
left the 'spirit' of the hunting group flies over the place, and if all
is as it should be future hunting success will follow. The door-
way, symbolically crucial transition point between the inside and
outside of the winter dwelling, should face both the rising sun
and a body of water. Consequently camps are almost always on
the western shores of lakes. The rising sun is positively valued,
and it is auspicious for the hunter to go out of the doorway facing
the rising sun.
    In many rites and myths the dominant conception of space is
framed in terms of a concentric model, with camp space at the
centre surrounded by topographical or physiographical space,
 the forests and lakes inhabited by animals, at the farthest reaches
of which and above and below are located spiritual entities
associated with natural forces. A distinction is thus drawn
between inside and outside, and the hunting journey, conceived
 as a process of going out, moving in a circle and returning, medi-
 ates between the two domains.
    Everything in the Mistassini world has a spirit - people,
 animals, rocks, clothes, moccasins, tents, doorways of tents and
 thus becomes throughly humanized. Spirits reside in anything
 that can be named, and in a manner akin to that among the
 Aborigines the landscape by this means becomes socialized and
 populated with spiritual entities and powers, frequently by
 associating or linking different ones together. For example,
 weather control is an important part of Cree ritual. Winds are
 conceived to blow from four different cardinal directions, and
 weather is primarily attributed to the actions of the winds and
 their spirits. There is also a strong set of beliefs about mountains,
56                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


considered to be the dwelling-places of spirits and places where
shamans go to practise magic (Tanner 1979: 98). One rite involves
a summer-born or winter-born person pointing at a particular
mountain in order to bring either warm weather or a snowstorm,
respectively.
   The Koyukon landscape of north-west interior Alaska, like
that of the Cree, is one filled with networks of paths, names and
associations. People know every feature of the landscape in
minute detail. The lakes, river bends, hills and creeks are named
and imbued with personal and cultural meaning. Nelson (1983)
points out that the intimacy of the relationship between people
and the land is such that it is difficult for a Westerner to either
believe or understand. People move in a world that constantly
watches - a forest of eyes: 'A person moving through nature -
however wild, remote, even desolate the place may be - is never
truly alone. The surroundings are aware, sensate, personified.
They feel. They can be offended' (Nelson 1983:14). The natural
and the supernatural or the mythological are inseparable, so that
perception of the natural environment extends from the empiri-
cal into the spiritual. Ideology forms a fundamental aspect of
day-to-day subsistence activities, and cannot be separated from
'economic' concerns. As with the Cree, all animals, some plants
and some inanimate objects such as rocks possess spirits.
   Mythologically the world and everything in it was created
during the 'Distant Time'. Stories explain the world's origin in a
time when animals and natural entities were human. In the
Distant Time the landscape acquired its present form. Humans
died and were transformed into the animals and plants encoun-
tered in the environment and features of the earth such as hills or
mountains (Nelson 1983: 16). Relatedness among animals is
revealed by Distant Time stories and by observation of specific
behavioural characteristics, for example the bones in the head of
the sucker fish resemble the objects it stole. A tendency to get
along means that animals are relatives. Certain landforms pos-
sess a special spiritual power that must be placated or shown def-
erence, and the entire earth's surface is filled with a generalized
power, sink taala, essential for shaman's medicine (ibid.: 35). A
nebulous but threatening spirit power is associated with many
places on the land, bodies of water and mountains. These are
places cursed by shamans or have acquired power in a time
beyond memory. The entire system of geographical orientation is
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies                57


intimately connected with an intricate web of waterways that
simultaneously threaten and sustain life. People orientate them-
selves in relation to rivers and river currents (upriver; downriver;
toward the water; away from the water; and four prefixes mea-
sure distance, for example dodot: nearby downriver) rather than
in terms of cardinal directions. Relations of distance and nearness
are not defined in simple geometrical terms. Rivers are also used
to define and sustain social boundaries. Koyukon people identify
themselves with reference to river drainages delineating individ-
ual or group terms. Despite continuous human activity for mil-
lennia the Koyukon impact on the environment has been slight.
The only tangible evidence of this long occupation is scattered
camp-sites, trails, widely dispersed village clearings, and the
overgrown remnants of abandoned locales. The imprint on the
land is fundamentally of a cultural character - one of an invest-
ment of meaning: 'the flow of land becomes also a flow of the
mind ... Almost nothing visible remained to associate [the aban-
doned settlement] with humanity. Only the memory of people
and events set this place apart from its surroundings and gave it
special meaning ... Each living individual is bound into this pat-
tern of land and people that extends throughout the terrain and
far back across time' (Nelson 1983: 243).
   When the Koyukon people cross their land the recollection of
events, the recognition of named places and locales, the aware-
ness of boundaries, not only invest it with meaning but perpetu-
ate the knowledges necessary to locate resources and orientate
themselves in space. As with the Aborigines, individual identities
and biographies are so closely connected with the landscape that
one can act on the other.


Subsistence Cultivators and the Land

Parallel Worlds in Melanesia

   'You realise that this tree isn't really a tree. It is actually a man, but
   you and I can't see him because we are only living beings. Our eyes
   aren't clear. We are not able to see things as they really are'
                                   (Informant cited in Harrison 1988: 325).

For subsistence cultivators in Melanesia the relationship with the
landscape is no less intimate than among Arctic or Australian
58                                          A Phenomenology of Landscape


hunter-gatherers. Malinowski noted the intimate relationship
between myth and the landscape as lived and perceived:
     The mythical world receives its substance in rock and hill, in the
     changes in land and sea. The pierced sea-passages, the cleft boulders,
     the petrified human beings, all these bring the mythological world
     close to the natives, make it tangible and permanent. On the other
     hand, the story thus powerfully illustrated, re-acts on the landscape,
     fills it with dramatic happenings, which, fixed there for ever, give it a
     definite meaning (Malinowski f 922: 330).

   More recently, Guidieri and Pellizzi (1981:13) refer in a gener-
al sense to two distinct 'surfaces' of existence in many Melanesian
societies. One is fixed, the land of the dead ancestral forces; the
other, the land of the living, is mobile, but always gravitating in
relation to the first. In this manner in many societies a distinction
is drawn between a perceptual order, the plane of everyday exis-
tence, and an invisible and underlying order of spirit beings,
including totemic ancestors and ghosts of the dead. These spirits
are not visible in their real forms, but are 'visible' in metamor-
phosed transformations in the form of animal and plant species,
rivers, mountains and rocks. This hidden order of existence, like
the Aboriginal Dreamtime, is atemporal, but constantly intersects
with and influences the world of the living. Among the Avatip on
the Sepik river in north-west Papua New Guinea to own land is
intimately bound up with magical and ritual responsibility for its
fertility:

     To the villagers all land and bodies of water are fertile because they
     contain the rotted bodies and body-fluids of totemic ancestors. Many
     parcels of land are criss-cross complexes of old levees left by shifts in
     the course of the river; people say these have human outlines, and
     still bear the shapes of the ancestors who 'fell down' upon them in
     mythical times (Harrison 1988: 323).

In this manner the land becomes humanized and socialized as
something replete with ancestral energies that requires care and
constant sustenance through ritual magic. Beneath the apparent
surface of the landscape, but intimately bound up with it, there is
a hidden topography best known to (and influenced by) ritual
experts in these societies, but emotionally and cognitively perti-
nent to all. Aspects of the social and ancestral past are both
recorded and experienced at specific locales in terms of topo-
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies       59

graphic and physiographic features. Possessing detailed and
accurate knowledge of the landscape is bound up with knowl-
edge of intangible worlds and ancestral powers embedded with-
in it, control of which is deemed essential for group production
and reproduction.
    Whereas in the West there is a tendency to privilege temporal
relationships between events in narrative accounts, typically in
Melanesia it is spatial relationships that are emphasized. Events
are anchored and given significance in terms of particular locales
and their interconnections as linked points in space. Particular
locales are of essential importance in 'fixing' events and acting as
mnemonics, thus creating a sense of social identity and establish-
ing linkages between past and present, the worldly and the
supernatural. Kiichler (1993) has recently emphasized the point
that landscape may act powerfully as memory, a template in the
process of memory work that is not fixed and static, but some-
thing drawn upon in social encounters and disputes over land.
    Specific locales in the landscape may be powerful visual
reminders of myths and themselves become, through the passage
of time, objects of knowledge, the accuracy of which may validate
the myths. Landscapes anchor events, and thus act so as to ensure
their enduring significance for populations moving around and
experiencing them on a daily basis. The landscape provides per-
manent markers around which life flows and within which
meanings become sedimented.
    Poole (1986), in a particularly vivid account, discusses this
intertwining of a physical and natural and cultural and super-
 natural ordering of things in relation to the significance of the
 landscape and the oil that seeps out of it in Bimin-Kuskusmin ter-
 ritory in Highland Papua New Guinea. The Bimin-Kuskusmin
 live in a rugged mountainous area in West Sepik province. Their
 territory is bordered to the west by the dramatic Strickland Gorge
 and on all other sides by formidable mountain ranges. In their
 mythology the known world is bounded and covered by the
 canopy of the sky, linked to the earth by massive limestone pil-
 lars and trees just beyond the farthest extent of human experi-
 ence. A mountain chain separates the northern and southern
 Bimin-Kuskusmin valleys, and this chain is the spine of the land;
 the seeping oil hidden in a hollow and issuing from a rock crevice
 is the marrow of the mountain spine. For the Bimin-Kuskusmin
 the forest is a realm of immense ritual importance and spiritual
60                                          A Phenomenology of Landscape


power linking the living with the dead and humans with spiritu-
al entities:
     Along limestone ridges and outcroppings the forest growth becomes
     markedly stunted or blighted, and jagged karst formations jut
     through this sparser foliage. Myriad streams, springs, caves, sink-
     holes, rock outcroppings, crevices, cliffs, and other 'natural' features
     of the lower and mid-montaine terrain are identified with ancestral
     events in myths that add sacred contours to the landscape. Lightning-
     scarred trees and places of landslides - all sign's of Afek's [the great
     cassowary, 'mother' of the game animals and father of the sacred
     semen-oil] power - are remembered for the mysterious, 'supernatur-
     al' events that have occurred there. Tiny knolls and forest glades are
     vividly recalled as the sites where a hunter crouched in fear when the
     whistle of a witch, the rumble of an earthquake, or the howl of an
     anquished spirit... was heard in the vast stillness ... At deep sinkholes
     the spirits of the dead find passage to the ancestral underworld, and
     ancestral spirits return through these passages to haunt and to bless
     this domain (Poole 1986:175).

   The oil was at the centre of all life and ritual practice.
Dedicatory shrines were constructed in a clearing near the oil
seep containing pig, human and cassowary skulls and rock crys-
tals, thought to be animate, sentient and highly sacred. The oil is
carefully collected in a depression encircled by sacred red
Cordyline plants. In an annual cycle of rites ritual experts present
sacrificial morsels of food to the ancestral skulls and the crystals.
The ancestral spirits are then said to return from the underworld
to increase the flow of sacred oil. This central ritual site links
together all Bimin-Kuskusmin, whether living or dead, in a com-
mon bond with the land and its resources. The oil represents 'the
source of fertility, growth, renewal and change for all faunae, flo-
rae and humans that dwell on the land ... and even beyond to the
farthest reaches of known human settlement' (Poole 1986: 171).
Only adult men who have undergone the ordeals of a ten-stage
initiation cycle taking place over a decade may approach the
sacred site of the oil. The sacred oil is central to rites of regenera-
tion in which the fertility of the forest is ensured. Oil-soaked taro
is fed to domestic boars, the burying of bamboo tubes of oil is car-
ried out to promote the growth of taro, oil is rubbed on the skin to
make it glisten and ensure personal well-being. Shrines through-
out the forest are anointed with oil. The oil is conceived to flow
under the landscape itself in the realm of the spirit world. Proof
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          61

and concern (attributed to white infiltration and to the dire ritual
consequences of their discovery of the source of the sacred oil)
about something's being amiss are areas of unwanted expanding
grasslands in parts of Bismin-Kuskusmin territory. In these areas
the oil has ceased to flow and the forests have dried up.
   For the Foi and the Kaluli of the southern highlands of Papua
New Guinea, the relationship with the landscape is no less inti-
mate. They know the course of every body of water, each of
which is named. Important landmarks, such as prominent hills,
pools in rivers, large trees, are all named and significant places.
The naming of places extends to ancestral and more recent events
that have taken place. Watercourses provide referents for loca-
tion and direction: 'the waters, as they turn and fall, generate new
localities for every new configuration of land. The name of a
locality carries, in effect, its own geographical coordinates, which
place it in determinate relation to the brooks and streams that
flow through the forest' (Schieffelin 1976: 30). Animals, plants
and people are all fundamentally related inasmuch as in origin
myths they were all originally human. People have food and
shelter by virtue of the plants and animals to which they are
simultaneously opposed and ancestrally related (ibid.: 95).
    Foi territory is characterized by a twofold division: (i) that cen-
trally located and permanently occupied by the longhouse soci-
ety and its gardens; and (ii) the hunting grounds, Ayamo,
seasonally occupied for hunting, fishing, trapping and collecting
(Weiner 1991: 33). Movement between these two areas was tradi-
tionally periodic. Ayamo is much larger than Foi gardening terri-
tory, and the population disperses in it. Since these areas are
occupied at different seasons and are the focus of rhythmic peri-
odic movements, notions of landscape and temporality become
interlinked. Changing topography and activities thus have an
inbuilt temporal dimension. Creeks and rivers provide major
 spatial boundaries used to provide a sense of orientation through
 space and forming the most common borderlines between clan
 territories. Clan areas are orientated around the mouth and
 source of identifying streams (ibid.: 40). Distance and nearness, as
 among the Koyukon, are related to the flow of water. Virtually all
 place-names have a lexical significance and make use of geo-
 graphically descriptive words referring to specific topographic
 features, such as 'creek', 'ridge', 'raised ground', 'grove', 'spur',
 'bend in river', 'mountain', 'waterfall'. They also refer to human
62                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


events and activities at particular locales. The sum of a Foi per-
son's existence is, in essence, the sum of the tracks he or she has
made or used during his or her lifetime. A historical conscious-
ness is thus bound up with movement through space. In Foi poet-
ry, Weiner argues, the moving image occurs as a result of the
serial juxtaposition of linked place-names and species, which
together create a sense of place. By serially listing place-names
temporal spans are automatically invoked, and a sense of life
movement through a region is constructed. Weiner puts the point
particularly well: in showing 'someone else the extent of his land
and resource holdings, a Foi man is revealing the fundamental
lived dimension of his "Being-there", through the attitudes of
care and the actions of concernful appropriation of earthly space,
the historical record of the impressions he has made on the land,
the inscriptive evidence of his life' (Weiner 1991: 45).
    The Foi existential landscape, like that of Australian
Aboriginal groups, the Mistassini Cree, the Koyukon and the
Kaluli, is doubly imaged, consisting of ancestrally constituted
places over which and between which the day-to-day move-
ments of people are transcribed. All these populations key into
and draw on ancestral powers. The life path of an individual both
iterates an ancestrally created world and creates its own particu-
lar and personalized path.
    In many areas of Melanesia myth is not only embodied in 'nat-
ural' landforms, but also in the form of ancestral stones dotting
the landscape (Malinowski 1922; Leenhardt 1930; Riesenfeld
1950; Kahn 1990). Leenhardt records that in New Caledonia 'each
stone has a name, a history, a life, we might even say a personali-
ty, resulting from the spirit enclosed within it. Often in [remote]
valleys I've asked the name for every detail of the land, each
notable tree; and the landscape transposes itself into a scheme it
would be impossible to transcribe on a map, in which each name
is title to a chapter' (Leenhardt 1930: 241, cited in Kahn 1990: 54).
Kahn reports that on the coastal mainland of Milne Bay Province
 stones, some with incised geometric designs, are particularly fre-
 quent. They usually represent mythical heroes or heroines who
 turned into stone, and some of them may play a prominent part
 in mythological narratives anchoring the stories to the ground.
 Sometimes the stones may represent the petrification of the per-
 sonal equipment of the ancestors left behind on journeys (Kahn
 1990: 59).
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         63


Mountains, Mesas and Tetrads
A number of accounts have emphasized the social and cosmo-
logical significance of the land among native American Indian
hunter-fisher-gatherers and farmers (e.g. Brody 1981; Hallowell
1955; Harrington 1916; Momaday 1974; Ortiz 1969; Parsons 1939;
White 1964). Here I want to refer to one of the richest of these
accounts, written by Ortiz, an anthropologist who also comes
from the society he studies and interprets, the Tewa, a pueblo-
dwelling population engaged primarily in subsistence horticul-
ture in the American South-west. Ortiz (1969) describes the Tewa
view of existence in terms of six discrete and hierarchical levels or
categories of being:
   6. Dry food who never did become
   5. Towa é
   4. Dry food who are no longer
   3. Made people
   2. Towa é
   1. Dry food people
These are also cultural categories used to divide and classify
the entirety of Tewa social and supernatural existence. 'Dry
food people' play no official roles in political or ritual life. The
Towa e make up the core of the political organization of the
Tewa. The 'Made people' constitute a hierarchy of eight dis-
crete but interrelated organizations, including the members of
two moiety societies, the medicine men, the Kwirana or 'cold'
clowns, the Kossa or 'warm' clowns, and the Hunt, Scalp, and
Women's societies (Ortiz 1969: 17). The other three categories
are supernatural counterparts of the first three. When someone
in category 1 dies he or she becomes a spirit of level 4; level 5
represents the spirits of people in category 2; while level 6 is
constituted by the souls of the Made people and of all the
deities recognized in Tewa mythology before the emergence of
humanity.
   These social and supernatural categories are superimposed on
the landscape in the form of a series of tetrads or groups of four,
and related to cardinal directions, topographical features, settle-
ment locales, paths of movement and a system of colour classifi-
cation (Fig. 2.8). The outer tetrad of the Tewa world is bounded
by four sacred mountains, each with unique characteristics. To
the north is the Hazy or Shimmering Mountain, to the west the
 64                                                 A Phenomenology of Landscape

                                              North
                                           Blue/Green
                                 Tse Shu Pin (Shimmering Mountain)
                                       [Conjilon Peak: 60 miles)




                                         Tema Yoh




                 Toma Yoh                                        Tsi Mayoh


West                                                                             East
Yellow                                                                          White
Tsikomo (Obsidian Covered Mountain)                      Ku Sehn Pin (Stone Man Mountain)
[Tsikomo: 15 miles]                                      [Truchas Peak: 20 miles]




                                          Tun Yoh




                                           South
                                            Red
                                     Oku Pin (Turtle Mountain)
                                     [Sandia Crest: 80 miles]




      Sacred Mountain
      Mesa
      Shrine: + one stone   ++   many stones
      Dance plazas
      Earth mother naval


 Figure 2.8. Landscape and cosmology in the Tewa world. Based on Ortiz
 1969: Fig. 2.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies       65

Obsidian-covered Mountain, to the south the Turtle Mountain
and to the east the Stone Man Mountain. These mountains vary
between 25 and 130 km. in distance from San Juan pueblo, the
largest of six surviving villages in New Mexico. All these four
sacred mountains can be seen from some reasonably high loca-
tion in Tewa country. For any particular pueblo the most sacred
of them, object of repeated pilgrimages, tends to be the nearest.
A lake or pond is associated with each mountain, in which the
'Dry Food People Who Never Did Become', the most sacred
supernatural category of beings, dwell linked with the appropri-
ate directional colour. On the top of each mountain there is a nan
sipu or earth navel, within which the Towa e spirits live, watching
over the world of the living. This is a keyhole-shaped stone
structure in which the bottom end is always kept open and
directionally orientated toward one or more of the Tewa vil-
lages. It constitutes a point at which the living may communicate
with the spirit world. It 'gathers blessings' from the three world
levels and directs them through the open end back to the Tewa
villages.
    A second internal tetrad is constituted by making reference to
four sacred Tsin , flat-topped hills (mesas) created by the Towa e
of the directions. These are located approximately midway
between the mountains and the village. As they are much closer
to the Tewa pueblos they therefore cannot provide, on the
ground, a system common to all; and, in practice, different hills
constitute cardinal reference points according to the location of
any particular village. Each of these hills is sacred because it is
believed to be dark and foreboding, and each has a cave or
tunnels running through it. These are thought to be inhabited by
masked supernatural whippers who are impersonated by the
 Towa e. Unlike the sacred mountains, the Tsin are very dangerous
places for anyone but the Towa e to be, because of the presence of
the masked whippers. As with the mountains, the hill closest to
any particular pueblo is the most mythologically significant. A
 third tetrad is made up of the four principal shrines of the direc-
 tions. These are the most important of numerous shrines found in
 the landscape around each Tewa village. These shrines are
 marked by large single stones or collections of stones. These are
 places in which souls live, and are endowed with sacred quali-
 ties. The final inner tetrad is made up of four dance plazas within
 the village. All public rituals must be performed at least four
66                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


times on each of these dance areas. In addition there is a 'moth-
er earth navel middle place' within the centre of a village, the
most sacred ritual centre of all. Ritual dances and other perfor-
mances must be initiated here, because it is at the centre of the
village. It is circular in shape and, unlike the navels on the
sacred mountains, open in all four cardinal directions.
Contrasting the two types of navels, Ortiz interprets their rela-
tionship in the following manner: 'The mountain earth navels
gather in blessings from all around and direct them inward
toward the village; the mother earth navel is the source of all
these blessings, so they are directed outward in all directions. By
the system of ideas at work here, everything good and desirable
stays within the Tewa world. This is how relentless and perva-
sive this tetramerous aspect of Tewa symbolic classification is'
(Ortiz 1969: 21-2).
    In Tewa cosmology the world is constituted by three levels,
that of the middle, mapped out in the landscape as a series of
sacred tetrads; the underworld; and the above. These worlds
replicate each other, and mediation between them is achieved
through the sacred points of the mountain lakes, the earth navels
and the shrines. These are points of entrance into other worlds,
between a plane of Being and a plane of Becoming. The tops of
the mountains are not only points of entry to the world below
(conceptually more elaborated in Tewa thought than the upper
world ) but points at which the upper, middle, and underworlds
come closest to intersecting. Their especial holiness is manifested
by the presence of concrete signs such as clouds (a source of pre-
cious moisture) and evidence of lightning strikes on trees (Ortiz
 1969: 25).
    From this striking example, considerably simplified from
Ortiz's rich ethnography, the significance of landscape as a con-
 cretization of a living mythology structuring and ordering the
 entirety of Tewa social existence and ritual practice could not be
 clearer. The myths and rituals give meaning to the land and the
 land itself provides constant tangible evidence of the efficacy and
 truthfulness of myth as objectified mythology and mythologized
 objectivity. The landscape provides a concrete means by which
 the Tewa can understand their world and their place within it.
 Meaning and order are imposed on the concrete details of the
 land to answer basic and fundamental questions about the order-
 ing and nature of social existence.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies        67

Conclusion

Disregarding all the particular descriptive details, what is clear
from all these accounts, whether of hunter-gatherers or subsis-
tence cultivators, is the symbolic, ancestral and temporal signifi-
cance of the landscape. Writing about an economic 'base' in
relation to resource utilization or landscape use seems quite irrel-
evant here. The landscape is continually being encultured, bring-
ing things into meaning as part of a symbolic process by which
human consciousness makes the physical reality of the natural
environment into an intelligible and socialized form. The land-
scape is redolent with past actions, it plays a major role in consti-
tuting a sense of history and the past, it is peopled by ancestral
and spiritual entities, forms part and parcel of mythological sys-
tems, is used in defining social groups and their relationship to
resources. Histories, discourses and ideologies are created and
re-created through reference to the special affinity people have
with an area of land, its topography, waters, rocks, locales, paths
and boundaries.
    It appears to be evident enough that the significance of land-
scape for different populations cannot be simply read off from
the local 'ecological' characteristics of a 'natural' environment,
whether desert, Boreal forest, rain forest or tundra. Nor can it be
related in any simple manner to the mode of subsistence (hunter-
gatherer/cultivator/mixture of the two) or pattern of dwelling
(mobile/sedentary). It, rather, cross-cuts these determinisms and
distinctions. A much stronger argument can be made that, in all
the social contexts I have considered, landscape is intimately
related to myth and obeys the same kind of logic as that which
structures myth viz metaphor, allegory, synecdoche etc.
 Landscape is, in substantial part, a mythopoesis and using terms
such as hunter-gatherers or subsistence cultivators detracts from
rather than clarifies the relationship between peoples and land-
 scapes. What the cases I have discussed share is the selection for
 myths that stress the conventional and a form of ordering that
 classically 'resolves' contradictions in social practices.
Part II
Prehistoric Landscapes
Introduction
Human Space and Prehistoric
Landscapes

It was something like that. I take it as axiomatic that relationships
between peoples and landscapes in prehistory were just as inti-
mate and affective as those discussed in Chapter 2. The problem
is, of course, to specify exactly in what that something might con-
sist. It is neither possible, nor desirable, to try to directly model
the significance of prehistoric landscapes explicitly in terms of
any of the contemporary examples. We can be sure the situation
was different. An examination of the range of modern examples
simply provides a conceptual background for attempting to think
through the archaeological evidence encountered in the field.
    In this and the next three chapters I want to consider evidence
from the Mesolithic and Neolithic in south Wales and southern
England, attempting to demonstrate both long-term continuities
and changes in the relationships between populations and the
land. The character of the material evidence to hand is, of course,
hardly ideal. For the Mesolithic it consists almost entirely of sur-
face flint scatters representing various temporary and seasonally
occupied locales and task-specific sites. Using map grid refer-
ences to find these sites, there is nothing to be seen on the ground,
nothing to indicate that you have even arrived, except, in a few
cases, the scars of recent excavations. For the Neolithic settlement
evidence is virtually absent, and the primary evidence consists of
different types of upstanding monuments in the landscape. Here,
at least, you are certain that you have actually arrived and the
walk is over.
    I have chosen to study three areas in detail: Pembrokeshire,
south-west Wales, the Black Mountains area of south-east Wales
and Cranborne Chase in southern England (Fig. 3. 0). These have
the advantage of possessing Mesolithic find material; and the
Neolithic monuments found in each region - portal dolmens and

                                                                  71
72                                       A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.0. Location of the study areas. 1: South-west Wales; 2: The Black
Mountains; 3: Cranborne Chase.

chambered monuments, chambered long cairns of 'Cotswold-
Severn' type and earthen long barrows, respectively - each repre-
sent the main forms found in southern Britain as a whole. The
'natural' landscapes in which these sites and monuments are
found contrast dramatically, from the rock-strewn south Wales
coastal peninsula to the inland sandstone massif of the Black
Mountains to the rolling chalk downland of Dorset. My consider-
ation of the earlier Neolithic in Dorset extends to include two
other principal classes of monuments found elsewhere in south-
ern England, but unknown in Wales, the Cursus and a cause-
wayed enclosure complex on Hambledon Hill. My initial
intention was to consider the long barrows on Cranborne Chase
separately; but, like Richard Bradley before me (in Barrett et al.
1991b: 36), I found it quite impossible to discuss them without
considering the Cursus. This may in itself be to say something of
Part II: Human Space and Prehistoric Landscapes                 73


interest about the power of that monument, even when, today, it is
scarcely visible on the ground.
   Although focusing on landscape the discussions also address
the 'problem' of the Mesolithic-Neolithic 'transition', one of the
black holes of British prehistory, a chronological drawer in the
traditional archaeological filing cabinet that remains almost
empty. Previous attempts to discuss the relationship between the
final postglacial hunter-fisher-gatherer populations of the
Mesolithic and the early Neolithic peoples who, in the received
wisdom, began to cultivate and garden, clear the land and keep
domesticates, have concentrated on the built environment. The
classic example has come not from Britain, but Brittany, where
much has been made of adduced structural and depositional sim-
ilarities between the graves in the Mesolithic cemeteries at
Hoedic and Teviec and early Neolithic long mounds (e.g.
Renfrew 1973a: 158; Sherratt 1990; Kirk 1993). Since, in Britain,
there is no architectural evidence, and very few Mesolithic buri-
als apart from remains in caves, such a linkage has not been pos-
sible to make in these formal terms. Here I attempt to trace
instead process rather than product, the means by which the land
became encultured and ultimately transformed into architectural
form during the Neolithic, when there arises a need to capture
and control what the landscape is about through the medium of
architectural morphology.
    From a very contemporary perspective, visiting sites in a
modern landscape, it is, of course, extremely difficult to attempt
to envisage, in the mind's eye, the prehistoric settings of locales.
Everything would appear to have changed; at first glance the task
seems hopeless. It is simply impossible to know exactly where
the trees and bushes were in relation to sites and monuments,
where the flowers bloomed and the rushes sighed in the wind.
 Even the greatest refinements in techniques such as pollen and
 molluscan analysis can provide only a relatively coarse assess-
 ment of these matters, and, concentrating on statistics and counts
 of oak and lime, arboreal and non-arboreal pollen, they tell us all
 too little of what the forests and open areas actually looked like
 and how the plants grew. The skin of the land has gone for good,
 and can only be partially recovered through the most diligent of
 scientific analyses; but not its shape. The bones of the land - the
 mountains, hills, rocks and valleys, escarpments and ridges -
 have remained substantially the same since the Mesolithic, and
74                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


can still be observed. Only the coastline has been radically
altered. It is the bones of the land and their relationship to sites
and monuments with which these archaeological studies are
principally concerned.
   As a contemporary subject observer interested in interpreting
the meanings of prehistoric landscapes I make no claims to an
empathetic understanding of their significance, to some incredi-
ble feat of being able to find and recover meaning in prehistoric
minds. To think that is either illusion or to act like God. However,
I believe that the experience of place is of fundamental signifi-
cance in the attempt to provide an account. There is one, all too
contemporary, experience of place with which most people will
be familiar. Locate a monument or site on a map. Drive for hours
in a car, and attempt to arrive as close as possible to the place.
Walk a shorter or longer distance, if necessary, and you are there.
In the case of all but a few well-preserved chambered monu-
ments the result is inevitably disappointing: a few overgrown
stones or a low mound covered with rank vegetation in summer
is hardly inspiring. You acquire little sense of the feel and charac-
ter of the land. A monument or place encountered in the course of
a walk between places is an altogether different matter.
Approaching it slowly, from different directions, and anticipat-
ing arriving, it is possible to observe in a much more subtle man-
ner the way in which it is related to its physical surroundings, the
lie of the land. Even a site which you cannot see, such as a
Mesolithic flint scatter, acquires in this way a greater significance
and interest. Even the most dilapidated monument becomes
worth visiting. To make the point in a slightly different way, all
places are in landscapes, but landscapes constitute the place.
Walk from one place to another or approach it from a different
direction and everything will change. Things that loomed large in
your visual field may become small, or look different. What was
at the centre may now be on the periphery; what could be seen
has now disappeared, and new horizons have come into view.
    This perpetually shifting human visual experience of place
and landscape encountered in the walk has not altered since the
Mesolithic. Things in front of or behind you, within reach or
without, things to the left and right of your body, above and
below, these most basic of personal spatial experiences, are
 shared with prehistoric populations in our common biological
 humanity. They provide tools with which to think and to work.
Part II: Human Space and Prehistoric Landscapes                75


   Looking at the two-dimensional plane of the modern topo-
graphic map with sites and monuments plotted on it, it is quite
impossible to envisage the landscape in which these places are
embedded. The representation fails, and cannot substitute for
being there, being in place. Similarly, an unfamiliar landscape
remains invisible. You do not know where, or how, to look. This
process of observation requires time and a feeling for the place.
After being there, after making many visits to the same locales,
the intensity of the experience heightens. Monuments that were
initially hidden from view on a first visit to a place can now be
seen, and patterned relationships between sites and their settings
become apparent.
Chapter 3
An Affinity with the Coast: Places and
Monuments in South-west Wales


Introduction

The geology of south-west Wales is particularly complex, consist-
ing of a series of sedimentary and igneous rock formations of
Pre-Cambrian to Carboniferous age. The landscape has been
greatly eroded to create a series of relatively flat surfaces at
approximately 60 m. intervals above sea level. Only small areas
of the land surface are 200 m. or more above sea level. Despite the
fact that this is a relatively low-lying area the coasts and some
inland areas display some quite dramatic variations in relief. The
greater part of north Pembrokeshire is made up of Ordovician
rocks, sandstones, grits and shales broken up by igneous intru-
sions. These igneous rocks are exposed in narrow strips, and
commonly form the numerous headlands along the north-west
coast where sheltered bays and inlets have been cut into the
softer shales. Inland they form impressive weathered rock out-
crops and ridges. Inland in the south of Pembrokeshire the land-
scape is gentler and more undulating being made up
predominantly of Devonian Old Red Sandstone and
Carboniferous limestone formations, locally eroded to create low
crags and rock outcrops. Along the coast great walls of impres-
sive precipitous cliffs are broken up to form sweeping bays and
dramatic headlands.
   The coastline of south-west Wales has long generated consid-
erable interest because of the presence of submerged early post-
glacial landscapes, exposed within the intertidal zone at very low
tides or when storms have eroded away more recent marine
sediments. These are made up of peat deposits with fallen tree-
trunks and stumps.

76
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales            77


Locales in the Earlier and Later Mesolithic
In south-west Wales the Mesolithic evidence almost entirely con-
sists of flint scatters, with a paucity of faunal collections associat-
ed with human activities. The surface flint findspots are
remarkably prolific, and have been documented and discussed
by a number of authors (Cantrill 1915; Gordon-Williams 1926;
Grimes 1932; Leach 1913; 1918; 1933; Wainwright 1963; Jacobi
1980; David 1990). They are almost solely confined to the coast for
both earlier and later Mesolithic assemblages. Earlier Mesolithic
flint scatters are concentrated along the south coast of Pembroke,
extending from Caldey island in the south-east to St David's
Head in the north-west. Later Mesolithic sites occur in the same
area, and also extend along the north coast as far east as Newport
(Fig. 3.1). These assemblages vary in size from small, highly local-
ized surface scatters, representing temporary occupations and
resting-places, to quite massive concentrations of microliths,
chipped flint, pebble tools, cores and lithic debris, suggesting fre-
quently visted locales. This material is locally derived from beach
shingles, and does not naturally occur on the cliff-tops bordering
the beaches where the majority of the sites are located.
    The dense concentration of the Mesolithic sites along the
southern coast of Pembrokeshire indicates that it was an area that
was extensively exploited throughout the Mesolithic. On the
basis of a survey of 20 sites along the Pembrokeshire coasts from
which there have been substantial lithic collections, as opposed to
isolated finds of one or a few artefacts, five broad types of locale
may be distinguished:
    (i) Cave and rock shelters in the faces of limestone cliffs. Four
of these are documented with Mesolithic material, three of which
are on Caldey island.
    (ii) Places on flat or undulating rather exposed ground high
up, situated directly on the margins of the cliff-tops and head-
lands, with extensive views along the coasts and across the sea,
but with restricted visibility inland. The classic case of such a
location is Nab Head, where the site is located on the heavily
eroding neck of the headland, with precipitous cliffs to the north,
west and east. Inland, to the south, the land rises up, and visibili-
ty is reduced to a few hundred metres. From the site there are
extensive views across the sea to locales where other Mesolithic
sites are found, to the south and east extending as far as Skomer
island and to the north and west to Ramsey island (Fig. 3.2).
78                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.1. The distribution of earlier and later Mesolithic locales in
south-west Wales. Places mentioned in the text:
1. Caldey Island                    7. Freshwater West
2. Nab Head                         8. Whitesands Bay
3. Manorbier Bay                    9. Newport
4. Swanlake Bay                    10. Frainslake
5. Cwm Bach                        11. Freshwater East.
6. Llanunwas
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   79
80                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


    (iii) Places somewhat withdrawn from the cliff edges, and usu-
ally close to springs and streams. The land in most cases rises up
gently away from the cliffs, so that visibility inland is restricted to
a few hundred metres. From these sites there are more limited
views along the coasts, as far as the headlands permit, and visi-
bility across the open sea is restricted. Sites at Manorbier and
Swanlake bays, Cwm Bach and Llanunwas are typical of this
choice of location.
    (iv) Places at short distances from the bases of the cliffs now
exposed at low tide, as at Freshwater East (Leach 1913) and
Whitesands Bay, sometimes found in association with sub-
merged forests (Fig. 3.3).
    (v) Places on flat land or sand-dune areas in river estuary loca-
tions or localized marshy areas created by streams. Sites at
Newport, Frainslake and Freshwater West (Wainwright 1959) are
representative of such locations.
    During the earlier Mesolithic sea levels would have been much
lower than today, and locales now situated on cliff-tops would
have been, at the time of occupation, inland sites situated on the
tops of rock outcrops and steep hills overlooking an extensive
forested coastal plain. Caldey island, with its caves and rock shel-
ters, would have been linked to the present-day mainland. The
cliffs of south Pembrokeshire (Fig. 3.4) would have been the first
steep hills and crags encountered inland from the sea, visually
dominating a belt of marshy coastal plain broken up topographi-
cally by outcrops which now form offshore islands and rocks.
The cliffs seen today have been, of course, considerably steep-
ened by marine erosion. Sea levels rose throughout the
Mesolithic, crossing modern coastlines and flooding the coastal
and estuarine sites located below the cliffs at around 4700 BC. By
the early Neolithic the isostatic recovery of the land was greater
than eustatic sea level rise, and the relationship between land and
sea stabilized (Taylor 1980:117-19).
     Exploitation territories of the later Mesolithic sites would have
included tidal strips more substantial than today, inland terrain,
extensive marsh areas in some cases, and large areas of open sea,
pointing to the significance of marine resources such as fish and
seal. Evidence of faunal exploitation is limited to the eroding
foreshore peats of Atlantic age exposed by sea erosion around the
coasts of Pembrokeshire and mixed cave deposits, indicating
 exploitation of Bos, pig, and red and roe deer (Jacobi 1980:179-83;
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   81
82   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           83


Caseldine 1990: 40; Lewis 1990). Mollusc exploitation seems to
have been limited, although one midden site from Nanna's cave
on Caldey island has been claimed (Lacaille and Grimes 1955).
   The main regional woodland reflected in pollen diagrams
from south-west Wales appears to have been dominated by oak,
hazel and alder, with some local pine woodland and alder carr
and sedge fen plant communities developing in valley bottoms
and low-lying coastal sites (Caseldine 1990; Lewis 1990). At
Marros and Abermawr Lewis (1990) attributes increases in hazel
counts in pollen diagrams to an opening out of woodlands dur-
ing the middle Neolithic and the late Mesolithic to early Neolithic
respectively. Clearance of the woodland on a large scale, princi-
pally by burning, and the creation of a more open 'pastoral' land-
scape does not seem to have occurred until the middle or later
Neolithic onwards. During the earlier Neolithic, when the major-
ity of the chambered monuments were built and used, clearances
of the forest were of limited extent (Caseldine 1990; Lewis 1990).
    Some writers on the Mesolithic of south-west Wales have
stressed the great attractiveness of coastal areas as opposed to
inland and upland areas with regard to both possibilities for
resource exploitation and the availability of raw materials
(Wainwright 1963: 126; ApSimon 1976: 41), while others have
pointed to a correlation between the distribution of Mesolithic
sites and areas of more frost-free days (Webley 1976: 20-1; Jacobi
1980: 179; David 1990: 251). Important as factors of climate or
resource availability may be, the choice of locales on, or beneath,
or between, inland (in the earlier Mesolithic) or coastal (during the
late Mesolithic) landmarks - precipitous ridges and rock out-
crops that must have been dominant in the local environment -
seems highly significant. These, no doubt named, natural topo-
graphic features would have been invested with sets of local
meanings and would have had the effect of pinpointing the posi-
tions of camp sites and their inhabitants to populations moving
around in the coastal flatlands or waters and marsh areas sur-
rounding them. The lack of later Mesolithic inland sites may be
partially attributable to a lack of intensive survey work, and sites
 on the higher ground of the Preseli mountains and elsewhere
might well be expected; but the evidence that these populations
 had a special affinity with particular (now coastal) locales and
 areas is overwhelming. The entire area along the coast was exten-
 sively exploited. There is, on average, a findspot every four or
84                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


five hundred metres along some stretches, notably between
Angle Bay and Linney Head, south of Milford Haven (Fig. 3.5)
and between Porthlyski bay and Newgale sands, with many
more yet to be discovered.
   Some locales, such as Nab Head (Jacobi 1980; David 1990) and
rock shelters on the island of Caldey (Lacaille and Grimes 1955),
have clear indications of successive occupation of precisely the
same locality from the earlier to the later Mesolithic, despite the
fact that local environmental conditions and, consequently, avail-
ability of exploitable resources must have changed drastically
throughout the Mesolithic. Clearly deciding to stop at a particu-
lar place was much more than simply a matter of food acquisi-
tion. At Nab Head a series of earlier and later Mesolithic
industries have been documented from both surface finds and
excavations (Gordon-Williams 1926; David 1990). The location of
this site on the neck of a headland, whether we see it today, sur-
rounded by the sea (Fig. 3.2), or envisage it jutting out into a
wooded coastal plain, as in the early Mesolithic, is quite striking.
The stone-tool industry is particularly extensive. From recent
excavations at Nab Head II, dominated by later Mesolithic
microliths, over 23,000 pieces of flaked flint and stone were
recovered. The assemblage is dominated by backed bladelets, but
also includes two pecked and groundstone axes of probable late
Mesolithic date (David 1990: 248). Apart from the flint material
recovered at Nab Head I a shale 'Venus' figurine was found, and
a large quantity (690) of perforated shale beads are recorded both
from surface finds and excavation (David 1990: 245). This was
clearly a major manufacturing site for these beads. Single finds of
shale beads are known from three other sites in Pembrokeshire,
and as far away as Waun-Fingen-Felen in the Black Mountains,
suggesting either their inclusion in exchange systems between
Mesolithic communities or extensive population movements in a
seasonal round. It is likely, as David remarks, that a cemetery
may once have existed at Nab Head, although there is no trace of
it now, and bones are not preserved in the acid soils. The pres-
ence of the beads and figurine at Nab Head, its repeated occu-
pancy through thousands of years, and the dramatic location of
the site provide us with a tantalizing glimpse of the symbolic
dimensions of social Being-in-the-landscape during the
Mesolithic, the constitution of biographies in relation to place. As
 Bradley notes, this period has too frequently been characterized
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   85
86                                       A Phenomenology of Landscape


in the archaeological literature as one in which people simply had
ecological relations with hazelnuts, as opposed to social relations
with one another (Bradley 1984:11).
   Proximity to marked changes in relief and jagged rock out-
crops was clearly of great symbolic significance during the
Mesolithic in Pembrokeshire, irrespective of the relative positions
of land and sea during the earlier and later Mesolithic. Here it
might be pertinent to note Chase's comments about coastal
Aboriginal populations in Cape York peninsula, northern
Australia:

     Present-day beach people display a high degree of precision in delin-
     eating estate boundaries along the beachline and major rivers.
     Clumps of causarine trees, a rock formation, an intrusive finger of
     dune scrub or a small watercourse provide exact boundary delin-
     eation. Further inland, away from the intensive beach domus zone,
     boundaries are less precise and are conceived in terms of sites or
     unnamed environmental features (Chase 1984: 112).

I want to suggest that it was precisely because the coast provided
both rich economic resources and a wealth of named and distinc-
tive natural topographic markers that it was so symbolically
important to both Mesolithic and Neolithic populations. During
the Mesolithic it seems highly likely that settlement locales repre-
sent places on paths of movement, bound into the lie of the land
at marked changes of relief with a cosmological significance,
which were ordered sequentially in relation to each other.


The Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'
It is becoming increasingly clear that the terms 'Mesolithic' and
'Neolithic' as a means of characterizing different economies and
social relations of production have outlived their usefulness in
archaeological discourse. The apparent hiatus between the final
Mesolithic and the early Neolithic is a product of these very
terms. All kinds of 'transitions' now seem required to provide
mediations between them (see for example Zvelebil 1986), from
supposedly highly mobile 'simple' hunter-gatherers to 'complex'
settled farmers. It is now generally accepted that Mesolithic com-
munities in Britain and Europe were in no sense less 'complex'
than those in the Neolithic, and the range of variation between
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales             87

social groups - economic, social and ritual - was equally great
(Price and Brown 1985; Gamble 1986). There is no necessary rea-
son to link the building of monuments with the production of an
agricultural surplus. And, indeed, it is important to remember
that not all surpluses are agricultural. A pastoral surplus which
does not require being 'settled' is perfectly possible, and some of
the 'classic' surplus societies are, of course, the hunter-fisher-
gatherers of the American North-West Coast. From the archaeo-
logical evidence there is little to suggest that anything like a fully-
fledged mixed farming economy existed in the earlier Neolithic
of Britain (Kinnes 1988; Thomas 1991: Chapter 2). Thomas has
cogently argued that wild food resources contributed a substan-
tial proportion of food supplies, and that a seasonal cycle of
movement lay at the heart of social and subsistence arrangements
(1991: 28). I explore the question of an economic 'transition' more
fully in Chapter 6.


Monument Construction and the Significance of Place

The coastal location of the Mesolithic sites is repeated in the over-
all distribution of the chambered monuments of south-west
Wales, which in the general absence of domestic sites are the
primary evidence for the Neolithic in the area as elsewhere in
Britain. The overall distribution of Mesolithic sites and Neolithic
burial chambers is complementary rather than exclusive. Many of
the monuments are situated in exactly the same general areas that
must have been habitually exploited during the Mesolithic (Fig.
3. 6). An inspection of the distribution map of Neolithic artefact
finds from non-funerary contexts in Wales also reveals that they
are particularly densely concentrated in those regions with
Mesolithic findspots in Pembrokeshire (Savory 1980). Some
specific site locales, such as the Caldey rock shelters, were
utilized during both the Mesolithic and the Neolithic (Lacaille
and Grimes 1955). Mesolithic locales and artefact findspots also
occur in very close proximity to some of the individual cham-
bered monuments, for example those at St David's, Manorbier,
Angle, Newport (Carreg Coetan Arthur) and Longhouse (Carreg
Samson).
   The only Neolithic settlement site known is Clegyr Boia
(Fig. 3.7). It may well have been a walled settlement, with
88                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.6. The distribution of Neolithic monuments in south-west
Wales
1. Pentre Ifan                        14. Tresewig
2. Bedd yr Afanc                      15. Coetan Arthur (St Davids)
3. Llech y Dribedd                    16. Carn Llidi
4. Trellyffaint                       17. St Elvies
5. Carreg Coetan Arthur               18. Hanging Stone
6. Cerrig y Gof                       19. Devil's Quoit
7. Carn Wen                           20. Colston
8. Penrhiw                            21. GarnTurne
9. Garnwnda                           22. Parc y Llyn
10. Garn Gilfach                      23. King's Quoit
11. Ffyst Samson                      24. Morfa Bychan
12. Carreg Samson/Longhouse           25. Gwal y Filiast
13. Treffynnon                        26. Mountain.
Monuments 1-6: Nevern group. C.I. : Cam Ingli peak; C.B. : Clegyr Boia
settlement site.
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   89
90                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


ramparts encircling an area in which remains of two or three
Neolithic huts, three hearths and a small midden were recovered
(A. Williams 1953: 24 ff.). The excavator thought that the rampart
was of Iron Age date because it overlay one of the Neolithic
house areas; but the evidence could equally well suggest that
there are multiple Neolithic phases present, in which case the site
is quite comparable with enclosures from south-west England
like Carn Brea and Helman Tor (Mercer 1981). The only identified
faunal remains were of cattle. The presence of the midden with
limpet shells indicates the continued importance of marine
resources in the Neolithic. Importantly, the site is located on the
summit of a rock outcrop, 1 km. from the coast, and commanding
panoramic views in all directions. It is located less than 3 km.
from the nearest burial chambers, situated on the coast to the
north of St David's Head and beneath the prominent rock out-
crop of Carn Llidi. The positions of these monuments are marked
by the rock outcrops below which they are situated. The rock out-
crops are prominent from the vantage point of Clegyr Boia,
although it is impossible to see the burial chambers themselves
(Fig. 3. 8). The major change occurring during the earlier Neolithic
would appear not to be of an 'economic' character - there is
virtually no evidence that plant or animal domesticates played
any prominent role in south-west Wales - but was primarily
ideological in nature; and a fundamental part of this changing
ideology involved a different relationship between groups and
the landscape.
    The architectural morphology of the monuments is particular-
ly diverse. This, taken together with the generally poor state of
preservation of both the chambers and surrounding cairns and
mounds, has defied attempts at classification. They do not fit into
any neatly recognizable groups. Rather than considering this as a
 'problem' (cf. Grimes 1936a; Lynch 1975), I want to take the line
that this is perhaps one of their most characteristic and important
features. There are no two identical sites - difference is being
asserted. It is important that the monuments make a contrasting
visual impact. Claims have been made for a significant presence
of 'classic' portal dolmens (Lynch 1972, 1975). Such monuments
are characterized by the provision of a rectangular chamber with
 a false high portal entrance fronted by two portal stones with a
high blocking slab at right-angles to them. The capstone slopes
 down to the rear of the chamber, where it is supported by a lower
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   91
92                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


upright. As Barker points out (1992: 73-6), only one site, Pentre
Ifan, can be claimed to match such a description. Others possess
sloping capstones, but without convincing evidence of a portal
construction. No passage graves with a lengthy entrance passage
have been documented. Four monuments do, however, appear to
have been provided with very short passages leading to the
chamber space (Grimes 1936a: 130-1; Lynch 1976: 75).
   This study is based on a survey of 26 separate locations on
which one or more burial chambers have been recorded (Fig. 3.6).
The total number of monuments is 31, this being a complete sam-
ple of all securely documented chambered monuments in
Pembrokeshire and the western fringe of Carmarthenshire. All
the certain sites identified by Barker in his recent catalogue (1992)
are included, and two other monuments, Morfa Bychan C and
Treswig, considered by him to be 'probable' sites only. These
monuments are all relatively small in size and simple in construc-
tion, with the exception of the two largest and most impressive
sites, Pentre Ifan and Garn Turne, which possess elaborate
entrance facades (Grimes 1936a: 123, 1948). Two unique and
unusual sites, Cerrig y Gof and Bedd yr Afanc (Grimes 1939a;
Lynch 1972: 81-2), the former with five rectangular cists arranged
in a circle in a cairn and the latter a 9 m.-long wedge-shaped
gallery construction, are probably late Neolithic in date.
Maximum chamber length varies between 1.7 and 4 m. The
chambers are usually rectangular or polygonal in form. The cap-
stone, where it survives, is undoubtedly the most visually
impressive architectural component of these monuments, and in
all cases was almost certainly not originally covered by mound or
cairn material. All the monuments with the exception of two or
three sites originally possessed only one capstone covering the
chamber, and capstone length provides a fairly reliable guide to
relative monument size. At least seven of the monuments origi-
nally possessed two small chambers. These were originally set in
mounds or cairns; but for most sites their ruinous state makes the
original shape and size impossible to determine by field survey
alone. In three cases there is evidence for the construction of a
rectangular cairn; and in a further nine cases the cairn appears to
have been originally circular or oval in form. Two cemeteries at
Carn Wen and Morfa Bychan, consisting respectively of three
and four monuments separated by distances of 70 m. or less, are
known. The other monuments are situated at distances ranging
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales            93


between 0.6 and 18 km. from their nearest neighbours (mean:
4.1 km.); but the majority of them are located within a few kilo-
metres of each other.
   While the architectural morphology of the monuments seems
to involve a stress on difference, their location in relation to topo-
graphic features of the landscape is highly structured and repeti-
tive. The relationship to the coastline, especially in relation to
bays, inlets and peninsulas, of many of the monuments is obvi-
ous, and must have been as important a factor in monument
placement as it was for settlements during the Mesolithic. The
mean distance from the nearest coastline is only 3.6 km., and 14 of
them are situated within 1 km. of the sea, three of which, includ-
ing the cemeteries at Carn Wen and Morfa Bychan, occur direct-
ly in cliff-top locations recalling the exact positions of many
Mesolithic locales.
    But this relationship to the coast is more complex than a casual
glance at the distribution map might imply. Only eight of the
monument locations were chosen so that standing by the monu-
ment it is possible to overlook the sea directly. From 14 sites (54
per cent) the nearest coastline to the monument is visible at vari-
ous distances away; but there are some striking anomalies. Four
monuments are located in such a position that a distant rather
than the nearest section of coastline is visible. In the case of the
monument at St Elvies, it is located only 300 m. from the nearest
coast, yet the sea is completely invisible. Such sites might be
described as being coastal, but with an inland visual field. This
placement of some of the monuments so that they are hidden
from the coastline nearest to them suggests that landscape fea-
tures other than the coast itself began to play an increasingly
important role for monument location during the Neolithic.
    One possibility is that the monuments might be located so as
to be intervisible with each other, rather than with features of the
natural landscape; but, despite the closeness of the location of
 many of the monuments, intervisibility between them is restricted
 to a few sites in the northern area of their distribution. Only two
 of the monuments are sited on the highest points in their imme-
 diate vicinity, with extensive views in all cardinal directions. All
 the others have restricted visibility in one or two directions, with
 the land rising up immediately beyond the monument, which
 may be sited on the midpoint of a slope, at the bottom of a slope,
 or on a relatively high point, with rock outcrops or the land
94                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


surface rising above it. The monuments, then, were clearly not
sited for maximum visibility in the landscape. They were only
meant to be seen, or approached, from certain directions.
    One notable feature of the peninsulas of south-west Wales is
the presence not only of dramatic cliffs but of inland outcrops of
igneous and other rocks. Fourteen of the site locations (54 per
cent) were chosen in a close or direct relationship to these. A fur-
ther four sites in the Nevern valley, I will argue, are intimately
related to one of the highest and most dramatic craggy outcrops
of the Preseli mountains, Carn Ingli, providing a central symbolic
focal point for this group of monuments.
    Just to the west of Fishguard harbour a north-south row of
three stone chambers is located on a high point with originally
(the view is now blocked by houses) sweeping vistas over to the
east, with Carn Ingli visible in the distance. Immediately to the
west of the chambers a rock outcrop juts out and rises above
them. These chambers are much ruined; but the capstones and
their long axes seem to be orientated so that they face west-east,
i.e. towards the harbour below and the rock outcrop above them.
This location is duplicated in the only other case in south-west
Wales where a row of burial chambers occurs - Morfa Bychan on
the south coast. Here there is a north-south row of four burial
chambers set high up on a sloping headland next to a long, low
and linear rock outcrop blocking all views to the west, and over-
looking a small bay to the east (Fig. 3. 9). The chambers here are
surrounded by oval or circular cairn structures. These four mon-
uments are situated on a slope rising from south to north, below
the outcrop to the west. As one moves up the slope from south to
north, the chambers get progressively closer to the outcrop itself,
 so that the northern chamber is actually built up against it. This
monument has an entrance which faces east towards the bay
below. In entering the monument from the east one would be
 approaching and 'entering' the rock outcrop behind it to the
west. Moving up the slope from south to north, the third monu-
 ment is situated directly below a natural stack of rock eroded
 from the main escarpment, known as the 'Druid's Altar' (Figs.
 3.10 and 3.11). This sequence of monuments, progressively situat-
 ed so as to be closer and closer to the rocks beyond in the course
 of upward movement, must have been one which was integrated
 and 'made sense of through persons moving closer to the rock as
 they moved from monument to monument. Such a sequence
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   95
96                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape



                                                  North




                                       Druid's Altar




                                       Steep slope to bay

             Rock outcrop




Figure 3.10. Plan of the Morfa Bychan cemetery.

would act so as to connect the monuments systematically to the land
as they became increasingly integrated with the parent rock itself.
   Built of the same rock as the outcrop itself, and linearly aligned
so as to run parallel to it, these monuments are completely invisi-
ble from only a short distance away. The rock outcrop itself is
clearly visible from Gilman point on the other side of the bay to
the east at a distance of 500 m., but not the monuments them-
selves. The rock outcrops thus simultaneously make the monu-
ments visible and invisible. The natural rocks, such prominent
features of the landscape, help to locate the monuments in space;
but the monuments themselves cannot be seen.
   Such a situation of monument visibility and invisibility in rela-
tion to rock outcrops is duplicated elsewhere in relation to both
coastal and inland monument sites. Two types of rock outcrops
were chosen by which to site monuments: (i) 'linear' and (ii) 'cir-
cular'. In the first case the monuments, as at Fishguard and Morfa
Bychan, are built alongside and against the outcrop, so that the
monument entrances in some cases resemble caves in the rock
outcrop itself (Fig. 3.12), recalling the caves and rock shelters
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   97
98   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           99


occupied during the Mesolithic on Caldey island. These rock
outcrops may be in any cardinal direction in relation to the mon-
ument, which can be situated to the west, east, south or north of
them; and in one case on St David's Head the burial chamber is
located between two low outcrops. In the second case the monu-
ments are constructed at a short distance of no more than a few
hundred metres away from a nearby circular outcrop to the west,
east or north (Fig. 3.13). Those monuments situated next to the
circular outcrops are usually at a greater distance from the coast.
    These rock outcrops are clearly dominant focal points in the
landscape in a way in which the monuments themselves are not
(Fig. 3.14). I have already pointed out that intervisibility is very
restricted, even for monuments located at short distances apart.
Those located in or near the outcrops are completely invisible
until one is next to them. By contrast, the outcrops by which they
are located dominate vistas for considerable distances. They are
far more visually impressive than the monuments themselves. I
will refer to such rock outcrops as natural, non-cultural, or non-
domesticated 'megaliths'. The outcrops key the monuments into
the landscape, drawing attention to their location and making
them special places. At a distance the outcrops indicate where to
look for or expect to find a monument. They both mark out mon-
ument locations and hide them from the eye. They are all in
places up to which one has to climb from surrounding lower
areas, suggesting their ritual liminality and removal from day-to-
day existence (Fig. 3.15).
    These rock outcrops would have served as important land-
marks and orientation points, as they do today. Paths of move-
ment might be expected to run between them and the
monuments placed by or near to them (Fig. 3.16). For example,
the monument at Longhouse, Carreg Samson (Fig. 3.17), is locat-
 ed roughly equidistant between two low circular rock outcrops,
with which it is intervisible, one 300 m. to the east and the other
 to the west, with the coast a short distance away to the north. It is
 not hard to suggest that these linearly related natural and cultur-
 al locales served to act together as symbolically important places
 on a path of movement along the coast.
    None of the Nevern group of monuments (Fig. 3. 6) in the east
 of the study area are immediately next to or built into rock out-
 crops, although the largest and most visually impressive of them,
 Pentre Ifan, is situated about 700 m. to the north-west of an
A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   101
102   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   103
104   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           105

unusual row of four prominent circular outcrops (Fig. 3.18). It is
interesting to note that, while none of the Nevern monuments are
intervisible, they are all deliberately sited so as to command vis-
tas of the landscape feature that completely dominates the visual
field in this area, the high crag of Carn Ingli. The specific choice to
locate some of these structures only a few hundred metres away
from their present positions would make this impossible. The
largest and most impressive monument in the group, Pentre Ifan,
is located directly below Carn Ingli, which is 3.5 km. to the west.
There are indications that the original entrance to the burial
chamber at Pentre Ifan was on the eastern side (Barker 1992: 24),
in which case one's vistas would be completely dominated by
Carn Ingli while approaching and before entering the monument
chamber. The rock outcrop of Carn Ingli dips roughly along a
south to north axis, with the higher end at the south. The dip of
the capstone of Pentre Ifan is also south to north, and the ritually
important forecourt area is at the higher end. The long axis of the
cairn which originally surrounded the chamber (probably built
later) also runs from south to north (Fig. 3.19). Here important
architectural features of the monument appear to duplicate the
incline of the mountain outcrop. From the two northernmost
monuments in the group, Llech y Dribedd (Fig. 3.20) and
Trellyffaint, there are sweeping views across the Nevern valley to
Carn Ingli; but the closest coastline immediately to the north of
these monuments, only just over 1 km. to the north, is invisible.
Only glimpses of sea, the Fishguard bay area to the west, are vis-
ible in the distance. Neither monument is visible from the other.
The location of these two monuments seems to have been delib-
erately chosen with reference to Carn Ingli rather than to the
coast, which is only about 1 km. to their north. The relationship of
 the monuments to Carn Ingli in the Nevern valley seems to be a
 generalized one, in so far as they are obviously preferentially
 sited in such a manner that it should be visible from them; and
 this contrasts with those other cases where monuments are very
 close to or actually built up against a prominent rock outcrop.
    There are only a few monuments whose placement cannot be
 accounted for in relation to coastal cliffs, crags or rock outcrops;
 and in these cases the symbolic geography influencing location
 seems to be highly individualized. Location on natural paths and
 trackways through the landscape appears to be an important fac-
 tor here, as might be expected. For example, the monument at
106   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   107
108   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales         109

Mountain is on a saddle of a pass through the Preseli mountains.
Gwal y Filiast (Fig. 3.21) is located on a forested slope falling
steeply down to the river Taf. Isolated from other monuments
and the furthest from the coast (17 km. away), it is situated
towards the top of the steep slope running down to the river. The
large capstone dips from west to east down towards the river,
and the chamber entrance also faces east down the slope. Why
this location on the river course rather than any other? Standing
at the site, the roar of the water below may be heard. Just at the
point where the monument is located the river descends with
white water down a series of rapids. Upstream and downstream
the water is calm. I want to suggest that the monument is located
precisely here because of the presence of the rapids below. It is
interesting to note in this connection the importance of rapids in
rivers in many systems of mythological thought as constituting
doors or openings to the underworld.

Conclusion
The finds from excavations of the megaliths of south-west Wales
are meagre, even from recent and well-excavated examples
(Grimes 1948; Lynch 1975; Barker 1992: 19-21). The acid soils
have destroyed all but the remains of cremated human bones,
which have been recovered from the chambers of four monu-
ments. The only other finds are a few flint flakes and sherds of
between one to three early to middle Neolithic vessels. This does
not exactly suggest that the monuments were major foci for arte-
fact deposition. The generally small size of the monument cham-
bers indicates that these were very possibly places for the
deposition of a few dedicatory ancestral remains, and were not
used for successive interment. Their primary purpose, in fact,
seems to have been neither for burial nor deposition. It is difficult
to make out a case that they acted as central territorial markers.
There is no evidence to suggest that they were marking the cen-
tres of areas of land with a high arable component. They rather
seem to have acted primarily as symbolic reference and ritually
important ceremonial meeting-points on paths of movement,
drawing attention to the relationship between local groups and
the landscape - itself already a constructed symbolic form of
named places, pathways and significant locales from the
Mesolithic onwards. I argue in Chapter 6 that the nature of this
relationship with the landscape was essentially transformative.
110   A   Phenomenology   of   Landscape
Chapter 4
Escarpments and Spurs: Places and
Monuments in the Black Mountains

Introduction
The Black Mountains constitute an upland area of Old Red
Sandstone dividing the ancient rocks of mid-Wales from areas of
Carboniferous limestone and Millstone Grit to the south. To the
north, west and south they rise up to around 700 m. in a series of
impressively steep, well-defined escarpments, with spurs jutting
into the flood plains through which flow the major rivers, the Usk
and the Wye. To the south-east they are irregularly split up by a
series of steep-sided valleys cut down by roughly parallel stream
systems. A series of chambered long cairns are found in a rough
semicircle along the Usk and Wye valleys, the only inland mega-
lithic monuments known in Wales. For south-east Wales as a
whole, including the Glamorgan lowlands and uplands, the
Brecon Beacons and the Black Mountains area, a series of earlier
and later Mesolithic sites have also been documented (Savory
1961; Jacobi 1980: 191 ff.; Berridge 1980; Stanton 1984; Britnell
1984: 136-8; Smith and Cloutman 1988; Wymer 1977). The main
concentration of these sites occurs at the head of the Rhondda
valleys, and relatively few locales are yet known from central
areas of the Brecon Beacons or Black Mountains (Figs. 4.1 and
4.2). This is almost certainly attributable to lack of field survey.
The majority of the sites in the Glamorgan uplands were located
by field-walking ploughed areas and tracks created by the
Forestry Commission from the 1960s onwards.


Mesolithic Locales
On the basis of visits to fifteen locales, from which there are major
flint scatters, the following general classes of places may be dis-
tinguished:

                                                                 111
112                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 4.1. The distribution of Mesolithic locales in south-east Wales. For
inset see Fig. 4.2. Places mentioned in the text:
1. Ogmore                               5. Cefn Hill
2. Pant Sychbant                        6. Dorstone
3. Waun-Fingen-Felen                    7. Craig y Llyn
4. Gwernvale                            8. Mynydd Blaenrhondda.




Figure 4.2. Mesolithic locales at the head of the Rhondda valleys.
                                            Source: Stanton 1984: Fig. 12b.
                     By kind permission of the University of Wales Press
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments             113

    1. Places located in enclosed upland locations around what are
now peat bogs but may have been small lakes during the
Mesolithic. These occur at the head of small streams which drop
down into a major river valley, providing a natural axis for move-
ment through the landscape. Pant Sychbant (Fig. 4.3) and Waun-
Fingen-Felen are examples of this type of location. At least twelve
flint scatters with earlier and later Mesolithic material have been
recovered from the former lake margins at Waun-Fingen-Felen,
on the north-east side (Barton, pers. comm.). Just to the south of
these flint scatters is a spectacular swallow-hole, surrounded by
jagged rocks into which a stream draining the bog disappears.
    2. Places located at the bottom of major river valleys on river
terraces. There were possibly many such locations, now buried in
alluvial deposits. The early and late Mesolithic flint scatter found
underneath the chambered long cairn at Gwernvale represents
such a location.
    3. Places on flat ridge tops by major river valleys, such as Cefn
Hill and Dorstone Hill directly overlooking the Golden valley.
    4. Places located immediately above dramatic escarpment
edges commanding panoramic vistas over the heads of valleys
and across passes in the mountains. The extensive flint scatters at
Craig y Llyn and Mynydd Blaenrhonnda in the Glamorgan
uplands are representative of such locations (Figs. 4. 4 and 4. 5).
    Common features of most of these Mesolithic locales are their
repeated use from the earlier to the later Mesolithic, a situation
chosen to command extensive views in two or more cardinal
directions across river valleys, and their positioning on natural
routes, trackways or paths through the landscape that would
have been followed both by people and migrating animals. Craig
y Llyn, for example, is on the junction of natural trackways link-
ing the Glamorgan uplands with those of south Brecknock
 (Savory 1961: 164). The same general locations appear to have
been returned to repeatedly during the earlier and later
 Mesolithic. While the majority of the microliths from the flint
 scatters are later Mesolithic in date there is a consistent represen-
 tation of earlier Mesolithic forms at sites such as Cefn Hill and
 Waun-Fingen-Felen (Jacobi 1980: 193; Berridge 1980) and Cwm y
 Fforch in the Glamorgan uplands at the head of the Rhondda val-
 leys (Stanton 1984: 64). At Gwernvale a chambered cairn overlay
 pre-cairn Neolithic and earlier and later Mesolithic occupation
 scatters. Half of these Mesolithic sites are located directly below
114   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   115
116   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments              117

rock outcrops or on the tops of sheer escarpment edges -
effectively inland versions of the cliff-tops of the Pembrokeshire
coast.
    Jacobi and Stanton have proposed for south-east Wales as a
whole a model of seasonal movement from coastal locations
occupied during the winter to upland exploitation camps in the
summer similar to that postulated for the Pennines (Mellars
1976), with groups following the upwards migrations of red deer.
It is pertinent in this respect to note that the bulk of the flint and
chert material recovered from Craig y Llyn in the Glamorgan
uplands may be of coastal origin (Jacobi 1980:195). Recent envi-
ronmental evidence suggests perhaps the deliberate burning of
upland areas to stimulate browse (Cloutman 1983; Smith and
Cloutman 1988).

Flint Scatters and Occupational Continuity
Neolithic surface find material is frequently found in the same
localities as the Mesolithic flint scatters. There is no positive evi-
dence here of any direct continuity between the Mesolithic and
Neolithic; but the choice of precisely the same location for the
construction of the Gwernvale chambered monument as had
been occupied repeatedly during the Mesolithic suggests strong-
ly something more than mere chance, as Saville has pointed out
(1990: 262). One possibility here is that Mesolithic settlement
activity continued until the onset of Neolithic settlement beneath
the place where the long cairn was later built. The valleys of the
Usk and the Wye have long provided routes into and from mid-
Wales, providing links with the coastal lowlands of Glamorgan
and the Severn and forming a bridge between lowland and high-
land areas. The site of Gwernvale and its use was embedded in
social memory. The fact that this area had been previously settled
and cleared of woodland and obstacles, marked by the deposi-
tion of cultural debris, a focus for tracks and pathways, suggests
a strong symbolic element to the choice of the location, one that
could ritually link past and present.
   To give some other examples: at Cefn Glas Mesolithic flint and
chert artefacts were found just to the south of a Neolithic hut site
(Stanton 1984: 59). At Waun-Fingen-Felen activity appears to
have continued into the Neolithic, with a charcoal layer at the
base of the blanket peat at one site giving a date of 4370-80 BP
118                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


(Caseldine 1990: 36). Mixed Mesolithic and Neolithic flint assem-
blages were recovered from Pant Sychbant and Craig y Llyn in
the Black Mountains and the Glamorgan uplands respectively
(Savory 1961; Burke 1966; Webley 1976: 31). At the coastal site of
Ogmore late Mesolithic material is mixed with Neolithic occupa-
tion debris (Webley 1969: 289; Jacobi 1980). Microliths are record-
ed from the immediate vicinity of Arthur's Stone chambered
monument. The repeated utilization of these specific locales,
when considered together with a similar overall distribution of
chambered monuments and Mesolithic sites in south-east Wales,
repeating the pattern already noted for Pembrokeshire, prompts
one to infer long-term regularities linking peoples and places. It
is tempting to suggest in the light of these observations that
Gwernvale may not be an isolated instance, and that many other
chambered cairns may be covering locales already utilized dur-
ing the Mesolithic and embedded in social memory.

Chambered Cairns and the Landscape
The megalithic monuments of the Black Mountains are the only
substantial inland group in Wales. At present the location of four-
teen monuments is known, and there may originally have been
one or two additional sites which have now been totally
destroyed (Grimes 1936b; Corcoran 1969: 21-4; Britnell and
Savory 1984: 3-9). All these monuments appear to be stone-built
long cairns of 'Cotswold-Severn' type. There is considerable
diversity in monument morphology. Seven are long mounds
with terminal and/or lateral chambers. A few appear to possess
additional chambers sealed within the mound, but in the absence
of detailed investigation the precise position and nature of the
chambers is uncertain in the majority of cases. One site, Arthur's
Stone, differs from the rest in that a single elongated polygonal
chamber with an anteroom set in an oval mound is approached
by an acutely angled passage. All the other cairns possess or
would have possessed between two and four or more chambers.
Four well-excavated and documented monuments are trape-
zoidal horned cairns with false portal entrances and forecourts
(Grimes 1939b; Savory 1956; Britnell and Savory 1984). Cairn
length varies greatly from c.15 m. to c.60m. The lateral chambers
were normally provided with a short passage leading from the
edge of the cairn revetment walls. In some cases chambers are
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments               119


paired on opposite sides of the cairn (Fig. 4. 6). For some monu-
ments the chamber nearest to the forecourt was the most massive,
suggesting a tapering away of cairn height, which at Pen-y-
Wyrlod was at least 3 m. at the portal end (Britnell 1991: 14).
Evidence from three excavations suggests that the outer revet-
ment walls of the cairn/eontinued uninterrupted across the ends
of the chamber passages (Britnell and Savory 1984: 147), at least
in their lower courses. It seems likely that, except during brief
periods when access to them was required, the chambers would
have been completely concealed in the cairn. At Gwernvale
Britnell estimates that lateral chambers 2 and 3 were entered up
to at least three times, and chamber 1 at least once, by means of
the removal of the revetment wall concealing them (ibid.: 148).
The chambers, then, and their entrances were clearly not intended
to have a visual impact in contrast with the orientational long
axis of the cairn itself (see below).
   The cairns of the Black Mountains were built on light Old Red
Sandstone glacial drift deposits, with the exception of Gwernvale




Figure 4.6. Groundplans of selected 'Cotswold-Severn' long cairns in the
Black Mountains (not to scale). 1. Ty Isaf; 2: Pipton; 3: Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth; 4: Gwernvale; 5. Reconstruction diagram of Gwernvale.
120                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


and Garn Coch, which are situated on alluvial gravels and sands
(Webley 1959: 291). Heavy clay soils were avoided, and the prin-
cipal vegetation surrounding the sites was relatively open dry
climax oak forests, with local development of heathlands on the
uplands as indicated from pollen analysis from the ancient soil
surface beneath the Mynydd Troed cairn (Crampton and Webley
1966). Both Webley (1976) and Savory (1980) have called into
question whether there ever was any cultivation in an upland
area much better suited to grazing such as the Black Mountains in
Wales. Faunal evidence from the Black Mountains is exclusively
derived from excavations at the monuments. The presence of the
bones of cattle, deer, pig and sheep from the monument cham-
bers and forecourt areas suggests the ritual importance of feast-
ing cycles at the monuments, which were possibly far removed
from Neolithic settlement areas.
   Webley has argued that the soils, although free-draining, were
unsuited to cultivation with a Neolithic technology, and suggest-
ed a significant pastoral element in the economy based on cattle
and sheep, with perhaps longer- and shorter-distance seasonal
transhumance patterns developing between the highland and
lowland areas of southern Wales, and more locally between the
river valleys and upland areas within the Black Mountains them-
selves. The cairns are, according to Webley (1976: 30), located
within areas that would have been utilized as summer pastures
only, with winter settlement occupying the Usk valley and the
lowlands of the Welsh coast. The monuments located along the
river valleys effectively become markers along pathways from
the lowlands to the uplands.
   It does not seem necessary to invoke a fully-fledged pastoral
economy; but the suggestion that there was a substantial degree
of population mobility during the earlier Neolithic, seasonally
moving between different landscapes, is pertinent. The overall
pattern of social movement, in other words, repeats that already
established during the Mesolithic, involving winter-summer,
lowland to upland movements. The significant difference would
appear to be the substitution of some domesticates, primarily
cattle and sheep or goat, for total reliance on wild food resources.
   The monuments extend in an arc around the Black Mountains.
In the north and west they are located along the valley of the Wye
and its tributaries, the Dore and the Llynfi; in the south, along the
valley of the Usk and one major tributary, the Rhiangoll. No sites
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments                      121


have been documented to the east of the Black Mountains
(Fig. 4.7). The monuments are thus located along the major rivers,
where the escarpment edge is most regular and clearly defined.
From all the monuments except one vistas are dominated by the
Black Mountains rising up in the distance. The major rivers or
their tributaries are visible from all the sites. From seven of the
fourteen monuments the irregular outlines of the Brecon Beacons
to the south are also visible in the near or far distance.
   The locations of the monuments can be divided into three cat-
egories: (i) those situated in a lowland location along the river
valleys on or near to river terraces above the flood plain; (ii^ in
intermediate situations above the river valleys, commanding
extensive views but at a relatively low height; and (iii) sites situ-
ated high up on ridges and saddles and on undulating terrain
below the Black Mountains (Table 4.1). Roughly 50 per cent of the

Table 4.1. Altitudes, orientation and length of the long cairns in the Black
Mountains Group. Type refers to altitude - low (L), intermediate (I) and
                 high (H). Map numbers refer to Fig. 4.7.

Name                    Map     Height     Type         Ort.      Length
Cross Lodge Farm          1       180       I       W-E              18
Arthur's Stone            2       280       H       NNW-SSE          21
Court Farm, Clyro         3        90       L       NE-SW            32
Pen-yr-Wyrlod,
Llanigon                  4       251       H        ENE-WSW         15
Little Lodge              5       137       I        N-S             58
Pipton                    6       145       L        NE-SW           37
Ffostyll North            7       312       H        E-W             40
Ffostyll South            8       312       H        NE-SW           36
Ty Isaf                   9       312       H        N-S             35
Mynydd Troed             10       358       H        NNE-SSW         28
Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth                 11       260       H        NNW-ESE         60
Ty Illtyd                 12      215       I        N-S             22
Gwernvale                 13       79       L        NW-SE           45
Garn Coch                 14       19       L        N-S?            19
122                                 A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 4.7. The distribution of long cairns in the Black Mountains.
Monument names are given in Table 1. Land over 500 m. hatched.
Relief features mentioned in the text: MT: Mynydd Troed; YD: Y Das;
LHK: Lord Hereford's Knob; H.B. Hay Bluff; TM: Table Mountain; HH:
Hatterall Hill; ML: Mynydd Llangorse; YG: Y Grib.
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments            123

monuments are located in the first or second categories and 50
per cent in the third.
   Two of the monuments at Ffostyll are situated only about
50 m. apart, the others are situated at a distance of between
2.0 km. and 5.6 km. from their nearest neighbours (mean distance
2.6 km.), thus displaying some considerable regularity in their
spacing. Second nearest-neighbour distances range between 2
and 12 km. (mean distance 6 km.). Their location appears to be
strongly related to not only the major river valleys but also tribu-
tary streams, in such a way that hypothetical 'territorial' demar-
cation can be related to the flows of river courses (see Fig. 4.7).
One of the monuments, Ty Illtyd, is comparatively isolated; the
others occur in what may be associated pairs, located in relation
to specific landscape features on opposite sides of the major
rivers, apart from a small cluster of five monuments in the centre
of the distribution.


Orientation and Ritual Axis

The orientations of the long cairns display a complete lack of
regularity. All the eight major orientational axes of the compass
are represented between the two poles, north to south and west
to east. A maximum number of 3-4 monuments share the same
orientational axis for the cairn. Cairn orientation differs for all
first nearest-neighbours, while only three second nearest-neigh-
bours share the same orientational axis. The most dramatic case
of this is the two cairns at Ffostyll situated next to each other,
where the northern cairn is orientated W-E and the southern one
is almost diametrically opposed, NE-SW. Well-excavated or pre-
served examples of these cairns do show some regularity in the
placement of the broad forecourt area. In the two cases where the
cairn is orientated NW-SE the broad end faces SE. For the two
out of three documented cases of the cairn running NE-SW the
forecourt area faces NE. So, while the orientational axes of the
cairns display a complete lack of regularity, there appears to be
some uniformity in the siting of the forecourt area in the cases of
those cairns sharing the same orientational axis, irrespective of
their location in the landscape.
    When looked at in the abstract the lack of regularity in the
orientation of the cairn axes would seem to suggest that the
124                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


cairns were orientated at random, that there are no principles
regarding their precise directional siting. However, when we
begin to consider the relationship between the long axes of the
cairns and dominant landscape features an entirely different pic-
ture emerges. Two different principles relating to cairn axis ori-
entation may be distinguished:
(i) Cairns orientated with their axes running parallel with the
major rivers or their tributaries (five sites); and
(ii) Cairns with their axes orientated towards prominent spurs on
the Black Mountains (nine sites).
In the first group the long cairn axis appears to be clearly related
to the orientation of the rivers, with the long axis in each case
broadly duplicating that of the river valley. These cairns are, as
might be expected, all located at low or intermediate heights
above the river flood plain (Table 4.1). If one is standing on or at
the terminal ends of these cairns one's eye is drawn along the
river course, up and down the valley (Fig. 4. 8). The cairn's orien-
tation clearly duplicates that of the river valley. As the river val-
leys change direction so do the cairn orientations. The only
exception to this is the comparatively isolated site of Ty Illtyd,
whose cairn axis opposes valley orientation. This site is the only
one that could be argued to be symbolically more closely related
to the Brecon Beacons than the Black Mountains, and its isolation
from the other monuments has already been noted.
   In the second group, consisting of cairns in high locations,
with one possible exception, for which precise cairn orientation is
unknown (Garn Coch), but which is sited within clear view of the
spectacular platform of Table Mountain (Fig. 4. 9), the long axis
appears to be intimately directionally related to particularly
prominent points on the escarpment edges of the Black
Mountains-spurs or terminal points (Table 4. 2; Figs. 4. 10-4. 12).
Only two of the cairns, Ty Isaf and Mynydd Troed, have both
ends of their axes orientated so as to face, or point towards,
prominent mountain spurs. One terminal axis of the other cairns
faces undulating terrain that either rises up behind the end of the
cairn (five cases), thus restricting visibility to a few hundred
metres or less, or slopes gently away below the cairn (two cases).
The cairns are, in most cases, situated at a distance of between
1 and 6 km. from the spurs to which they are orientated, thus
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   125
126   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments                  127

Table 4.2. The directional orientation of the terminal ends of the
Black Mountain long cairns in relation to topographically dominant land-
scape features (spurs and terminal ends of mountain escarpments).
                            See also Fig. 4.7.

Name              Map      End     Points to    End       Points to
Arthur's Stone      2     NNW       -           SSE    Hatterall Hill
Pen-yr-Wyrlod,
Llanigon            4     wsw       _           ESE    Cussop Hill
Little Lodge        5     N         -           S      Y Das
Ffostyll North      7     w         -           E      Lord Hereford's
                                                       Knob
Ffostyll South      8     NE        -           SW     Mynydd Troed
Ty Isaf             9     N         Y Grib      s      Mynydd Troed
Mynydd Troed       10     NNE       Mynydd      ssw    Mynydd
                                    Troed              Llangorse
Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth           11     NW        _           SE     Mynydd Troed
Garn Coch          14     N?        Table
                                    Mountain?


maximizing the angle of view. In only one case (Mynydd Troed)
is the cairn situated directly below the spur, so that one must tilt
the head to look up at it (Figs. 4.13 and 4.14).
   The cairns on higher ground, then, located away from the
main river valleys, connect up with prominent topographic fea-
tures of the landscape in relation to at least one terminal axis.
Despite the fact that they point towards these landscape features,
the actual places chosen for cairn location were not themselves
particularly visibly dominant high points in the landscape. Only
Arthur's Stone, set on a ridge top, commands panoramic views in
all directions. Some of the cairns were deliberately sited so as not
to be intervisible.
    Five monuments in the centre of the distribution of the Black
Mountains Group taken as a whole are intervisible, and two
others at the south-eastern terminal end (Fig. 4.15). With the
exception of Ffostyll north and south, which stand next to each
other, intervisibility is restricted between pairs of monuments.
128   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   129
130
      A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   131
132   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments              133




Figure 4.15. Patterns of intervisibility between the long cairns in the
Black Mountains.
134                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Clear evidence of siting to prevent intervisibility can be seen in
the locations of Court Farm Clyro and Pen-yr-Wyrlod, Llanigon
(Fig. 4.15: Nos. 3 and 4). These cairns are situated 3 km. apart on
opposite sides of the Wye river. The two sites would have been
intervisible had the latter been sited only a few hundred metres
to the east of its present location. The view between the monu-
ments is blocked by a spur immediately to the north-west of Pen-
yr-Wyrlod, Llanigon jutting out into the Wye valley. The location
of the monument seems to have been chosen with precisely this
in mind, as were those of others.
    The location of the monuments at Ffostyll (see Figs. 4.7 and
4.15: Nos. 7 and 8) in relation to other sites is of particular inter-
est, since this is the only pair of monuments to occur. It is of great
interest to note that they are situated exactly in the middle of the
Black Mountains Group. Although relatively close to the Pipton
and Little Lodge cairns, they are only intervisible with Pen-y-
Wyrlod, Talgarth, situated farther away to the south-west. The
southern monument has one long axis orientated towards
Mynydd Troed (Fig. 4.16), towards which the south-east end of
the Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth cairn also faces. The eastern axis of
the northern monument faces a prominent spur of the Black
Mountains known as Lord Hereford's Knob. The two monu-
ments at Ffostyll are located adjacent to another spur, Y Das,
where the line of direction of the escarpment edge of the Black
Mountains changes from running in a north-easterly to a south-
westerly direction. This change in the angle of direction of the
escarpment edge is particularly marked when viewed from the
 cairn location, but appears less accentuated when looking at a
topographic map. The land surface rises gently up to the north
 and west of the Ffostyll cairns, blocking intervisibility with the
 Pipton and Little Lodge cairns. However, the southern end of the
 latter is orientated so as to also face, or point, towards Y Das
 (Fig. 4.10). A common focal point, in this case, connects together
 these two monuments, which are not themselves intervisible.
    Taking together evidence for monument intervisibility and
 relationships between monuments and dominant focal points in
 the landscape to which the cairns are orientated, the Ffostyll
 cairns, Pen-y-Wyrlod, Pipton and Little Lodge can be argued to
 form a coherent interconnected sub-group of monuments,
 including highland and intermediate, spur-orientated and valley-
 orientated locations. The rest of the Black Mountains Group of
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   135
136                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


monuments form pairs, each of which includes one monument
with its cairn orientated along a river valley and the other with a
spur orientation (see Fig. 4.7). Thus within each of the five groups
monuments align one's vision both along the valleys and
towards important dominant focal points in the Black Mountains.
The orientation of the mound axes directed and focused attention
to the two features of the landscape of essential importance and
significance - the Black Mountains and the major valleys running
around them. The axes of the long cairns either duplicate those of
the natural topography, in the case of those in lowland situations
following the orientations of the river valleys, or point towards
striking focal points of sacred significance. That these points
would have been known and sedimented in social memory from
the Mesolithic onwards, and might be associated with ancestral
powers, seems very likely.
   From 7 (50 per cent) of the cairns, including all those centrally
located, the prominent elongated mountain of Mynydd Troed is
clearly visible. Two cairns, Ty Isaf and that named after the
mountain, flank it, and the largest and most impressive monu-
ment in the Black Mountains group, Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth, is
located just to the south of it, 1.5 km. away. The long axis of Pen-
y-Wyrlod is orientated towards Mynydd Troed, and its high fore-
court end is closest to the mountain. It is particularly fascinating
to note the similarity in visual form between Mynydd Troed and
the original shapes of the long cairns (Fig. 4.17). Could this be
why the largest monument in the Black Mountains is built just
beneath it, and why it is visible from so many of the monuments
clustering in this area?


Looking Out and Going In: Burials, Chambers and Topography

Burial deposits in the Black Mountains cairns have been relatively
well preserved. They exhibit features typical for the Neolithic of
southern Britain - the differential selection and arrangement of
human bones in the chambers, exploiting basic body symmetries
such as right and left and upper and lower body parts (Shanks
and Tilley 1982; Thomas 1991: Chapter 6). In the Pipton cairn a
deposit of bones was discovered under the floor slabs of the
south transept in Chamber I, consisting of the crushed skull
bones of a juvenile with some added fragments of long bones,
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   137
138                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


together with hazel-nut shell fragments and an unworked flint
flake. In the chamber entrance there were four other discrete
deposits lodged against the sidestones, consisting of a lower-jaw
bone, part of a humerus and part of a pelvis and a collection of
long bones. Chamber II had seven piles of bones placed against
the walls and a further deposit underneath the chamber floor.
Lower limb bones are more frequent than upper, and left bones
outnumber right in a ratio of roughly 3:1 (Savory 1956: 21-2, 26;
West 1956: 47). Chamber I at Ty Isaf contained the remains of at
least 17 individuals, with groups of bones positioned along the
side slabs and others stuffed into crevices (Grimes 1939b: 126).
Smaller quantities of disarticulated remains were discovered in
Chambers II and III. The lateral chambers NE II and NE III at Pen-
y-Wyrlod, Talgarth contained the disarticulated remains of,
respectively, six and seven individuals. Fragments of burnt bone
and part of a human temporal bone were also recovered from the
socket of a portal orthostat. A child burial in a cist in one of the
horns of the monument indicates its secondary use after the mon-
ument had been closed and blocked off (Britnell and Savory 1984:
19-23; Luff et al. 1984: 36-7).
    Apart from the human burial deposits finds from the monu-
ments are meagre. From Pipton the only artefacts recovered were
the flint flake from the burial deposit in Chamber I and a sherd of
Neolithic pottery from beneath the cairn (Savory 1956:14-15). Ty
Isaf yielded a little more material: two leaf-shaped arrowheads
and an axe, a bone pin and sherds from a single bowl in Chamber
I, fragments of seven bowls and a sandstone pendant from
Chamber II and further Neolithic potsherds from Chamber III
 (Grimes 1939b: 126 ff.) From Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth only three
 flint artefacts were recovered, plus part of a bone flute made from
 a sheep's tibia from Chamber NE III and a few pot fragments,
 most of which were recovered in the vicinity of Chamber NE III.
 Of the large number of Neolithic finds recovered from
Gwernvale only a few are contemporary with the use of the
 monument, the rest dating to pre-cairn-construction occupation
 levels. Finds from the chambers are restricted to fragments of
 between four and five pots.
     Ground plans and the locations of internal monument cham-
 bers and passages from excavations or surface survey are known
 in more or less detail for a number of sites (Table 4.3). Those
 chambers orientated along the cairn axis obviously share the
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   139
140                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


same focal view in the landscape, and it is these that are orientat-
ed towards spurs. In other cases the middles of escarpment edges
are visible just before entering the chamber. This contrasts with
landscape orientation on leaving the chamber. A majority face
undulating terrain, others the middle of escarpments. In only one
case there is an obvious alignment with an escarpment spur, and
this is at Arthur's Stone. Here the passage leading to the chamber
bends round at an angle, so that its mouth faces Hay Bluff
(Fig. 4.18). This site contrasts with the other Black Mountains
monuments in the form and nature of the chamber and passage.
While at the other monuments there are good grounds for believ-
ing that the internal chambers were sealed and hidden within the
cairn, and the entrances to the passages to the lateral chambers
only periodically open and visible, Arthur's Stone more probably
represents a monument in which the passage may not have been
blocked and concealed. Its orientation to a mountain spur as
opposed to the lack of orientation of the entrances of the lateral
chambers in the other long cairns to visually dominant landscape
features then becomes explicable. For the other monuments the
orientation of the long axis of the cairn in relation to dramatic
landscape features appears to be of great importance, and the
chamber orientation of little or secondary significance in this
respect. However, what one would see on entering the chamber,
largely the middle sections of escarpment edges, appears more
crucial than the rather mundane view on exiting facing away
from the mountains. But this could also be explained in another
manner. Entering the chambers entails removal to a sacred ritual
space, which either shares the cairn axis orientation to dominant
focal points in the landscape - spurs - or duplicates the orienta-
tion of the escarpment edge, thus connecting the chambers with
the overall spatial orientation of the mountains themselves. This
is particularly important for those cairns whose long axes are
aligned along valleys for which we have evidence for chamber
orientation (Pipton; Gwernvale). Leaving the chamber entails a
return to the domain of everyday life, where an individual would
see undulating woodland or pasture. The placement of the bones
of the ancestral dead in the chambers in effect sedimented them
into the land, and with reference to the orientational axes of the
chambers and passages. In this manner the biographies of indi-
viduals became fixed in relation to particular places and axes of
symbolic significance.
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   141
142                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


Conclusion

These monuments were clearly not major sites for the deposition
of artefacts, as is the case for those in south-west Wales. The
successive deposition and subsequent rearrangement of ances-
tral remains in the chamber was of great significance. The nature
of the burial deposits was not purely dedicatory, as may have
been the case in the Pembrokeshire monuments. A significant
presence of domestic animal bones, sheep, pig and cattle, in the
chambers and forecourt areas suggests the use of the monuments
in feasting cycles. By contrast with many of the monuments in
south-west Wales those of the Black Mountains are monumental,
and, in some cases, quite massive constructions, designed to
make an indelible and permanent impact on the landscape; and
the orientation of the long axis was of the utmost significance. In
the Black Mountains there was a will to make the monument vis-
ible that is not manifested in the same form in many of the monu-
ments in south-west Wales. There the landscape (the rock
outcrops) makes the monument visible. In the Black Mountains
the reverse seems to be happening: the monuments draw out and
emphasize important features of the landscape: the axes of the
river valleys and prominent spurs, paths of movement and
prominent landmarks whose ancestral significance had already
been established during the Mesolithic, and whose meanings
were now being re-worked through the process of monument
construction, a point further discussed in Chapter 6.
Chapter 5
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the
Chalk Downland

Introduction

In this chapter I want to consider the relationship between places
and monuments in an area of chalk downland in southern
England, Cranborne Chase, straddling the county boundaries of
Dorset, Hampshire and Wiltshire. While the archaeological land-
scapes considered in the previous two chapters have often been
considered as peripheral to the main areas of early Neolithic set-
tlement, Cranborne Chase has been regarded as one of the most
important 'core' areas of Neolithic Wessex in southern England.
It is a topographically well-defined chalk plateau bounded to the
west by the river Stour, to the north by the Nadder and to the east
by the Avon. The northern and western sides have steep and
impressive escarpment edges. To the east the dip slope running
down to the Avon valley is less sharp and precipitous. The chalk
plateau is highest in the north, approaching 300 m., and gently
dips down and gradually loses itself in the sandy Dorset coastal
heathlands of pine, heather and gorse to the south. From the
highest point, Win Green, in the north the Needles and the Isle of
Wight can be seen some 50 km. away in the distance on a clear
day.
    Cranborne Chase is a bold, open landscape in which the lines
of the land and its contours are far more significant than its
shades, colours and local details. The chalk plateau, roughly
rectangular in form and running for roughly 30 km. in a SW-NE
direction, is broken up by deep coombes and the Ebble valley in
the north. To the south a number of roughly parallel stream and
river valleys, the Crichel and Gussage brooks and the headwaters
of the rivers Allen and Crane, break up the chalk. This gives rise
to a rolling landscape of shallow open valleys separated by gentle

                                                               143
144                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


rounded ridges around 100 m. high, running NW-SE. Numerous
dry valleys lead off the main valleys, giving the local topography
of the southern areas of the Chase a more diverse character.
   Geologically, the chalk downland is broken up on the surface
and alleviated by alluvial deposits along the river and stream
courses, Greensand exposures along the western and northern
escarpments, and areas with clay with flints in the central part of
Cranborne Chase. The highest point in central and southern areas
of the Chase is marked by the sandy and gravelly Reading
beds which cap Penbury Knoll, crowned today with gnarled
pines and visible for up to 12 km. or more across the rolling
downland. From Penbury Knoll there are panoramic views
across the Chase to Win Green in the north and southwards to the
Dorset coast.
   Cranborne Chase was, undoubtedly, one of the great ceremo-
nial landscapes of the early Neolithic in Britain. It contains one of
the major concentrations of earthen long barrows in southern
England, and by far the two most impressive earthworks to be
constructed anywhere in Britain during the Neolithic, the 10 km.-
long Dorset Cursus and a complex of causewayed enclosures on
Hambledon Hill on its western periphery. Field-walking over a
twenty-year period has also recovered the largest and best prove-
nanced collection of Mesolithic flintwork from anywhere on the
chalk downland of southern Britain.


The Mesolithic Landscape

Virtually all the collections are surface flint scatters. Two small
excavations and one more extensive one have been carried out
(Catt et al. 1980; Lewis and Coleman 1984; Higgs 1959). Field sur-
veys have documented 27 major flint scatters in the central area
of Cranborne Chase and in surveyed areas to the north (Arnold
et al. 1988; Ross 1987) (Fig. 5.1). The overall density of sites is
high, ranging between 0.2 and 0.6 sites per square kilometre in
surveyed areas. On the basis of the presence/absence of diagnos-
tic microlith types six sites belong to the earlier Mesolithic and
two to the later Mesolithic (Arnold et al. 1988: 120), while the
majority have both earlier and later microlith forms. Taking
frequencies of microliths into consideration six sites are domi-
nated by earlier material and ten by later forms.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                     145




Figure 5.1. The distribution of Mesolithic locales in central areas of
Cranborne Chase and finds of early Neolithic leaf-shaped arrowheads in
relation to surface geology.
Key: 1: Greensand; 2: Clay-with-flints on chalk; 3: River gravel on chalk;
4: Reading Beds; 5: Mesolithic locales; 6: 1-5 leaf shaped arrowheads;
6: (large symbol) > 5 leaf-shaped arrowheads.
PK: Penbury Knoll. After Arnold et al. 1988: Fig. 2 and Barrett et al. 1991b:
Fig. 2.4.




   The fact that most assemblages contain both early and later
Mesolithic flintwork points importantly to continuity in the
choice of locales and the exploitation and use of particular areas
of the landscape. Mesolithic occupation began here perhaps as
early as 6,500 BC and continued for 2,000 years or longer, with
repeated visits to the same places. Locales on the Greensand, to
the north, appear to have been occupied later than those on the
river gravels and areas of clay with flints. The spatial distribution
of the flint scatters tends to be compact, most sites on the clay
with flints covering an area of about 80 by 50 m. Some are consid-
erably larger, one near to Iwerne Minster covering an area of
300 X 200 m., within which smaller, more tightly defined flint
146                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


concentrations could be identified (Summers 1941). Spreads of
material locales found on the Greensand may be up to twice this
size (Arnold et al. 1988: 122). The flint scatters on the excavated
site at Downton situated on a river terrace and dominated by
later microlith forms covered an area up to 265 sq. m. (Higgs
1959: 214).
   The only structural evidence from these sites is from Downton
and St Giles Field, Woodcutts. At Downton a series of 23 stake
holes in two discrete areas defining semi-circular or oval areas
were identified, together with concentrations of charcoal, worked
flints and cooking holes. These may be remains of light shelters
with stakes driven into the ground to support them (Higgs 1959:
231). Trial excavations at the Woodcutts site revealed traces of
sub-surface digging of Mesolithic date, but the excavated area
was too small to provide any basis for an interpretation (Catt et al.
1980: 72).
   Field visits were made to a sample of twelve of the Mesolithic
findspots. Four typical locales can be distinguished in relation to
the local topography and geology:
   1. Places close to springheads on the Greensand in the north on
sloping terrain (n = 2);
   2. Places on gentle south-facing slopes in undulating terrain on
areas characterized by clay with flints in central areas of
Cranborne Chase (n = 5);
   3. Places on alluvial deposits in valley bottoms (n = 2);
   4. Places on local high points on flat or sloping terrain (n = 3).
There is nothing particularly remarkable or distinctive with
regard to these places in relation to local topographical features
of the landscape, apart from the evidence for substantial
Mesolithic occupation and activity on Penbury Knoll/Pentridge
Hill, the highest point in the central area of Cranborne Chase
(Wymer 1977: 69, 76; Lewis and Coleman 1984). Field-walking
and a limited excavation here has recovered a large flint assem-
blage at a number of separate locations, dominated by early
microlith forms, but with a small representation of later types. Of
the locales mentioned above, Arnold et al. (1988) have noted that
the second type (on the clay with flints) is by far the most com-
mon, and there is indeed a remarkable degree of preference for
areas with rich flint deposits on clay soils.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                 147


   It is of interest to note that most of the locales are clustered in a
broad NE-SW band running across the centre of Cranborne
Chase, running from the escarpment edge by Hambledon Hill to
the west to Penbury Knoll in the east, with outlying and more iso-
lated site locations on Greensand deposits to the north. This band
of Mesolithic sites is clustered between 2 and 4 km. north of the
Dorest Cursus and the main concentration of long barrows on
Cranborne Chase. They may mark an important axis of move-
ment across the landscape and its alteration through local wood-
land clearance - an axis which only later, in the early Neolithic,
became formalized and culturally embedded by means of monu-
ment construction.


Locales and the Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'

Bradley and others (Bradley et al. 1984: 89; Bradley in Arnold et al.
1988: 125; Barrett et al. 1991b: 30) assume that Mesolithic occupa-
tion on Cranborne Chase effectively came to an end around 4,000
BC, and that there was a hiatus between Mesolithic occupation
and the early Neolithic settlement in which substantial areas of
the chalk downland came into use for the first time, as opposed to
the preferential occupation of areas with clay with flints during
the Mesolithic. Thus, in this scenario, for a period of over 1,000
years Cranborne Chase was unoccupied before the first Neolithic
settlement and the construction of long barrows. One possible
reason suggested for this is that late Mesolithic settlement shifted
from inland to almost exclusively coastal exploitation. Why this
should happen remains unexplained. Some sort of gap between
the late Mesolithic and early Neolithic remains commonplace in
the literature on southern England, but may be more a product of
archaeological categorization and the crudeness of relative dating
with regard to flint assemblages than anything else. Indeed,
Jacobi notes with reference to late Mesolithic settlement in
Hampshire that there were 'no obvious areas whose uptake by
early farmers will not have impinged in some way upon preexist-
ing patterns of territoriality' (Jacobi 1981: 23). Looking at the
overall distribution of Mesolithic and early Neolithic locales in
the landscape, continuity rather than a hiatus may be envisaged
in relation to both settlement and patterns of exploitation of ani-
mal and plant food resources.
148                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


   The early Neolithic evidence is dominated by ceremonial
monuments - earthen long barrows, the causewayed enclosures
on Hambledon Hill on the western fringe of Cranborne Chase
(Mercer 1980, 1988) and the Dorset Cursus (discussed below).
Apart from these sites the only evidence from 'domestic' contexts
is the distribution of leaf-shaped arrowheads, one excavated flint
assemblage beneath a long barrow (Drew and Piggott 1936), and
small ceramic collections from beneath two long barrows and the
Dorset Cursus and from settlement pits on Handley Hill closely
associated with Wor barrow (Barrett et al. 1991b: 30-2). The
distribution of leaf-shaped arrowheads, like the Mesolithic flint
industries, is strongly related to areas of clay with flints, and
there is a concentration of finds on Penbury Knoll. The only
change from the Mesolithic pattern is that some findspots now
appear on the chalk downland in areas where the long barrows
and the Cursus were built. All findspots with over five arrow-
heads occur in areas already occupied during the Mesolithic (Fig.
5.1). This evidence points not only to the continued use of the
same areas of the landscape, but to continuity in economic activi-
ties, with hunting, fishing and gathering still playing, as in Wales,
a dominant role, supplemented by limited numbers of domesti-
cated animals, the remains of which have been almost exclusive-
ly recovered from ritual rather than domestic sites. Moreover,
metrical analysis of early Neolithic flint industries has demon-
strated technological continuity with the later Mesolithic (Pitts
and Jacobi 1979). Gardiner notes that later Mesolithic and early
Neolithic flint assemblages may easily be confused in the absence
of diagnostic pieces (Gardiner 1984: 19), while Care has demon-
strated that the same surface flint sources were exploited for axe
production in both the Mesolithic and the Neolithic (Care 1979).
Bradley himself notes that Mesolithic activity on Cranborne
Chase 'set in motion an oscillation between upland and lowland
settlement which was to continue throughout the prehistoric
period' (in Barrett et al. 1991b: 30). Loess soils, today heavily
eroded, appear to have originally mantled the whole of the chalk
downland and areas with clay with flints on Cranborne Chase, so
that a shift of some Neolithic activity away from areas of clay
with flints cannot be explained as a result of a wish to exploit
better-quality and more easily tilled soils as part and parcel of a
fully-fledged agricultural system (Fisher 1991). Mesolithic activity,
as noted by Care, may have substantially affected the forest
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               149

cover, creating regions of more open country on the chalk down-
land attractive to later Neolithic occupation (Care 1979:100).
    Animal bones from earlier Neolithic contexts associated with
the Thickthorn Down barrow, and primary silts in the ditch of the
Dorset Cursus, include ox, pig, sheep, aurochs, and red and roe
deer, with wild and domestic cattle being most frequent (Jackson
1936; Legge 1991). Legge notes the high proportion of wild ani-
mals represented by the finds from the Cursus ditch - at least 25
per cent - and that the majority of the remains were whole skulls
or parts of skulls, or mandibles, i.e. they do not seem to be ordi-
nary butchery deposits (Legge 1991: 55). Cattle remains also
dominate the fauna from Hambledon Hill (Mercer 1980: 61).
Flotation has also recovered some evidence of wheat and barley
cultivation here, on the fringes of the Chase.
    Excavations under the Thickthorn Down long barrow at the end
of the Cursus revealed a narrow-flake industry of early Neolithic
date, together with a leaf-shaped arrowhead and plain bowl sherds
(Drew and Piggott 1936; Barrett et al. 1991b: 31). As Bradley points
out, this probably represents an occupation site over which the
barrow was subsequently built. From the old land surface
beneath the mound a microlith was recovered, and 'the fact that it
was found on and not under the turf-line suggests little differ-
ence in age [from the Neolithic flintwork]' (Clark 1936: 91). Since
the southern barrow on Thickthorn Down is one of only three
totally excavated examples on Cranborne Chase the association
between the find of a microlith and an early Neolithic flake
industry sealed by later barrow construction is of particular interest.
     Excavations on the two major ceremonial monuments of the
 early Neolithic, Hambledon Hill and the Dorset Cursus, have
 similarly recovered Mesolithic material. At Hambledon Hill exca-
 vation of the primary silts of the ditch recovered unspecified arte-
facts of Mesolithic date (Farrar 1951: 105-6). Excavations of the
 west ditch of the Cursus provided two bone samples giving late
 Mesolithic radiocarbon dates of 4510 and 4950 BC (Barrett et al.
 1991b: 46); and late Mesolithic occupation of the nearby floor of
 the river Allen, over which the Cursus crosses, is well attested by
 flint scatters (Arnold et al. 1988; Wymer 1977: 70).
     Such evidence can, of course, all be dismissed as purely
 fortuitous; but at the very least it points to the long-term use and
 significance of particular locales in the landscape. Undoubtably
 one of the most symbolically significant of these was Penbury
150                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Knoll, the highest point of the central area of Cranborne Chase,
from which there are extensive views in all directions. As has
already been noted, concentrations of earlier and later Mesolithic
and early Neolithic flintwork occur here. It is of great interest to
note that not only does the Dorset Cursus begin due north of
Penbury Knoll (see below), but this high point can be seen from
no less than 31 of the long barrows (80 per cent) on Cranborne
Chase. With one exception those barrows from which Penbury
Knoll is not visible occur on the extreme periphery of their over-
all distribution on Cranborne Chase, and are associated with the
escarpment edge defining the area of chalk downland to the
north, west and east (see the discussion below). A wish that
Penbury Knoll should be visible from the barrows seems to have
played a part in deciding where to place them. Shifting some of
the barrow sites away from their present locations, sometimes a
matter of only a few hundred metres or less, would have made
Penbury Knoll invisible. This hill, today capped, as perhaps in
the past, by gnarled pines (Fig. 5.2), was undoubtedly steeped in
ancestral associations, social memories and myth.


Earthen Long Barrows

There are 39 extant or destroyed earthen long barrows known
from Cranborne Chase (Ashbee 1984: Chapter 2; Kinnes 1992:
8-9). They have been well surveyed and documented in the liter-
ature (Grinsell 1938-40, 1957, 1959; RCHM 1972, 1975, 1979;
Barrett et al. 1991b: Chapter 2). Three have been totally or partial-
ly excavated and a further five have been subject to antiquarian
investigation to a limited extent (Kinnes 1992: 21-3). The barrows
exhibit considerable diversity in size, ranging in length from
20 m. to just over 100 m. and from 12 to 30 m. in width (Table 5.1).
Some of this variation is the result of differential denudation and
destruction. Most would originally have been up to between
3 and 4 m. high at the highest end. One exceptionally long exam-
ple on Martin Down, which is 150 m. long, may either be a bank
barrow or a barrow with an added earthen 'tail' (Barrett et al.
1991b: 51). Mound form may be parallel-sided, trapezoidal or
oval, but as a result of denudation is often impossible to assess
accurately without excavation. Most do appear to have originally
been trapezoidal in form, tapering in size from a higher and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   151
152                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape

Table 5.1. Morphological characteristics of the long barrows on Cranborne
Chase. Map Numbers refer to Fig. 5. 4. Orientation (largest and highest
end first), L = maximum recorded length; W = maximum width; D =
Ditch type: A, parallel with mound; B, semicircular enclosing one end of
                barrow; C, completely enclosing barrow.

Barrow Name                   Map         Ort.         L     W       D
Pimperne                        1    SSE-NNW          106    27      A
Gussage, Parsonage Hill         2    SSE-NNW           26    19      A
Thickthorn Down, North          3    SE-NW             47    20      B
Thickthorn Down, South          4    SE-NW             25    20      B
Thickthorn Farm                 5    SSE-NNW           30    18      A
Chettle House (Bar)             6    ENE-WSW           98    20      ?
Chettle Wood                    7    SE-NW             58    20      ?
Gussage South-East              8    ESE-WSW            ?     ?      ?
Gussage Cow Down, South         9    SE-NW             64    14      B
Gussage Cow Down, North        10    SE-NW             50    26      A
Donhead St Mary                11    ENE-WSW           40    18      ?
Drive Plantation               12    SE-NW             37    27      ?
Wor Barrow                     13    SE-NW             45    23      C
Salisbury Plantation           14    NE-SW             43    18      ?
Martin Down, South             15    SSE-NNW          102    18       7
Martin Down, Central           16/17 SE-NW            150    21       A
Martin Down, North             18    SE-NW             29    21       A
Martin, Long Barrow Lane       19    SE-NW             40     ?       ?
Duck's Nest                    20    SSE-NNW           44    30       A
Toyd Down, Knap Barrow         21    SE-NW             95    30       A
Toyd Down, Grans Barrow        22    SSE-NNW           58    18       A
Coombe Bissett                 23      E-W             51    17       A
Whitsbury Down                 24      SSE-NNW         30    19       B
Round Clump                    25      SE-NW           72    27       B
Rockbourne Down                26      SSE-NNW         60    27       A
Vernditch Chase, North         27      E-W             23    16       A
Vernditch Chase, South         28      SE-NW           36    24       A
Giant's Grave, Breamore        29      NE-SW           68    26       A
Giant's Grave, New
Court Down                     30      NNE-SSW         61     15      A
Sutton Down                    31      E-W?            23     18      A
Whitesheet Hill, Ansty         32      ENE-WSW         41     23      A
Hambledon Hill, North          33      SSE-NNW         69     15      A
Hambledon Hill, South          34      S-N             26     12      A
Telegraph Clump                35      E-W             96     24      A
Little Down                    36      SE-NW           38     24      A
Race Down                      37      SE-NW           35     15      ?
Tollard, Farnham               38      SE-NW           43     15      ?
Pistle Down                    39      SE-NW           20     17      ?
Furze Down                     40      ENE-WSW         56     24      ?
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland              153


broader to a lower and narrower end. The orientation of the bar-
rows tends to be repetitive and standardized. The majority
(66 per cent) are orientated either SE-NW or SSE-NNW with the
larger and higher end to the south but there are a number of
interesting exceptions (Table 5.1). Most originally had continuous
or interrupted quarry ditches running parallel to the axis of the
mound and flanking it, some with an intermediate berm between
the mound and the ditch (Fig. 5. 3).
   At least five barrows in the centre of the distribution, closely
associated with the Dorset Cursus, have an unusual ditch con-
struction, with the ditches carried around either one, or in the
case of one site, Wor Barrow, around both ends of the barrow
(Barrett et al. 1991b: 32). Two barrows to the east of the Cursus
also possess U-shaped ditches (RCHM 1979: xxi)




Figure 5.3. Selected groundplans of long barrows on Cranborne Chase.
Excavated: 1: Thickthorn Down; 2. Wor Barrow phases 1-2; 3 Wor
Barrow phase 3. Unexcavated: 4: Duck's Nest; 5: Grans Barrow, Toyd
Down; 6: Round Clump; 7 Furze Down. Not to scale. For orientation and
dimensions see Table 5.1. X = position of burials. Extent of mound
stippled. After Barrett et al. 1991b: Fig. 2.9 and RCHM 1979: Fig. 3.
154                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


   Of the three reliably excavated barrows on Cranborne Chase,
Wor Barrow (Pitt-Rivers 1898; discussion in Kinnes 1992: 22-3
and Barrett et al. 1991b: 48-33) is still the most illuminating, with
a complex structural sequence, beginning with a long mortuary
enclosure with a narrow entrance at the SE end flanked by a post
bedding trench, continuing with an embanked mortuary cham-
ber, and ending with an oval-shaped mound with encircling
ditches with causeways at the SE and NE ends. The mortuary
chamber contained three articulated and three disarticulated
(skull and longbone bundles) skeletons, all male. The only arte-
facts recovered were undecorated early Neolithic pottery and an
antler pick in the main barrow ditch. The southern barrow on
Thickthorn Down (Drew and Piggott 1936) may have been built
successively outwards in bayed sections from the SSE end,
defined by rows of hurdles, one running laterally down the
mound, the others at right-angles to it (Barrett et al. 1991b: 37;
Kinnes 1992: 22). It contained no burials, but may have covered a
turf 'mortuary structure'. The surrounding ditch is of U-shaped
plan, open to the higher SSE end, where a triangular post-hole
setting occurred. Early Neolithic bowl sherds were found
deposited in the primary silts of the NE ditch segment, and
domestic and wild animal bones, including domestic cattle, red
deer and wild ox, along virtually the entire length of the flanking
ditches, along with deposits of flint-knapping debris. Rescue
excavations at Hambledon Hill South recovered only the
displaced remains of one adult male inhumation. The ditch
segments contained early Neolithic undecorated bowl sherds, a
fragment of a stone axe and flintwork (Mercer 1980: 43).
   From the sheer size and scale of the barrows and the rather
limited numbers of human remains from many excavated exam-
ples, both from Cranborne Chase and elsewhere in southern
Britain, it is possible that burial of the dead may have been of sec-
ondary importance to the experiential impact that they must have
had as upstanding monuments on Neolithic populations moving
around in the landscape.
   The barrows can be broadly subdivided into three main
groups: (i) a series of 15 mounds closely associated with the
Dorset Cursus and all within 2 km. from it; (ii) a loose western
group of seven barrows; and (iii) an eastern group of nine monu-
ments. In addition to these there are eight more isolated barrows
on the fringes of Cranborne Chase (Fig. 5.4). The majority of the
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   155
156                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


barrows occur on their own, but distances to first nearest neigh-
bours are short (mean =1.5 km.). Three barrow pairs occur, and
one cluster of three monuments, all situated at distances of 300 m.
or less.


Patterns of Intervisibility

Patterns of intervisibility between the barrows on Cranborne
Chase are shown in Fig. 5. 5. These were assessed through multi-
ple visits to every barrow site in clear weather conditions over a
period of five weeks. In some cases localized obstructions such as
hedges, trees or buildings or later prehistoric earthworks in the
immediate vicinity of the barrows meant that these observations
had to be taken a short distance away from the barrow site; but
this should not unduly affect their reliability. For some sites in or
adjacent to dense woodland extrapolations were based on an
assessment of the contours of the intermediate terrain. It should
be remembered that these are the barrows that are intervisible




Figure 5.5. Intervisibility between the long barrows on Cranborne Chase.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             157


today in what is for the most part a relatively open and treeless
landscape. Judging the precise relationship between the contem-
porary pattern and the prehistoric situation is difficult, since this
crucially depends on the amount of woodland cover. A number
of factors indicate that the degree of visibility between barrows
during the Neolithic may have been similar or indeed higher
than today. It has been argued that the Neolithic environment on
the chalk downland of Wiltshire and Dorset was characterized in
the earlier Neolithic by woodland clearance and long periods of
grassland, possibly maintained by grazing (Evans and Jones
1979). Results of analyses of the molluscan data from three exca-
vations in the central area of Cranborne Chase give a more fine-
grained picture. Molluscs from the buried soil surface under the
Thickthorn Down South long barrow suggest an open landscape,
while those from two sections through the west ditch of the
Dorset Cursus 700 m. apart and about 4 km. to the east of the
Thickthorn barrow produced contrasting results, one pointing
towards an open landscape, the other a rather densely wooded
location which remained largely unaltered until the late Neolithic
(Entwistle and Bowden 1991). It is worth noting that the samples
from the Dorset Cursus ditch are both derived from a low-lying
stretch of the monument where it crosses a dry river valley, a
damp catchment area of the river Allen. The molluscan evidence
may be interpreted as providing a picture of a relatively open
upland landscape on the chalk ridges, on which the barrows were
constructed, and a highly variable degree of clearance and activi-
ty in more low-lying valley locations.
    It also needs to be remembered that the present-day intervisi-
bility of the barrows is actively depressed by virtue of thousands
of years of denudation and destruction, so that their profiles are
lower and more blurred. They are also covered with turf and veg-
etation, whereas when first constructed they would be gleaming
white chalk masses, and, even if sited in woodland, would be
likely to be surrounded by substantial clearings. Finally their
location on high points must surely indicate a desire that they
were meant to be seen from relatively long distances. In sum
 there is little evidence to suggest that barrows which are promi-
 nently sited and intervisible today might not also have been dur-
 ing the period of their initial construction and use.
    Intervisibility between the barrows is high in the centre of
 their distribution, with every barrow being intervisible with one
158                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


or more barrows in the western, eastern and Cursus groups. Such
is the degree of prominence of some barrows that others up to
eight or nine km. distant can be seen on the skyline (Fig. 5.5). By
contrast, only one of the outlying barrows (Fig. 5.5: No. 11) is
intervisible with the barrows in the centre of the overall distribu-
tion, and in no other case are the other seven outliers intervisible
either with each other or with those in the centre of Cranborne
Chase. A clear contrast exists, then, between barrows being inter-
visible in the centre and invisible on the periphery of their overall
distribution. Part of the process of siting barrows in the centre of
Cranborne Chase was their relationship to other barrows and the
Cursus while, on the periphery, a relationship to topographic
features of the landscape, rather than to other monuments,
appears to have been of paramount significance.
    The barrows may be ranked according to the dominance of
their visual field in relation to others. Being able to see other bar-
rows from each mound was clearly an important factor in the
location of many of them. In general, it is possible to distinguish
between (i) those monuments in which visibility was a primary
concern in their location, situated on local high points, false crests
and skylines and (ii) those in which visibility was not a dominant
concern, situated at lower points in the local terrain. This is a dis-
 tinction between a local field of monument visibility and a more
 generalized one. In general terms the closer the barrows are sited
 to the Cursus the higher their degree of intervisibility. Barrows in
 the western group are intervisible with between one and three
 other sites. For some in the Cursus group the numbers of barrows
 visible from any one site increases dramatically, up to eleven
 other sites. Those barrows with the highest level of intervisibility
 with others occur at the terminals of either end of the Cursus on
 Thickthorn Down (six other sites) and Martin Down, and include
 the northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down (seven other sites),
 itself enclosed by the Cursus. The barrow with the highest degree
 of intervisibility marks the beginning of the Cursus on Martin
 Down (11 other sites). Barrows in the eastern group have a uni-
 formly high degree of intervisibility, with between four and
 seven other barrows visible from any one site. The exception is
 the two long barrows on Toyd Down (Fig. 5.5: Nos. 21 and 22),
 one or both of which are visible from eleven other sites.
     It is of interest to note that those barrows with the highest
 degree of intervisibility with others form members of pairs of
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             159

larger barrow groups. In the eastern group the only pair of
barrows to occur are those mentioned above on Toyd Down. In
the Cursus group pairs or groups of barrows sharing the same
alignment are associated with the beginning, end and central
stretch of the monument, but only one of the barrows is highly
visible, the northernmost barrow on Thickthorn and Gussage
Cow Down and the southernmost one on Martin Down. In the
western group, where levels of barrow intervisibility are much
lower, pairs of barrows do not occur.
    One explanation for this pattern might be that sites that were
particularly important in the prehistoric landscape and highly
visible 'attracted' other barrows through time, and sites built
later elsewhere were deliberately sited so as to be intervisible
with one or more other barrows. In this manner the construction
of barrows on Cranborne Chase gradually created a series of
visual pathways and nodal points in the landscape. While some
or many barrows are visible from others in the centre of the dis-
tribution, comparatively few (30 per cent) are intervisible looking
directly down the long axes of the barrows across the landscape.
All these cases occur among the barrow pairs/groups associated
with the Cursus and the pair on Toyd Down in the eastern group.
In all, except the last case, the barrows share the same alignment.
Most barrows seem to have been located, therefore, to be seen
 from the side rather than along their long axes. Looking down the
 long axes of the barrows the Cursus is visible from 12 sites. Most
barrows in the Cursus group channel or 'direct' vision towards
 this monument, with only a few exceptions.
    Many barrows are today located on footpaths, and originally
 the majority of these mounds may have been located along track-
 ways or natural paths of movement through the landscape. The
 point at which tracks join may have been emphasized and
 marked out by a small cluster (2 or 3) of barrows.
    The orientation of the long axes of the barrows is closely relat-
 ed to that of the local topography, and in most cases they are
 aligned so as to run parallel to the contours along ridge axes (Fig.
 5.6). In other words, the form of the monument duplicates that of
 the surrounding landscape in its immediate vicinity. They are sit-
 uated on high points, with panoramic views in all or three out of
 four cardinal directions. However, fourteen sites (36 per cent) are
 situated immediately below rather than on the highest point in
 the local terrain that surrounds them, with the land rising up and
160   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               161


restricting visibility in one or more cardinal directions. Eight of
these cases occur in the Cursus group and the other five are
isolated barrows on the fringes of the overall distribution. The
higher and wider end of these barrows is situated up the slope in
these cases (Fig. 5.7). Such an arrangement suggests that the bar-
rows were meant to be seen and approached from a particular
direction along a particular path or route, and the siting of those
along the Cursus was intimately related to the position of this
monument in the landscape. By contrast to the chambered cairns
of the Black Mountains, the long axes of the barrows do not direct
attention to features of the topography beyond them; they rather
form part of that landscape itself. Local differences in the orienta-
tion of the barrow axes can generally be explained with reference
to the local topography.
    In the centre of the distribution in the Cursus group chalk
ridges cut up by valleys run NE-SW, an orientation duplicated
by many of the barrows. In the western group variations in bar-
row orientation are closely related to more localized differences
in the terrain. For example, the barrow at Chettle Bar is orientated
E-W and runs along the top of a small chalk spur that also has an
E-W axis. The Drive Plantation barrow (Fig. 5.8) and the
Salisbury Plantation barrow in the Cursus group, orientated
respectively SE-NW and NE-SW, are similarly aligned along
localized ridges. In this respect it is important to note that the bar-
rows fit into the immediate topography of their surroundings
rather than being related to a more generalized pattern of the
 landscape. The orientation of barrow axes was a localized deci-
 sion, and not governed by a more abstract set of rules stipulating
how they should be orientated. Those barrows on the margins of
 the overall distribution are intimately related to the escarpment
 edges of Cranborne Chase. To the west, those on Hambledon Hill
 are orientated N-S along the spine of this hill island (Fig. 5.9).
 Barrows on Sutton Down and Whitesheet Hill are orientated in
 relation to the escarpment edge. Standing on these barrows look-
 ing along their axes an observer's view is directed along the
 escarpment and towards spurs jutting out from it in a manner
 somewhat analogous to the situation encountered in the Black
 Mountains (Fig. 5.10). The same is true of the barrow at New
 Court Down, whose long axis runs parallel with the contours of
 the escarpment edge rather than is the case with barrows in the
 centre of the distribution in relation to a localized ridge. The
162   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   163
164   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   165
166                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


primary relationship of these barrows, on the margins of the dis-
tribution, is to the escarpment edge itself, the break between
highland and lowland. Intervisibility with other monuments is
not important. What these barrows appear to be doing is to mark
out the internal space of Cranborne Chase as significant and spe-
cial by ritualizing and emphasizing its margins. Moving beyond
them into the centre of the distribution the local topography of
ridge and valley becomes emphasized, with a visual relation
between barrows and the Cursus, discussed below.

Hambledon Hill
Two long barrows are associated with another monument com-
plex of different form on Hambledon Hill. Hambledon Hill is a
massive clover-leaf-shaped hill set apart from the steep western
escarpment edge of Cranborne Chase, with the river Stour flow-
ing close to its western flank and the river Iwerne cutting it off
from the chalk plateau to the east. In effect it is a very distinctive
'hill island', a dominant landmark which can be seen from a great
distance away to the north, south and west (Mercer 1988: 89). In
the liminal space of this island of a hill a massive series of enclo-
sures were constructed, along with the two long barrows, during
the earlier Neolithic (Figs. 5.11 and 5.12 ).
    The main enclosure, a rounded triangle in shape, was situated
on the crown of Hambledon Hill, consisting of an inner bank sur-
rounded by interrupted ditches. The enclosures on Hambledon
Hill bound off interior spaces that are already bounded by the
contours of the land. In this manner, cultural islands were created
in a topographic space that was already an island. It is likely that
this island quality of the place was already understood and
appreciated by the Mesolithic populations who visited it and
stayed there for longer or shorter periods before venturing up
and down the chalk escarpment to the east, demarcating the main
mass of Cranborne Chase. During the earlier Neolithic this locale
simply became ritualized in a visible form through the construc-
tion of the permeable membranes of the causewayed enclosures.
    Associated with the main enclosure are mutiple cross-dykes
cutting across the spurs of the hill to the west, south and east.
Both the cross-dykes and the banks and ditches of the main enclo-
 sure were constructed so as to run up to natural breaks of slope
on the hill. One barrow was incorporated within this construction,
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   167
168                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 5.12. Plan of the earlier Neolithic enclosures on Hambledon Hill.
                                               Source: Mercer 1980: Fig. 9.
                      By kind permission of Edinburgh University Press.
being situated in a not particularly prominent position on sloping
land between the southern cross dykes and the main enclosure
boundary. The other is set prominently, its long axis running
along the spine of the northern spur of Hambledon Hill about 400
m. outside the main enclosure. The main enclosure construction,
like the barrows, is clearly related to the contours of the land
encircling the domed summit of the hill, while the surrounding
cross-dykes cut across the land between precipitous breaks of
slope on either side. Although there exists a basic contrast
between the bounded circular form of the enclosure and the lin-
earity of the long barrow axis, the placement of the enclosure
repeats the close duplicative relationship to natural topography
of long barrow location on Cranborne Chase in general, while the
linear cross-dykes associated with it cut across the contours of the
land in a similar manner to the Dorset Cursus.
   Excavation of the interior of the main enclosure revealed the
basal segments of around 80 pits (top segments having been
destroyed by ploughing). These had been dug into the chalk and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland              169

partially allowed to silt up; and then a wide range of materials -
pottery, stone axes, granite rubbers and antler were deposited in
them. A considerable quantity of this material was derived from
distant sources - Devon and Cornwall. Some of the pits show
signs of recutting and more than one phase of deposition, and the
possible erection of posts to mark their positions. The ditch of the
main enclosure also revealed careful deposition of materials, but
of an altogether different character. In discrete segments of the
ditch human bone, animal bone - mainly cattle - pottery and axes
had been placed, probably in leather bags. Other deposits
consisted of carefully placed human skulls without lower
mandibles or associated vertebrae, indicating that they had been
placed in the ditch in skeletal condition. After this initial phase of
use the ditch silted up, and then was subject to recutting on a
number of occasions and further deposition of disarticulated
human skeletal material, skull fragments, pottery and flint arte-
facts. Mercer describes the main enclosure as ' a gigantic necrop-
olis constructed for the exposure of the cadaveric remains of a
large population' (Mercer 1980: 63). A minimum of 70 individuals
located in the 20 per cent of the main enclosure ditch that was
excavated indicates a possible minimum dead population for the
site of 350 individuals. The main enclosure was very possibly an
exposure area for corpses with associated ritual pit depositions,
with some material being taken away and left in the ditches.
Hambledon Hill was, in Mercer's words, 'a vast, reeking open
cemetery, its silence broken only by the din of crows and ravens'
(Mercer 1980: 63).
    Sixty per cent of the dead population at Hambledon Hill were
children, a proportion contrasting with the relatively few child
remains excavated from earthen long barrows in southern
England. Many authors have argued for a close association
between causewayed enclosures and long barrows in southern
England (e.g. Renfrew 1973a,b; Mercer 1980,1988; Thorpe 1984;
Thomas 1991; Edmonds 1993) and that, given the evidence for the
 disarticulation, differential selection and arrangement of human
 skeletal material at both the barrows and causewayed enclosures,
both played a role in a system involving not only the deposition
but also the circulation of ancestral bones. I shall suggest below
 that these practices may have been intimately related, in a com-
 plex ritual cycle, to the third class of monument found on
 Cranborne Chase, the Dorset Cursus.
170                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


The Dorset Cursus

At the time of its initial use the Dorset Cursus was one of the two
most spectacular monuments in Neolithic Britain, rivalled in size
and the sheer scale of its construction only by the earthworks on
Hambledon Hill just 12 km. to the west of its south-west terminal
end. The Cursus itself runs for almost 10 km. across the central
part of Cranborne Chase from Martin Down in the north-east to
Thickthorn Down in the south-west (Figs. 5.13 and 5.14). It con-
sists of two parallel banks with external ditches linked together at
the two terminal points with cross banks with external ditches. It
is now, for the most part, only visible in the form of soil and crop
marks, but sections of it are still well preserved in three places:
the south-west terminal in an unploughed field on Thickthorn
Down, a section of the south-east bank on Bottlebush Down and
traces of both banks in Salisbury Plantation. Aerial photographs




Figure 5.13. The Dorset Cursus and associated long barrows. For barrow
names see Table 5.1. MD: Martin Down; BB: Bottlebush Down; TD:
Thickthorn Down. A: Pentridge section of the Cursus; B: Gussage sec-
tion of the Cursus.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                     171




Figure 5.14. Longitudinal profile and plan of the Dorset Cursus.
                                      Source: Barrett et al. 1991: Fig. 2.14.
                     By kind permission of Cambridge University Press
172                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


and probing (Atkinson 1955) have verified its course and shown
it to have been constructed in two stages, an earlier and longer
stretch, the Gussage Cursus, running for 5.6 km. from Bottlebush
Down westwards, and a later 4.3 km. stretch, the Pentridge
Cursus, continuing from the original north-east terminal
onwards to Martin Down. On the basis of probing and excavation
(Atkinson 1955; Barrett et al. 1991b) the banks appear to have
been unbroken by causeways except for gaps near to the Martin
Down end. Excavation has shown the ditch to have been steep-
sided and flat-bottomed, about 3 m. wide at the top, 2 m. wide at
the bottom and 1.2 m.-1.4 m. deep (Barrett et al. 1991b: 43). The
bank was probably revetted, being located about 1 m. inside the
ditch, and parts of the ditch have traces of recutting. Startin
(in Barrett et al. 1991b: 46) has estimated that the banks may orig-
inally have stood at least 1.7 m. high and that the labour invest-
ment required to dig the ditch and construct the bank would be
somewhere approaching half a million worker-hours. The results
of Atkinson's survey and excavations suggest that only one of the
ditches of the Cursus maintained a precise alignment, that on the
SE side, the NW side having been constructed by means of a
series of offsets taken from the SE side; but in sections of the
Allen valley at least the NW ditch may have been constructed
first (Atkinson 1955: 9; Barrett et al. 1991b: 47).
    The Cursus is directly associated with at least nine long bar-
rows (see Figs. 5.13 and 5.14). Two are incorporated within its
course and another seven are directly aligned in relation to its ter-
 minals or, as is the case on Gussage Cow Down, with a barrow
incorporated by it. Of the 39 long barrows which occur on
Cranborne Chase the course of the Cursus would have been visi-
ble from at least 14 (36 per cent). Penbury Knoll, below which the
 Cursus starts, is visible from all but eight of the barrows (80 per
 cent), and two particularly prominent barrows (Gussage Down
 North and Martin Down South) are intervisible with a large num-
ber of barrows from which the course of Cursus itself could not
 be seen (Fig. 5.5). No less than 22 barrows (57 per cent) are within
 5 km. of the Cursus, and only four are over 10 km. distant, on the
 far fringes of Cranborne Chase to the west, north and east. The
 course of the Cursus is unique in linking up pairs or groups of
 barrows situated no more than a few hundred metres apart on
 Martin Down, Gussage Cow Down and Thickthorn Down.
 Within the entire Cranborne Chase group of barrows there is
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               173


only one other site away from the Cursus, Toyd Down, where
two long barrows, Knap barrow and Grans barrow, occur very
close together at a distance of less than 200 m. Contrasting with
the groups of barrows directly associated with the Cursus the
long axes of Knap and Grans barrows are not orientated on the
same axis but in different directions. The Cursus must have been
deliberately constructed so as to link up not only the maximum
number of barrows possible but groups of barrows. If we attempt
to draw imaginary straight lines for an alternative Cursus else-
where in Cranborne Chase such a situation would not be possi-
ble. In no other location in the landscape could so many barrows
and barrow pairs be linked together (see Fig. 5.4).
   Radiocarbon dates from primary silts in the Cursus ditches
indicate that it was constructed around 2,600 BC. Dates from the
bottom and primary silts of the ditch of Wor Barrow, just to the
north of the Cursus, bracket a time-range of about 2800-2700 BC,
and those from other earthen long barrows in southern England
generally fall within the time span 2800-2500 BC (Barrett et al.
1991b: 51-3; Barrett and Bradley 1991: 9). An exceptionally early
date for the southern barrow on Thickthorn Down at the end of
the Cursus of 3210 BC may be contaminated and too early. The
available absolute dates point to the construction of long barrows
before, during and after the construction of the Cursus on
Cranborne Chase. The occurrence of precise alignments of long
barrows in relation to the Cursus banks at its terminals and the
incorporation of two barrows in the Cursus itself (see below)
point to a particularly close set of relations between the two classes
of monuments, and perhaps a similar ritual and funerary sym-
bolic significance. In the first instance the Cursus linked barrows
already in the landscape. Subsequently other barrows were
linked to it, an ongoing presenting of the past.


Walking the Cursus

The Pentridge section of the Cursus (Figs. 5.14 and 5.15) begins
in the north-east in a relatively flat area of Martin Down. The ter-
minal of the left bank is almost exactly 2 km. due north of the
highest point of Penbury Knoll. From the vantage point of
Penbury Knoll the entire stretch of the first section of the Cursus
is visible, including both the terminals on Martin Down and
174   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                175

Bottlebush Down. Parts of the second stretch of the Cursus lead-
ing up to the barrow on Gussage Cow Down and the south-west
terminal on Thickthorn Down are also visible from here, but not
intermediate sections of the second half, where the Cursus dips
down into the Gussage and Wyke valleys. From Penbury Knoll a
spur of high ground swings round to the north and dips down,
extending to about 400 m. south of the beginning of the Cursus.
The terminal end of this spur is marked and further emphasized
by a large barrow, today just over 100 m. in length, the second
largest in the entire Cranborne Chase barrow group, only exceed-
ed in length by a few metres by the Pimperne barrow in the
extreme west of the overall distribution. Unusually, this barrow,
rather than following the contours of the immediate topography,
cuts across them - i.e. the direction of the slope of the spur runs
parallel with the long axis of the barrow (Fig. 5.16). Its specific sit-
ing makes it highly visible both from the Cursus terminal and
from eight of a group of nine long barrows situated to the east of
the Cursus. Although the Cursus terminal would not be visible
from these barrows this barrow served as a marker for the point
at which it began. The inference that can be drawn from this is
that the group of barrows situated to the east of the Cursus may
be later in date than those associated with its NE terminal end.
    The prominent barrow on the arm of Penbury Knoll,
mentioned above, is orientated NNW-SSE, with its higher and
broader end up-slope at the SSE end. The NNW end is exactly
aligned on the NE end of the Cursus and clearly related to it.
About 250 m. due north another massive barrow is sited only
about 10 m. to the south-east of the Cursus end, and again exactly
aligned on its NE end. The mound, 150 m. in length, is by far the
largest in Cranborne Chase (Fig. 5.17). It has been variously inter-
preted as two conjoined long barrows with continuous side
 ditches set end to end (Crawford and Keiller 1928: 232; RCHM
 1975) or a bank barrow (Ashbee 1984: 15). Bradley has recently
reinterpreted it as a classic long barrow, its broader end to the
 east, with a 'tail' added to, but not continuous with, the eastern
 end at a later date, the Cursus blocking possibilities for further
 expansion to the north-eastern end, which might otherwise be
 expected (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51). About 250 m. to the
 north of the Cursus a smaller, now much ploughed-down,
 barrow occurs, aligned again on the north-east terminal, as does
 another small barrow in Vernditch wood, 2.4 km to the north.
176   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   177
178                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Penny and Wood (1973: 47) have remarked on the precise
geometrical relationship of these four barrows to the Martin
Down terminal, one which seems very unlikely to be purely of a
fortuitous nature - a point which Bradley has also forcefully
made (in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51) (see Fig. 5.15). All these barrows
and the Cursus terminal are, or may have been (one is now in a
plantation), intervisible, reinforcing their association.
   The symbolic importance of the Cursus terminal is thus
marked out in the landscape in a particularly effective manner
by: (i) a precise relationship with four barrows; (ii) terminating
by the largest long barrow on Cranborne Chase; (iii) being situat-
ed due north of another massive barrow, intervisible with an
exceptionally high number of other barrows to the east, sited on a
spur of Penbury Knoll, the highest point and most outstanding
natural landmark in the central portion of the Chase, visible from
all but a few peripheral barrows in their overall distribution.
From this starting-point the Cursus almost immediately begins to
dip down gently and swings away from the barrows to the south-
west, before following a much more regular course for the next
2.4 km. After less than a few hundred metres the northern termi-
nal would become obscured to an observer walking down the
Cursus and looking back to the starting-point. Following this
gentle slope the land then becomes undulating, slightly higher to
the north of the Cursus, dipping down at first and then rising up
steeply to a spur of Penbury Knoll to the south. The Cursus grad-
ually rises up a gentle slope crossing the modern approach road
to Pentridge village. A narrow causeway crossed the Cursus on
the initial part of this rise, 1 km. from the Martin Down terminus,
the only one documented for the entire length of the first stretch
of the Cursus (Atkinson 1955: 8), affording uninterrupted views
towards Penbury Knoll through the Cursus banks to the south
and across rolling downland to the north. This would probably
be the last point at which an individual, walking down inside the
possibly 1.7 m. high Cursus banks, would be able to have an
extensive view of the landscape beyond and outside it to the left
(south) or the right (north).
   The initial 3 km. stretch of the Cursus running towards
Bottlebush Down follows a course that runs parallel to an arm of
Penbury Knoll extending as far west and south as the upper
reaches of the Crane valley (Fig. 5.18). This provides the domi-
nant focal viewpoint to the south, and the ridge top would be
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   179
180                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


visible on the skyline beyond the left Cursus bank. To the north
the land is gentle and undulating, and nothing would be visible
beyond the right-hand bank of the Cursus to those moving along
within. Beyond the modern approach road to Pentridge the
Cursus crosses a 350 m. stretch of relatively flat land constituting
a localized high point, the land dipping away at first to the south,
and then rising up towards Penbury Knoll. It then gradually rises
up for another 750 m., crossing two shallow dips to another local-
ized high point, a flat ridge top, now covered by Salisbury plan-
tation, which extends for about 400 m. In the centre of this flat
area the first monument along the course of the Cursus, in the
right-hand or northern bank, is encountered. This is a long bar-
row, orientated NE-SW, of medium size, 43 m. long, 18 m. wide
and now 2.4 m. high at the NE end, tapering off to the south-west.
This barrow orientation is highly unusual for the Cranborne
Chase group of barrows taken as a whole, and is only shared by
one other barrow on the extreme periphery of the overall distrib-
ution to the east, the Giant's Grave, Breamore. The barrow is
clearly orientated to run parallel to the contours of the ridge top,
which is the case for many others in the Cranborne Chase group;
but its orientation is precisely the reverse of the norm, SE-NW,
with the broader and higher end to the SE. To any observer familiar
with the usual orientation of long barrows and the placement of
the higher forecourt end, this would constitute a striking surprise
and contrast. In comparative visual effect to the barrows at the
beginning of the Dorset Cursus, this is the world reversed.
Another point of significance is that the barrow is incorporated in
the right-hand or north-west bank of the Cursus, whereas all the
emphasis on alignments of the barrows at the Martin Down ter-
minal was on the left-hand or south-east terminal point, another
 contrast and reversal.
    Field survey (Atkinson 1955: 7; RCHM 1975) has shown that
 the north-west bank of the Cursus runs up to and is aligned on
 the barrow at both ends, but that the long axis of the barrow dif-
 fers from that of the Cursus banks by about 10 degrees.
 Atkinson's inference is that the Cursus was constructed so as to
 be aligned on a previously existing barrow. Bradley makes the
 suggestion that because the alignments are not precise this bar-
 row might have been built alongside an early (marking out?)
 phase of the construction of the Cursus, and only incorporated
 into the bank when the earthwork was enlarged (Bradley in
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               181

Barrett et at. 1991b: 49). Whether this barrow predates, postdates
or is contemporary with the construction of the Cursus cannot be
established without excavation. Whatever the precise chronolog-
ical relationship, the lack of precise incorporation into the Cursus
bank is of considerable symbolic significance. This was intended
to be the case: the monument should be both incorporated into
the Cursus banks and maintain its identity and visual impact by
being differentiated from them. One means of differentiation was
the difference in height and width of the barrow from the Cursus
banks, particularly marked at the higher NW end, the other the
slight difference in orientation. Walking down the Cursus the
barrow would only be visible to an observer approaching it from
a short distance away - a matter of no more than 100 m.
Encountering it would constitute a surprise, and the greatest
visual impact on an observer would be for someone moving
south-west from the Martin Down terminal in the north-east.
    The barrow is situated approximately two-thirds the distance
(2.6 km.) along the first stretch of the Cursus, and from it neither
the terminus on Martin Down, with its associated barrows, nor
that on Bottlebush Down are visible. The only other barrow that
might have been visible, and this only if an observer stood on top
of the barrow looking out, would be Wor barrow, situated
 1.3 km. on the skyline to the north-west (the view is now blocked
by a plantation).
    A few hundred metres beyond the barrow the Cursus begins
to dip down, at first gently, and then very steeply into a dry val-
ley. Today the valley is cut along its bottom by a deep drainage
ditch, which is water-filled in winter. At the time of the construc-
tion and use of the Cursus the valley bottom would have been
boggy land, and water-filled for much of the year. This valley is,
without doubt, the most dramatic, steep-sided, change of relief
 along the entire length of both sections of the Cursus (Fig. 5.19). It
also marks the point at which the familiar landmark of the arm of
 Penbury Knoll to the south of the Cursus tapers away and disap-
 pears. Walking down into the boggy depths of this valley provides
 a sensation of the entire world being removed. Views along the
 valley itself would be blocked by the Cursus banks, that behind
 and in front by the steep slopes of the terrain. The top of Penbury
 Knoll itself becomes invisible for the first time, and with it, the
 familiarity and reassurance of a well-known landmark, steeped
 in ancestral associations going back to the Mesolithic, is lost.
182   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             183

   Up to this point the first section of the Cursus traverses only
very gently undulating terrain, the differences in relief being
slight, and the Cursus axis itself parallels and follows the axis of
the high ground of Penbury Knoll, meeting its northern, and fol-
lowing its southern ridged spurs. The Cursus is keyed into and
follows the line of the high ground running to the south of its
south-western bank. The relationship of the axis of the cultural
monument to that established by the natural topography is one of
imitation or duplication. The Cursus is sited at a distance varying
between 200 and 500 m. from the point at which the much higher
ground of the upper parts of the ridges of Penbury Knoll rise up
on its southern side. It is thus situated at an appropriate distance
away to maximize the visual impact of the change of relief and
also to afford a comfortable angle of view over the top of the
Cursus banks (depending on their exact height), which are not
too close and not too far away. The Cursus itself is dovetailed into
the contours of the immediate landscape surrounding it to the
north and the south as if forming a natural and integral part of it.
Crossing this first very steep-sided valley that relationship now
dramatically changes to one of contrast or contradiction. Rather
than following and being situated below the orientational axes of
high points in the landscape the Cursus slashes and traverses its
way across them until its final termination point on Thickthorn
 Down. The long barrow in Salisbury Plantation is thus located
immediately before an important transition in the relationship of
the monument to the local topography. Another important
 change occurs from this point onwards: the course of the Cursus
becomes much less regular and more sinuous, with a number of
 important changes of direction. From a point roughly 200 m.
 south of the terminal on Martin Down until just beyond the
barrow and the edge of this steep valley the course of the Cursus
 has a very regular alignment.
    Emerging from the valley, the climb to the summit of
 Bottlebush Down, now traversed by the Cranborne to Sixpenny
 Handley road, is a steep one. From the summit of Bottlebush
 Down the impressive barrow traversing the Cursus at right
 angles, on Gussage Cow Down, becomes visible for the first time,
 just over 3 km. distant, looking down the Cursus, and the familiar
 landmark of Penbury Knoll is visible once more looking back-
 wards. The first section of the Cursus ends, as it began, undramati-
 cally, dipping away to the south-west down a gentle slope.
184                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


    Walking at a steady pace, and without stopping, it takes no
more than an hour to proceed along the first 4.3 km. stretch of the
Cursus. The terrain is gentle and easy until the steep valley just
before the end of the first stretch. The second, Gussage, section
(Figs. 5.14 and 5.20) is longer, about 5.6 km., and takes about one
hour and fifteen minutes to walk. To a much greater extent than
the first, it is characterized by long vistas along the Cursus axis as
it proceeds down and up two roughly parallel ridges, on both of
which long barrows are sited, completely dominating the view.
In the first section of the Cursus, after leaving the Martin Down
terminal, monuments were absent or hidden. In this second sec-
tion they were meant to stand out on Gussage Cow Down and
Thickthorn Down. Their presence, rather than to be hidden, and
to surprise, was to be constantly felt (Fig. 5.21).
    The second stretch of the Cursus begins on the midpoint of a
slope and runs down to cross the base of a wide and shallow dry
valley, the source area of the river Allen. At the point at which the
Cursus crosses the valley bottom, where the modern road runs to
Wimborne St Giles, the terrain would, in the Neolithic, have been
wet and marshy for much of the year. The course of the Cursus
crosses over and drops down an ancient Pleistocene river cliff just
before reaching the lowest point on the modern road (Fig. 5.22).
The banks and ditches of the Cursus were constructed on either
side of this topographic feature. One end of it adjoined the north-
ern bank, with the southern bank enclosing the other end with a
gap of around 30 m. The drop in relief to anyone walking along
the Cursus towards the south-west terminus is both sudden and
unexpected. The Cursus here, then, encloses another surprise -
this time not a hidden monument, but a hidden relict cliff down
which the unwary might easily tumble. Until this point the old
familiar landmark of Penbury Knoll is visible looking back.
Going down the cliff slope it disappears from sight once more at
the point at which marshy land is reached, a repetition of the sit-
uation encountered in the dry valley towards the end of the first
 (Pentridge) stretch of the Cursus. Ahead the prominent barrow
 on Gussage Cow Down dominates the view.
     Crossing the modern road the Cursus rises up to the barrow, at
 first gently and then more steeply. As it does so Penbury Knoll
 gradually becomes visible once more looking behind.
 Progressively moving up the slope to approach the long barrow
 on Gussage Cow Down the barrow outline becomes more and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   185
186   A   Phenomenology   of   Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   187
188                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


more indistinct, fading away into the skyline. As it does, looking
behind, the outline of Penbury Knoll and its accompanying
ridges becomes clearer and clearer in the distance. That which is
near and in front successively fades away, that which is far away
becomes more distinct. The barrow is sited in such a manner that
it is completely obscured by the upward slope of the hill until the
crest of that hill is almost reached. Altogether it is out of sight for
about 550 m. of the course of the Cursus (five minutes' walking
time) up the steepest part of the slope. It only looms into sight
again at a distance of around 70 m. away.
    The ridge of Gussage Cow Down, on which the barrow stands,
marks the highest point over which the Cursus crosses from the
Bottlebush terminal. The barrow is situated approximately at the
midpoint of this second stretch of the monument, and from it the
Bottlebush Down terminal and the barrow marking the terminal
point on Thickthorn Down would also be visible (it is now con-
cealed by a thick hedge immediately in front of it). As the Cursus
climbs up to the Gussage Cow Down barrow it alters direction
twice within 230 m., creating what Bradley terms a 'dogleg' effect
(Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 47). Bradley suggests that this is
because the entire Cursus length from the Bottlebush Down
terminus was aligned on the Gussage barrow, but that it drifted
off course and had to be corrected in the lee of the hill where that
barrow could not be observed (ibid.). These changes in the course
of the Cursus going up the hill do not make much impression
from a map; but they would have had considerable visual impact
when viewed from the Bottlebush terminal and experienced by
those walking up the Cursus. Such a 'dogleg' effect does not
occur further on at the point at which the Cursus rises up to
adjoin another barrow on Thickthorn Down, where a similar
sighting 'problem' occurs, nor is there any evidence for sudden
changes in direction where the Cursus crosses the narrow and
steep dry valley before climbing up to Bottlebush Down towards
the end of the Pentridge section. The 'dogleg' effect may perhaps
be more satisfactorily understood by suggesting that it was an
intentional design feature put in place to emphasize further the
now hidden approach to a monument of central social and
symbolic significance.
    Gussage Cow Down is a ridge situated midway between the
Allen and Gussage valleys. The ridge top itself is orientated
NW-SE. The banks of the Cursus do not climb this ridge directly
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                189

from the bottom of the Allen valley, at right-angles to the direc-
tion of the slope, but obliquely, and are set in a roughly diagonal
fashion in relation to it. The Cursus thus not only cuts across the
natural axis of the landscape as defined by the ridge of Gussage
Cow Down with the valleys on either side of it, but it does so
obliquely, while also including the 'dogleg' change of direction.
Little more contrast with the overall topography, or shape of the
land, could be effected than the inclusion of all these three fea-
tures simultaneously.
   By contrast, the two long barrows situated on the ridge top of
Gussage Cow Down both duplicate the ridge axes, being orien-
tated SE-NW along their long axes, with their broadest and high-
est ends facing SE, the norm for Cranborne Chase. These barrows
are not sited on the highest point of the ridge top, but a little way
below it to the north, at a distance of 240 m. from each other. The
long axes of these two barrows are precisely aligned on each
other, and, as mentioned above, the northernmost barrow stands
in the centre of the Cursus and at right-angles to it. It is this north-
ern barrow that is sited so as to be particularly conspicuous
viewed side-on (Figs. 5.7; 5.21 and 5.22). It is intervisible with no
less than seven other barrows (see Fig. 5.6), contrasting with the
southern barrow, which is only visible from a short distance
away, sited as if it were only meant to be seen from the northern
barrow and the Cursus. The inference that might be drawn from
this is that the southern barrow was intimately related to the
northern one, and built with reference to it and its location in the
middle of the Cursus.
    Penny and Wood (1973: 58-9) and Bradley (in Barrett et al.
 1991b: 56) have noted and emphasized that the northern barrow
on Gussage Cow Down is aligned in such a manner that the mid-
winter sun can be observed setting behind the barrow on the sky-
line from the Bottlebush terminal. Dramatically, the rays of the
dying sun move from the SE to the NW end of the barrow, with
 the last flicker of light at the end of the barrow.
    Both barrows on Gussage Cow Down are of medium size
 (50-65 m. long), the southern barrow being a little longer than the
 northern one. The southern barrow is surrounded by a well-
 defined U-shaped ditch open towards the northern barrow and
 the Cursus. The ditches surrounding the northern barrow are
 now ploughed out, but from aerial photographs (Crawford and
 Keiller 1923: plate XVI) appear to run parallel to the mound long
190                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


axis without curving around either end. The barrow is sited off-
centre to the Cursus, being much nearer to the NW bank than
that to the SE. The reason for this would seem to be fairly obvious
- that anyone walking along the Cursus should pass by the side
of the barrow rather than walk over it, and do so at the broader
and higher SE end, where the mortuary chamber and forecourt
area for ritual activities would be sited.
    Approaching the northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down the
view farther west along the Cursus is completely blocked until
the barrow itself is passed (Fig. 5.23). The outline of the southern
barrow would be similarly concealed from view by the Cursus
banks until the point at which the northern barrow was reached.
The Cursus thus contains another surprise: the unexpected bar-
row to the south, hitherto concealed from view both by virtue of
its specific siting and by the Cursus banks. Passing around the
southern end of the northern barrow would thus have an added
significance, in that this would permit the southern barrow to be
seen (Fig. 5.24).
   , Immediately after passing round the northern barrow the final
stretch of the Cursus to Thickthorn Down becomes visible, with
the exception of a stretch which runs over the bottom of the
Gussage valley and its stream, a tributary of the river Allen (Fig.
5.25). Both the barrows on Thickthorn Down, one located just to
the south of the Cursus terminal, and the other aligned on it (see
below), would be visible from this point (as mentioned above,
they are now concealed by a thick hedge), but not the cross-banks
 of the Cursus terminal itself, which is located just below the sky-
 line. The impression given would be that the Cursus itself contin-
ued beyond this point. From the Bottlebush Down terminal the
 whole length of the Cursus up to the Gussage North long barrow
 incorporated within it had been visible. This contrasts interest-
 ingly with the situation encountered on reaching that barrow,
 where the view is visually truncated, concealing the next valley
 bottom beyond, with the Thickthorn North barrow being located
 outside the Cursus banks to the left, and the terminus invisible
 beyond the brow of the hill.
     Walking down the slope away from the barrow Penbury Knoll
 becomes invisible immediately, and the Gussage barrow itself
 after 300 m. The Cursus descends into a slight dip before rising
 up again after another 300 m., at which point the barrow behind
 becomes visible once more. The Cursus then runs over relatively
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   191
192   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   193
194                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


flat land for a further 600 m. before finally gently dipping down
into the Gussage valley and crossing a stream, which is today
water-filled except during dry spells in the summer.
   The Cursus then gradually rises up to Thickthorn Down,
crossing the slope in a diagonal fashion once more. Half-way up
this slope the northern Thickthorn barrow by the Cursus terminal
would become invisible on the skyline. The Cursus does not
deviate to include the barrow in its course, but runs up the hill
and ends just beyond the brow to the north-east of the barrow.
The two barrows on Thickthorn Down, in exactly the same man-
ner as the pair on Gussage Cow Down, duplicate the natural axis
of the ridge top. They are similarly sited to the north of the high-
est point of the ridge, and views to the south along the ridge top
from them are consequently limited. They are both aligned on the
south-east terminal point of the Cursus bank, duplicating the
situation encountered at the Martin Down terminal. Both the
Thickthorn barrows have U-shaped ditches surrounding the
mound, but unlike those at Gussage Cow Down South these
ditches are open at the SE rather than the NW end, i.e. away from
the Cursus. In other words the relationship of the ditches enclos-
ing the barrows to the south of the Cursus on Gussage Cow
Down and on Thickthorn Down is reversed.
    The Cursus terminal cross-bank and side-bank ends are excep-
tionally well preserved on Thickthorn Down, and particularly
massive (Fig. 5.26). There is no causeway known, so that anyone
leaving the Cursus would have to climb out of it over the terminal
bank. Bradley has remarked on the massive nature of the
Thickthorn terminal cross-bank, suggesting that the Cursus bank
here was both considerably higher and larger than those found
along the rest of its course and had been deliberately enlarged.
He makes the very interesting interpretation that the Cursus
cross-bank here had been constructed so as to resemble a massive
long barrow (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51). Building on these
observations, it is pertinent to note that the Thickthorn terminal,
with its barrow-like cross-bank, is built on sloping ground, with
the higher end at the SE and the lower end facing NW, i.e. exact-
ly like the two barrows on Thickthorn Down, with their higher
ends at the SE associated with and aligned on it.
    What visual impact would this have had on someone
 approaching the terminal who had not experienced the visual
impact of the monument previously, but had progressed along
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   195
196                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


the course o£the Cursus from the Martin Down terminus? Going
up the slope to Thickthorn Down the two long barrows would be
out of sight. Coming to the brow of the hill the Cursus banks
would effectively continue to block any view of the Thickthorn
barrows; but instead one's vision would be funnelled towards the
massively constructed terminal cross-bank blocking any view
across the landscape to the west - a feature entirely concealed
until this point. On the basis of previous experience of the barrow
hidden in the right Cursus bank on the ridge covered by
Salisbury Plantation and the barrow placed at right-angles to the
Cursus on Gussage Cow Down, together with the orientation and
shape of the cross-bank, the obvious (but incorrect) conclusion
would be that this was another barrow, but far more massive
than anything previously encountered from the Martin Down
terminus onwards. The Cursus cross-bank on Thickthorn Down
is just over 100 m. long. Emerging from the Cursus, the real long
barrows on Thickthorn Down would be visible to the south, and
a number of other barrows scattered over the landscape in the
distance to the north and west; looking behind to the east, the
northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down, and Penbury Knoll,
marking the start of the Cursus on Martin Down.



The Empty Place - A Ritual Passage

The precise purpose of the Cursus has remained somewhat
enigmatic. Penny and Wood (1973) attempt to explain it as a
gigantic astronomical observatory; but most of the solar and
lunar alignments they discuss in relation to other long barrows
and round barrows in the vicinity seem unconvincing apart from
the most basic one, mentioned above - the midwinter sunset
behind the Gussage North barrow. Another suggestion common-
ly put forward is that the Cursus must be some kind of ceremoni-
al or processional way concerned with a cult of the dead
(Atkinson 1955: 9). Bradley rightly stresses the manner in which
the Cursus links together a series of long barrows, and suggests
that there may have been an important distinction between the
barrows, possibly related to the rising moon, and the Cursus,
with its solar alignment. He argues that:
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                    197

  the entire layout of the Cursus seems to be intended to exclude out-
  siders: only for those inside the great enclosure was the design of the
  monument apparent. It may be that the building of the Cursus was
  the ultimate expression of ... changes in attitudes to the dead. It inte-
  grated the separate long barrows scattered along the upper limits of
  the settlement pattern, and at the same time, bound them together in
  a complex design which could only be appreciated by those who had
  access to certain specific points inside the monument. By incorporating
  into its structure an important astronomical alignment, those who
  built it made those developments appear to be part of the functioning
  of nature (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 58).

Bradley stresses a number of important points in this passage -
the ritual function of the Cursus, the fact that it could only be
understood from the inside, and an ideological role in naturaliz-
ing a set of cultural practices and relating them to the passage of
time and the seasons. Rather surprisingly, he also suggests that
the Cursus would be unsuitable for processions, as it crosses
rivers (ibid.: 47). In the account of walking the Cursus I have
repeatedly emphasized the manner in which the spatial structure
of the monument and its relationship with topographic features
of the landscape and associated barrows constantly surprises
someone moving along it for the first time. I want to argue that
the experience of walking along it was an essential ingredient in
its meaning, and that this movement took place, as described
above, from the NE to the SW.
   The point about the direction of movement is fairly easily
established - the Cursus simply does not make sense when mov-
ing down it from the SW end. First, the important solar alignment
is not visible from the SW. Second, it might be expected that the
monument should end at a dramatic position in the landscape,
and the Martin Down terminal, at the top of a gentle slope, does
not meet this expectation. Indeed, its location in the landscape
more or less repeats that of the earlier Bottlebush terminal, with a
long down-slope view. Third, features such as the partially hid-
den barrow in the bank of the Pentridge section of the Cursus, the
hidden Pleistocene river cliff, and the massively enlarged Cursus
terminal cross-bank on Thickthorn Down in the Gussage section
would have little or no visual or somatic impact when
approached from the NW, and would not surprise.
    The Cursus is a massive linear space bounded by banks with
external ditches curving round at its ends, with the highest and
198                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


most massive terminal cross-banks in the SW. In its linearity,
external ditches and emphasized terminal point it resembles a
massive unfilled long barrow. It differs from most barrows in its
overall orientation and relationship with the landscape, crossing
rather than following its contours, for much of its length. The
Cursus was deliberately designed so as to include two previously
constructed barrows within it, and the orientations of others at
both terminals are clearly related to it. In this sense it presenced
the past in the present, and part of its meaning was constituted by
its relationship to the barrows and the specific manner in which it
connected them together.
    The Gussage Cursus has a clear symmetry in its arrangement.
It runs down a slope, over an ancient river cliff, crosses water,
moves up a slope to the ridge top where the Gussage Cow Down
barrow is located, moves down another slope, crosses water and
runs up to its terminus on Thickthorn Down. It is not hard to
imagine how such a monument worked in terms of initiation
ceremonies involving liminal states and rituals of reversal.
Novices are taken out of the mundane everyday world and into
the enclosed and bounded space of the Cursus. They move along,
going down-slope, shut out from the world in the direction of the
dying sun, stumble down the concealed ancient river cliff, and
then cross wet land to reach the Gussage barrow in the centre of
the Cursus. They experience it moving out of sight and changes
in the Cursus direction. When they eventually approach the bar-
row they move round its higher SE end with great ceremonial,
and see for the first time the barrow outside the Cursus to the
south, with its open unenclosed lower end facing them, and are
instructed with tales of the ancestors and supernatural beings.
Ahead on Thickthorn Down two other barrows are visible, but
outside the Cursus. They move down the slope, cross water and
continue up-slope to Thickthorn Down, where the barrows are
concealed and the massive barrow-like terminus blocks the view.
Climbing out of the Cursus they return to the everyday world
 with the ditches around the Thickthorn barrows in the 'right'
 place at the lower end.
    There are an obvious set of structural contrasts here: between
 high and low, down-slope and up-slope, wet and dry, barrows
 with ditches open at the NW and then the SE ends, barrows within
 the monument and barrows outside it, and plays on the visibility
 and invisibility of barrows in relation to movement, creating a
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland            199

series of contrasts and surprises. Within the enclosed world of the
Cursus the Gussage Cow Down barrow is itself placed at a high,
dry point within liminal space, and water must be crossed to
reach and to leave it.
    The Pentridge extension to the Cursus modifies the simpler
pattern of the initial Gussage Cursus to introduce more contrasts
and surprises. The extended Cursus from Martin Down to
Thickthorn Down begins, like the Gussage Cursus, down-slope;
it ends up-slope. It begins just to the north of the most dominant
and familiar landmark in the area, Penbury Knoll, visible from
virtually all the long barrows in the Cranborne Chase group. It
now both begins and ends with barrows located outside the
Cursus, aligned on the SE terminal point. In approximately the
mid-point of each stretch barrows are included within the monu-
ment at high points; but their relationship to the Cursus itself is
reversed, at first respecting and then cross-cutting its axis. The
first barrow inside the Cursus is hidden, the second highly visi-
ble. The first barrow stands on its own, the second is associated
with a barrow outside the Cursus. Both barrows on Thickthorn
Down are outside the Cursus. So in relationship to the long bar-
rows with which it is associated the extended Cursus from its
starting-point has varying degrees of incorporation - total in the
Pentridge section (the barrow forms part of the Cursus banks),
partial on Gussage Cow Down (one barrow is outside the Cursus).
The Pentridge section of Cursus at first parallels high ground to
its left; and then, once the first barrow is reached, this relation-
ship is reversed, and it crosses rather than follows valleys. The
pattern is one of symmetries and differences, repetitions and
reversals, requiring, as Bradley rightly stresses, an insider's
knowledge and detailed ritual instruction to understand them
and their significance. The Cursus, through its form and the con-
nections it creates with other monuments, establishes through
formalized successional movement along it, a spatial story.
    The Cursus represents a formalized structuring of the experi-
ence of landscape by those entering and using it. It acted not only
as a conduit of movement, but as a barrier blocking a less struc-
tured encounter with the barrows on Cranborne Chase. As
 Barrett (1994) has recently argued with reference to the some-
 what later ceremonial monuments of Durrington Walls, Avebury
 and Stonehenge, it is highly unlikely that it was formally planned
 and conceived. It represents rather a series of construction
200                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


projects that were modified and whose meaning and significance
became altered though time, thus transforming the biographies,
myths and encounters of people with the landscape. The very act
of people coming together to construct the monument, camping
nearby for several weeks or months, to re-establish, augment and
develop it, was important in itself and not simply a matter of the
creation of a container for various forms of subsequent activity.
    It is not unlikely that, on Cranborne Chase, part of the narra-
tive meanings of the Dorset Cursus were linked not only to initi-
ation rites, but also to the themes of death and the regeneration of
life. It may have operated as a linear conduit through which both
bodies and bones were being moved between the barrows in the
central part of the Chase and Hambledon Hill. Bodies were per-
haps being taken out of Cranborne Chase to a death island of the
setting sun immediately beyond its margins to the west, and
being allowed to decompose, with selected bones being returned
to the barrows in the central ritual arena of the Chase itself. The
pollution of death was thus being removed and dry, clean and
ritually pure bones returned. Given the massive effort required to
construct the Cursus, the barrows themselves, and the enclosures
on Hambledon Hill, and the long-distance movement of pottery,
axes and other materials during the Neolithic, such a system of
corpse movement does not appear inherently unlikely. On
Hambledon Hill artefacts were carefully offered and deposited in
the pits inside the enclosure and in the ditches as if they were
bones. In turn the bones of the skeleton became treated as arte-
facts, being deposited in the barrows and circulating among the
living.


Conclusion

The slight early Neolithic 'settlement' evidence, contemporary
with the construction of the barrows, the Cursus and Hambledon
Hill, suggests that Cranborne Chase may have been an area that
was not permanently settled, but periodically visited by a num-
ber of surrounding social groups, to perform rituals, bury the
dead and manipulate ancestral bones. The escarpment periph-
eries were marked out by barrows aligned along its axes, empha-
sizing transition up to an important sacred space. The barrows
situated in the centre of the Chase were situated so as to duplicate
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland           201

the contours of the land, while the Cursus dramatically cuts
across them, linking the monuments together. Hambledon Hill
was a heavily ritualized death island to the west, to which bodies
were taken in processions and from which ancestral bones were
circulated back to the barrows on the Chase. In this area the
visual relationship between monuments and their sequential
ordering along the formalized path of movement marked out by
the Cursus was as essential a part of their meaning as the ritual
topography itself that these monuments helped to create and
sustain.
Chapter 6
Conclusion: Ideology and Place:
Restructuring the Connections

'The flow of movement is a flow of the mind.' I have argued that
during the Mesolithic, in all three study areas, ancestral connec-
tions between living populations and the past were embodied in
the Being of the landscape and an emotional attachment to place
that had a generalized power and significance in relation to
human activity as a series of known, named and significant
places linked by paths of movement to which populations repeat-
edly returned during their seasonal activity rounds. These
Mesolithic populations made relatively little impact on the land
apart from establishing clearings around their camp-sites and
burning off areas of woodland to stimulate browse.
    In the earlier Neolithic the relationship between populations
and the landscape became restructured and took on a different
form. The ancestral powers and meanings in the landscape now
became actively appropriated by individuals and groups through
the construction and use of chambered tombs, long cairns and
long barrows, and on Cranborne Chase by the Cursus and the
enclosures on Hambledon Hill. These monuments served to
make permanent, anchor, fix and visually draw out for percep-
tion the connections between people and the land for the first
time. Ancestral powers now became double. The tombs pres-
enced and marked out the bones of the ancestral dead in the land-
scape. In so doing they visibly brought the presence of the
ancestral past to consciousness. Their specific morphological
characteristics and their landscape settings also served to relate
the bones of previous generations to a more generalized ancestral
 power embodied in the topography and symbolic geography of
 place and paths of movement which had already been constituted
 in the Mesolithic. The location of important points in the external
 world became captured in the orientation of morphological

202
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections          203

features of the monuments and their placement in the landscape.
Their settings were deliberately chosen to fix a certain vantage
point in relation to perception of the world beyond. During the
Mesolithic the significance of place was understood in terms of its
setting in the landscape. In the Neolithic this was reversed - the
landscape was now understood in terms of its relationship to the
setting of the monuments.
   In other words, the setting of place became much more
anchored. Megalith building and long barrow construction
implies a need to represent in a physical form and capture per-
manently ancestral connections with the landscape. In south-
west Wales this was effected by constructing monuments near to
important topographical markers in the land such as rock out-
crops. In the Black Mountains the long axis of the chambered
cairn was of paramount significance. It imposed a form, a direc-
tional line across the topography, producing an axis directing
vision in a prescribed direction outward from the monument
itself and pointing towards escarpment spurs or along prescribed
routes of movements along the Usk and Wye valleys. On
Cranborne Chase, the long barrows, rather than directing vision
beyond themselves, outward towards topographic features, are
sedimented into the lie of the land itself, following its contours.
    Discussing the three different landscapes, and moving from
west to east across Wales and southern England, I have attempted
to take the reader on a textual journey involving a number of basic
transformations. First we move from a case of a lack of monu-
ment visibility to intervisibility. Second, there is an increasing
emphasis on movement; and third, there is a greater emphasis on
the elimination of difference in monument form from case 1 to
case 3. Finally there is also a basic contrast between Cranborne
Chase and the situation in south-west Wales and the Black
Mountains. The relationship between monuments of fundamen-
tally different forms and uses (the barrows, the Cursus and the
causewayed enclosure on Hambledon Hill) was as important
here as was the relationship to the topography. Siting a barrow
on Cranborne Chase was much more intimately linked to the
position of other previously constructed barrows than it appears
to have been in Wales. Increasingly, through the construction of
the Cursus, formalizing one path of movement between the bar-
rows, and, no doubt, blocking others, one type of monument
could only be 'read' and understood here in relation to the others.
204                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


    The building of the monuments prevented the ritual and
mythological significance of particular places being lost and
forgotten. They stabilized both cultural memory of place and
connections between places. The cultural appropriation in the
Neolithic of already established ancestral powers in the land-
scape through monument building served to increase its symbolic
potency and power. Through the mediation of the tomb time
became frozen, with the drawing of the past into the present. The
tomb objectified ancestral powers in the landscape. In this way
these powers became not just subjects of knowledge but objects
of knowledge too, resources to be worked upon and manipulated
for the sectional social interests of individuals or particular social
groups.
    The architectural forms of cairn and barrow, Cursus and
causewayed enclosure, in their different ways, signify a will to
make ancestral powers in the land visible, to be seen and remem-
bered, but always from a particular perspective provided by the
vantage points of the monuments. As we move around in space
our perspective of the landscape alters. What the monuments
did, in their different ways, was to freeze perspective through the
architectural lens of the monuments themselves - their orienta-
tions, entrances and exits, façades, forecourts and passage-ways.
They are then about establishing control over topographic per-
spective and the individual's possibilities for interpreting the
world. Experience of the landscape in the Neolithic became medi-
ated and channelled through fixed and permanent architectural
form. Landscape perception, now being structured through
monuments and relationships between them, became far more
 'focused'. Experience of the ancestral past now came into being
 within the specific setting of monuments and their relationships
 to the outside world. This, in turn, is linked with control of
knowledges of the ancestral past which are mediated through the
 cultural form of the monument and the character of the deposits
 left in and around it. Ancestral powers in the landscape could
 now only be deciphered from experiencing them at the site of the
 tomb or by passing down the Cursus or entering a causewayed
 enclosure. This in effect represents a closing down and restriction
 of a variety of 'points of view' - both literal and metaphorical.
 The monuments both deployed and captured an ancestral history.
 Acting as mnemonic markers they coded historicity and sacred
 power in particular places, creating a hierarchy of valued points
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections              205

in the landscape on pathways channelling movement through it
and sustaining knowledge of it. This logic, involving a re-order-
ing of the visible, constituted a vital component of power rela-
tions during the Neolithic, serving to differentiate between those
who were included in the knowledges required to decipher the
landscape and those who were excluded.
    In this respect it seems pertinent to note that, considering the
overall distribution of megalithic monuments in Wales and
southern England, where we find chambered tombs or long bar-
rows we also usually have evidence of a substantial amount of
Mesolithic activity. In areas where there are no monuments there
is little or no Mesolithic evidence either. Such a generalization
could also be extended to other areas of Europe, such as Brittany,
the Netherlands and much of southern Scandinavia.
    'Our body, to the extent that it moves itself about, that is, to the
extent that it is inseparable from a view of the world and is that
view itself brought into existence, is the condition of possibility ...
of all expressive operations and all acquired views which consti-
tute the cultural world' (Merleau-Ponty 1962: 388). At one level
monument construction solved the existential problem of how to
experience the natural world and the powers embedded in it
when none of the perspective views of it as the human body
moves through space can exhaust it. Horizons for experience are
always open and changing. Through the culturally embedded
horizon of the tomb and its setting the landscape became visibly
encultured. In turn, the relation of the tomb to the landscape
served to naturalize the ancestral powers embodied in the cultur-
al form of the monument and its bone and artefact deposits. They
are being represented as part of an immutable natural order of
things. The natural world as mediated through the tomb becomes
the horizon of all horizons, the style of all possible styles, guaran-
teeing for experience a given rather than a willed unity as a frame-
work for knowledge of the social and its connection with the past.
The monument draws together and serves to coalesce the natural
and the cultural as a framework for experiencing and under-
 standing the world. What appears - the monument - 'hides'
contexts in which it does not appear. It captures and draws atten-
 tion, domesticating the view of the landscape. The monuments,
 then, are to do with the formation and stabilization of attitudes
 toward the world. They acted as signifiers of part of a structure of
 knowledge, an iconography of human intentions, a resource for
206                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


power and social control. With the advent of monument
construction the landscape increasingly starts to become not just
a subject of human symbolic labour but an object of that labour
too.
    In the above paragraph I wrote of the view of the landscape in
the Neolithic's, becoming 'domesticated', and I now want briefly
to explore how this might relate to subsistence practices. It
appears that, in the areas I have considered, cultivation was
probably not important; but the herding of domesticates, particu-
larly cattle, began to assume an increasing significance during the
Neolithic. The herding and tending of animals formed part and
parcel of the new 'order of thought', manifested so dramatically
through monument construction and use. Domestic animals
during the Neolithic had a much greater symbolic exchange-
value than their utilitarian use-value as food on the hoof. Part of
the process of thinking about the landscape in a fresh way now
involved thinking it through animals. There are two main aspects to
this. First, as I have argued at length elsewhere (Tilley in press),
the symbolic potential and evaluation of food derived from
domesticates, as opposed to that acquired through foraging, con-
stituted a major preoccupation in exchange, feasting and ritual. It
is not surprising, then, that the vast bulk of domestic animal
bones known from the British Neolithic occur on ceremonial
rather than domestic sites, and that many of these deposits are
highly structured, i.e. come from specific parts of the animal,
such as the preponderance of skulls and mandibles found in the
Cursus ditches, discussed above. Meat from domestic animals
was exotic and highly prestigious, and became a requirement for
ritual practice - quite literally food for thought. Although still
probably contributing the bulk of the subsistence base, food
acquired from foraging gradually became down-graded in status
during the course of the Neolithic, and producing food for ritual
events provided a major stimulant for an increasing emphasis on
domesticates.
    Second, in general terms, it might be expected that there
would be more ideological continuity in terms of the importance
 attached to paths, as opposed to boundaries, between hunter-
 gatherer-fishers and populations which had incorporated a
 pastoral component, than between hunters and settled agricul-
 tural societies. Herding meant changing attitudes to grazing
 land, to property and inheritance, to over-wintering stock, food,
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections         207

ritual and ceremonial. Herding involved seasonal movements
along pathways through the landscape, as in the Mesolithic, but
with altogether different connotations. It obviously required a
great deal more social commitment and ideological investment in
the process of this movement, which would, as did the monu-
ments, increasingly serve to inscribe and 'fix' the landscape.
Moving animals along paths already in use from the Mesolithic
objectified them in just the same way as I have argued that monu-
ments 'captured' the ancestral connotations of topographic fea-
tures of the landscape. The movements of animals would
physically inscribe these paths across the landscape much more
prominently than the feet of hunter-gatherers following the
movements of game, and it would become increasingly difficult
(both in practical and symbolic terms) to take different ways. The
monuments, then, sedimented the symbolic potency of locales in
the landscape, domestic animals the paths of movement between
them and the ceremonies conducted in and around them. This is
not to impy any economic determinancy. It is rather a matter of a
social, political and ideological transformation that had profound
consequences for an entire Neolithic way of life, involving both
continuity and change from the Mesolithic.
   I have suggested that, as cultural markers, one of the purposes
of the megaliths in the Black Mountains and south-west Wales
and the long barrows on Cranborne Chase would seem to have
been to draw attention to the symbolic and social significance of
the natural topography and markers within it, such as the coast,
rivers, rock outcrops, spurs, escarpments and ridges. Such mark-
ers and places were almost certainly in use during the Mesolithic
preceding the construction of these Neolithic monuments. The
Mesolithic hunter-gatherers would have used them, as they can
be used today, as reference points and orientational foci. These
were obvious locations for stopping, resting, telling stories,
 observing game movements. As such they would be named and
be invested with narratives and mythologies. In a sense the rock
 outcrops, cliffs and escarpment edges of South-West Wales and
 the Black Mountains are natural untamed non-domesticated
 'megaliths' or stone groups.
    The occurence of flint scatters at these locales would have had
 considerable significance during the Mesolithic and early
 Neolithic for a recognition, reading and understanding of place.
 Like the difference between primary forest and regenerating
208                                                               References


areas, differences in the composition of these scatters- waste,
flakes, cores, microlith forms and discarded tools would act so as
to recall memories of previous visits, activities, events and sea-
sons. Reading these signs from places visited by previous genera-
tions Mesolithic archaeologists would also be able to infer, like
the contemporary archaeologist, the types of activities that had
taken place.
   What happens in the Neolithic is the constitution of a different
sense of time, place and social identity, through monument
building, and also by means of the herding of domesticates on
pathways across the land. Cultural markers are being used to cre-
ate a new sense of place, harnessed to legitimize patterns of social
control relating to restricting access to knowledges deemed
essential to group reproduction, while continuing to make refer-
ence or lay claim to already established ancestral connections
with, and pathways through, the landscape. An already encul-
tured landscape becomes refashioned, its meanings now con-
trolled by the imposition of the cultural form of the constructed
monument.


References

ApSimon, A. (1976), 'A view of the early prehistory of Wales', in G. Boon
  and J. Lewis (eds), Welsh Antiquity, Cardiff: University of Wales Press
Arnold, J., Green, M., Lewis, B. and Bradley, R. (1988), The Mesolithic of
  Cranborne Chase', Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History and
  Archaeological Society, 110: 117-25
Ashbee, P. (1984), The Earthen Long Barrow in Britain, Norwich: Geo
  Books
Atkinson, R. (1955), The Dorset Cursus', Antiquity, 29: 4-9
Barker, C. T. (1992), The Chambered Tombs of South-West Wales, Oxbow
  Monograph 14, Oxford: Oxbow Books
Barrett, J. (1994), Fragments from Antiquity, Oxford: Blackwell.
Barrett, J. and Bradley, R. (1991), The Cranborne Chase project and its
  publication', in J. Barrett, R. Bradley and M. Hall (eds)
Barrett, J., Bradley, R. and Hall, M. (eds), (1991a), Papers on the Prehistoric
  Archaeology of Cranborne Chase, Oxbow Monograph 11, Oxford:
   Oxbow Books
Barrett, J., Bradley, R. and Green, M. (1991b), Landscape, Monuments and
   Society. The Prehistory of Cranborne Chase, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press
References                                                              209

Barth, F. (1975), Ritual and Knowledge among the Baktaman, New Haven:
  Yale University Press
Basso, K. (1984), '"Stalking with stories": names, places and moral narra-
  tives among the western Apache', in E. Bruner (ed.) Text, Play and
  Story, Prospect Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press
Bender, B. (1992), 'Theorising landscapes, and the prehistoric landscapes
  of Stonehenge', Man, 27: 735-55
Bender, B. (ed.) (1993), Landscape: Politics and Perspectives, Oxford: Berg
Berndt, R. (1972), 'The Walmadjeri and Gugadja', in M. Bicchieri (ed.),
  Hunters and Gatherers Today, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston
Berndt, R. (1974), Australian Aboriginal Religion, Leiden: E. J. Brill
Berndt, R. (1976), 'Territoriality and the problem of demarcating socio-
   cultural space', in N. Peterson (ed.), Tribes and Boundaries in Australia,
   New Jersey: Humanities Press
Berndt, R. and Berndt, C. (eds) (1965), Aboriginal Man in Australia,
   London: Angus and Robertson
Berridge, P. (1980), 'Waun Fingen Felin', Archaeology in Wales 20:19-20
Binford, L. (1978), Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology, London: Academic Press
Binford, L. (1980), '"Willow smoke and dog's tails": hunter-gatherer set-
   tlement systems and archaeological site formation', American
   Antiquity, 45: 4-20
Bradley, R. (1984), The Social Foundations of Prehistoric Britain, London:
   Longman
Bradley, R. and Gardiner, J. (eds), (1984), Neolithic Studies. A Review of
   Some Current Research, Oxford: British Archaeological Reports 133
Bradley, R., Cleal, R., Gardiner, J., Green, M. and Bowden, M. (1984),
   'The Neolithic sequence in Cranborne Chase', in R. Bradley and J.
   Gardiner (eds)
Britnell, W. (1984), 'Gwernvale: discussion', in W. Britnell and H. Savory
Britnell, W. (1991), 'Penywyrlod, Talgarth', Archaeology in Wales, 31:14
Britnell, W. and Savory, H. (1984), Gwernvale and Penywyrlod: Two
   Neolithic Long Cairns in the Black Mountains of Brecknock, Cardiff:
   Cambrian Archaeological Monographs No. 2
Brody, H. (1981), Maps and Dreams, Vancouver: Douglas and Mclntyre
Burke, T. (1966), 'Excavations at Pant Sychbant, Penderyn (Breckn.)',
   Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies, 22: 78-87
Buttimer, A. and Seamon, D. (eds) (1980), The Human Experience of Space
   and Place, London: Croom Helm
Cantrill, T. (1915), 'Flint chipping floors in south west Pembrokeshire',
   Archaeologia Cambrensis, Sixth Series, 15:157-210
Care, V. (1979), 'The production and distribution of Mesolithic axes in
   southern England', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 45: 93-102
Caseldine, A. (1990), Environmental Archaeology in Wales, Lampeter:
   St David's University College
210                                                           References

Catt, J., Green, M. and Arnold, J. (1980), 'Naleds in a Wessex downland
   valley', Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History and Archaeology
   Society, 102: 69-75
Chase, A. (1984), 'Belonging to country, territory, identity and environ-
   ment in Cape York peninsula, Northern Australia', Oceania
   Monograph, 27:104-22
Chorley, R. and Haggett, P. (eds) (1967), Models in Geography, London:
   Methuen
Clark, J. (1936), 'Report on flint objects', Appendix in C. Drew and S.
   Piggott (1936)
Clarke, D. (ed.), (1972), Models in Archaeology, London: Methuen
Clarke, D. (ed.), (1977), Spatial Archaeology, London: Academic Press
Cloutman, E. (1983), Studies of the Vegetational History of the Black
   Mountain Range, South Wales, Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University
   of Wales
Corcoran, C. (1969), 'The Cotswold-Severn Group', in T. Powell, C.
   Corcoran, F. Lynch, and J. Scott, Megalithic Enquiries in the West of
   Britain, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Cosgrove, D. (1984), Social Formation and Symbolic Landscape, London:
   Croom Helm
Cosgrove, D. (1989), 'Geography is everywhere: culture and symbolism
   in human landscapes', in D. Gregory and R. Walford (eds), Horizons
   in Human Geography, London: Macmillan
Cosgrove, D. and Daniels, S. (1988), 'Introduction: iconography and
   landscape', in D. Cosgrove and S. Daniels (eds), The Iconography of
   Landscape, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Crampton, C. and Webley, D. (1966), 'A section through the Mynydd
   Troed long barrow, Brecknock', Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies,
   22: 71-7
Crawford, O. and Keiller, A. (1923), Wessex from the Air, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press
Daniels, S. (1989), 'Marxism, culture and the duplicity of landscape' in
   Peet and Thrift (eds)
David, A. (1990), 'Some aspects of the human presence in west Wales
   during the Mesolithic', in C. Bonsall (ed.), The Mesolithic in Europe,
   Edinburgh: John Donald
de Certeau, M. (1984), The Practice of Everyday Life, Berkeley: University
   of California Press
Dixon, R. (1976), 'Tribes, languages and other boundaries in northeast
   Queensland', in N. Peterson (ed.) Tribes and Boundaries in Australia,
   New Jersey: Humanities Press
Drew, C. and Piggott, S. (1936), 'Excavation of long barrow 163a on
   Thickthorn Down, Dorset', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 2:
   77-96.
Duncan, S. (1989), 'What is locality?', in Peet and Thrift (eds)
References                                                             211

Edmonds, M. (1993), 'Interpreting causewayed enclosures in the past
   and the present', in C. Tilley (ed.)
Entwistle, R. and Bowden, M. (1991), 'Cranborne Chase: the molluscan
   evidence', in J. Barrett, R. Bradley and M. Hall (eds)
Evans, A. and Jones, M. (1979), ' The plant remains', Appendix in G.
   Wainwright, Gussage All Saints: An Iron Age settlement in Dorset,
   London: HMSO
Farrar, R. (1951), 'Archaeological fieldwork in Dorset in 1951: a Neolithic
   causewayed enclosure at Hambledon Hill', Proceedings of the Dorset
   Natural History and Archaeology Society, 73:105-6
Fisher, P. (1991), 'The physical environment of Cranborne Chase', in
   J. Barrett, R. Bradley and M. Hall (eds)
Foucault, M. (1977), Discipline and Punish, New York: Vintage
Foucault, M. (1986), 'Of other spaces', Diacritics, 16: 22-7
Gamble, C. (1986), 'Hunter-gatherers and the origin of states', in J. Hall
   (ed.), States in History, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gardiner, J. (1984), 'Lithic distributions and Neolithic settlement
   patterns in central southern England', in R. Bradley and J. Gardiner
   (eds)
Giddens, A. (1979), Central Problems in Social Theory, London: Macmillan
Giddens, A. (1981), A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism,
   London: Macmillan
Giddens, A. (1984), The Constitution of Society, Cambridge: Polity Press
Gold, J. and Burgess, J. (eds), (1982), Valued Environments, London: Allen
   and Unwin
Gordon-Williams, J. (1926), 'The Nab Head chipping floor', Archaeologia
   Cambrensis, 81:86-111.
Goudie, A. (1987), 'Geography and archaeology: the growth of a rela-
   tionship', in J. Wagstaff (ed.)
Gregory, D. (1978), Ideology, Science and Human Geography, London:
   Hutchinson
Gregory, D. and Urry, J. (eds), (1985), Social Relations and Spatial
   Structures, London: Macmillan
Grimes, W. (1932), 'Surface flint industries around Solva,
   Pembrokeshire', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 86:179-220.
Grimes, W. (1936a), 'The megalithic monuments of Wales', Proceedings of
   the Prehistoric Society, 2:106-39.
Grimes, W. (1936b), 'The long cairns of the Brecknockshire Black
   Mountains', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 259-82.
Grimes, W. (1939a), 'Bedd yr Afanc', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society,
   5:258
Grimes, W. (1939b), 'The excavation of the Ty-Isaf long cairn,
    Brecknockshire', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 5: 119-42
Grimes, W. (1948), 'Pentre Ifan burial chamber, Pembrokeshire',
   Archaeologia Cambrensis, 100: 3-23
212                                                            References

Grinsell, L. (1938-40), 'Hampshire barrows', Proceedings of the Hampshire
   Field Club, Vol XIV: 9-40; 195-365
Grinsell, L. (1957), 'Archaeological gazetteer', Victoria County History
   Wiltshire 1,1, London.
Grinsell, L. (1959), Dorset Barrows, Dorchester: Longman
Guidieri, R. and Pellizzi, F. (1981), 'Shadows. Nineteen tableaux on the
   cult of the dead in Malekula, eastern Melanesia', Res, 2: 6-71.
Hallowell, A. (1955), Culture and Experience, Philadelphia: University of
   Pennsylvania Press
Harrington, J. (1916), The Ethnogeography of the Tewa Indians, Washington
   DC: Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology 29
Harrison, S. (1988), 'Magical exchange of the preconditions of produc-
   tion in a Sepik river village', Man, 23: 319-33
Harvey, D. (1969), Explanation in Geography, London: Arnold
Harvey, D. (1973), Social justice and the City, London: Arnold
Heidegger, M. (1972), 'Building dwelling thinking' in M. Heidegger,
   Basic Writings, (ed. D. Krell), London: Routledge
Higgs, E. (1959), 'Excavations at a Mesolithic site at Downton, near
   Salisbury, Wiltshire', Proccedings of the Prehistoric Society, 25: 209-32
Hirsch, P. and O'Hanlon, M. (eds) (in press) The Anthropology of Landscape:
   Between Place and Space, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Hodder, I. (1982a), Symbols in Action, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press
Hodder, I. (ed.), (1982b), Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press
Hodder, I. (1986), Reading the Past, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press
Hodder, I. (1987), 'Converging traditions: the search for symbolic mean-
   ings in archaeology and geography', in J. Wagstaff (ed.)
Hodder, I. (1992), Theory and Practice in Archaeology, London: Routledge
Hodder, I. and Orton, C. (1976), Spatial Analysis in Archaeology,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Hugh-Jones, C. (1979), From the Milk River: Spatial and Temporal Processes
   in Northwest Amazonia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Ingold, T. (1986), The Appropriation of Nature, Manchester: Manchester
   University Press
Ingold, T. (1992), 'Culture and the perception of the environment', in E.
   Croll and D. Parkin (eds), Bush Base: Forest Farm, London: Routledge
Ingold, T. (1993), 'The temporality of landscape', World Archaeology,
   25 (2): 152-74
Jackson, J. (1936), 'Report on the animal remains', Appendix in Drew and
    Piggott
Jacobi, R. (1980), 'The early Holocene settlement of Wales', in J. Taylor
    (ed.), Culture and Environment in Prehistoric Wales, Oxford: British
    Archaeological Reports 76
References                                                                 213

Jacobi, R. (1981), 'The last hunters in Hampshire', in S. Shennan and R.
   Schadla Hall (eds), The Archaeology of Hampshire, Aldershot:
   Hampshire Field Club and Archaeology Society
Jarman, M., Bailey, G. and Jarman, H. (eds) (1982), Early European
   Agriculture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Jones, R. (1990), 'Hunters of the Dreaming: some ideational, economic
   and ecological parameters of the Australian Aboriginal productive
   system', in D. Yen and J. Mummery (eds), Pacific Production Systems:
   Approaches to Economic Prehistory, Canberra: Australian National
  . University
Kahn, M. (1990), 'Stone-faced ancestors: the spatial anchoring of myth in
   Wamira, Papua New Guinea', Ethnology, 29: 51-66
Kinnes, I. (1988), 'The cattleship potemkin: reflections on the first
    neolithic in Britain', in J. Barrett and I. Kinnes (eds), The Archaeology of
    Context, Sheffield: University of Sheffield
Kinnes, I. (1992), Non-Megalithic Long Barrows and Allied Structures in the
   British Neolithic, London: British Museum Occasional Paper 52
Kirk, T. (1993), 'Space, subjectivity, power and hegemony: megaliths and
   long mounds in earlier Neolithic Brittany', in C. Tilley (ed.),
   Interpretative Archaeology, Oxford: Berg
Küchler, S. (1993), 'Landscape as memory: the mapping of process and
  its representation in a Melanesian society', in B. Bender (ed.),
Lacaille, A. and Grimes, W. (1955), 'The prehistory of Caldey',
   Archaeologia Cambrensis, 104: 85-165
Layton, R. (n.d.), 'Relating to country in the Western desert', unpub-
  lished manuscript. To appear in P. Hirsch and M. O'Hanlon (eds)
Leach, A. (1913), 'Stone implements from soil drifts, south Pembroke',
   Archaeologia Cambrensis, Sixth Series, 13: 391-433
Leach, A. (1918), 'Flint-working sites on the submerged land
  (Submerged Forest) bordering the Pembrokeshire coast', Proceedings
   of the Geological Association, 29 (2): 46-67
Leach, A. (1933), 'Stone implements from the Nab Head, St. Bride's
  Pembrokeshire', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 87: 229-36
Legge, A. (1991), 'The animal remains from six sites at Down Farm,
  Woodcutts', in J. Barrett, R. Bradley and M. Hall (eds)
Leenhardt, M. (1930), 'Notes d'ethnologie Neo-Calédonienne', Paris:
    Travaux et Mémoires de l´Institut d'Ethnologie, Vol. 8
Lewis, B. and Coleman, R. (1984), 'Pentridge Hill, Dorset: trial excava-
    tions', Procceedings of the Dorset Natural History and Archaeology Society,
   104: 59-65
Lewis, M. (1990), The Prehistory of Coastal S. W. Wales 7500-3600 BP.
   An Interdisciplinary Palaeoenvironmental and Archaeological
   Investigation, University of Wales: Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation
Luff, R., Brothwell, D. and O'Connor, T. (1984), 'The human and animal
   remains', Appendix in Britnell and Savory
214                                                           References

Lynch, F. (1972), 'Portal dolmens in the Nevern valley, Pembrokeshire',
  in F. Lynch and C. Burgess (eds), Prehistoric Man in Wales and the West,
  Bath: Adams and Dart
Lynch, F. (1975), 'Excavations at Carreg Samson megalithic tomb,
  Mathry, Pembrokeshire', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 124: 15-35
Lynch, F. (1976), 'Towards a chronology of megalithic tombs in Wales' in
  G. Boon and J. Lewis (eds), Welsh Antiquity: essays presented to H. N.
  Savory, Cardiff: National Museum of Wales
Malinowski, B. (1922), Argonauts of the Western Pacific, London:
  Routledge Kegan Paul
Mellars, P. (1976), 'Fire, ecology, animal populations and man: a study of
  some ecological relationships in prehistory', Proceedings of the
  Prehistoric Society, 42:15-45
Mercer, R. (1980), Hambledon Hill: A Neolithic Landscape, Edinburgh:
  Edinburgh University Press
Mercer, R. (1981), 'Excavations at Carn Brea, Illogan, Cornwall', Cornish
   Archaeology, 20:1-204.
Mercer, R. (1988), 'Hambledon Hill, Dorset, England', in C. Burgess,
  P. Topping, C. Mordant and H. Maddison (eds), Enclosures and
  Defences in the Neolithic of Western Europe, Oxford: British
  Archaeological Reports 403
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962), Phenomenology of Perception, London:
  Routledge
Miller, D. and Tilley, C. (eds) (1984), Ideology, Power and Prehistory,
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Momaday, S. (1974),' Native American attitudes to the environment', in
  W. Capps (ed.), Seeing With a Native Eye: Essays on Native American
  Religion, New York: Harper Forum Books
Morphy, H. (1989), 'From dull to brilliant: the aesthetics of spiritual
  power among the Yolungu', Man, 34 (1): 21-40
Morphy, H. (1991), Ancestral Connections, Chicago: Chicago University
  Press
Morphy, H. (n.d.), 'Landscape: the reproduction of the ancestral past',
  unpublished manuscript. To appear in P. Hirsch and M. O'Hanlon
  (eds)
Mountford, C. (1965), Ayers Rock. Its People, Their Beliefs and Their Art,
  Honolulu: East-West Center Press
Munn, N. (1970), 'The transformation of subjects into objects in Walbiri
  and Pitjantjatjara myth' in R. Berndt (ed.), Australian Aboriginal
  Anthropology, Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press
Munn, N. (1973), 'The spatial presentation of cosmic order in Walbiri
  iconography', in A. Forge (ed.), Primitive Art and Society, Oxford:
  Oxford University Press
Munn, N. (1986), Walbiri Iconography, Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press
References                                                                215


Nelson, R. (1983), Make Prayers to the Raven, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press
Ortiz, A. (1969), The Tewa World, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Parmentier, R. (1987), The Sacred Remains, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press
Parsons, E. (1939), Pueblo Indian Religion, 2 Vols, Chicago: Chicago
   University Press
Peet, R. and Thrift, N. (eds) (1989), New Models in Geography, Vol. 2,
   London: Unwin Hyman
Penning-Rosewell, E. and Lowenthal, D. (eds) (1986), Landscape Meanings
   and Values, London: Allen and Unwin
Penny, A. and Wood, J. (1973), The Dorset cursus complex - a Neolithic
   astronomical observatory?', Archaeological Journal, 130: 44-76
Pickles, J. (1985), Phenomenology, Science and Geography, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press
Pitt-Rivers, A. (1898), Excavations on Cranborne Chase TV, Privately printed
Pitts, M. and Jacobi, R. (1979), 'Some aspects of change in flaked stone
   industries of the Mesolithic and Neolithic in southern Britain', Journal
   of Archaeological Science, 6: 163-77
Poole, F. (1986), 'The erosion of a sacred landscape: European explo-
   ration and cultural ecology among the Bimin-Kuskusmin of Papua
   New Guinea', in M. Tobias (ed.), Mountain People, Oklahoma:
   University of Oklahoma Press
Price, T. and Brown, J. (eds) (1985), Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The
   Emergence of Complexity, London: Academic Press
RCHM (Royal Commission on Historical Monuments) (1972), County of
   Dorset, Vol. IV: North, London: HMSO
RCHM (1975), County of Dorset Vol V: East, London: HMSO
RCHM (1979), Long Barrows in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight, London:
   HMSO
Relph, E. (1976), Place and Placelessness, London: Pion
Relph, E. (1981), Rational Landscapes and Humanistic Geography, London:
   Croom Helm
Renfrew, C. (1969), 'Review of "Locational Analysis in Human
   Geography" by P. Haggett', Antiquity, 43: 74-5
Renfrew, C. (1973a), Before Civilization, Harmondsworth: Penguin
Renfrew, C. (1973b), 'Monuments, mobilisation and social organization
   in Neolithic Wessex', in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of Culture
   Change, London: Duckworth
Ricoeur, P. (1983), Time and Narrative, Vol. I, Chicago: Chicago University
   Press
Riesenfeld, A. (1950), The Megalithic Culture of Melanesia, Leiden: E. J. Brill
Roese, H. (1982), 'Some aspects of topographical locations of Neolithic
   and Bronze Age monuments in Wales', Bulletin of the Board of Celtic
   Studies, 29: 763-75
216                                                              References

Ross, M. (1987), 'Kington Magna and surrounding areas: a fieldwalking
   survey of the prehistory (1979-1987)', Proceedings of the Dorset Natural
   History and Archaeology Society, 109: 91-103
Saville, A. (1990), 'A mesolithic flint assemblage from Hazleton,
   Gloucestershire, England, and its implications', in C. Bonsall (ed.),
   The Mesolithic in Europe, Edinburgh: John Donald
Savory, H. (1956), 'The excavation of the Pipton long cairn,
   Brecknockshire', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 7-48
Savory, H. (1961), 'Mesolithic site on Craig y Llyn (Glam.)', Bulletin of the
   Board of Celtic Studies, 19:163-5.
Savory, H. (1980), 'The Neolithic in Wales', in J. Taylor (ed.), Culture and
   Environment in Prehistoric Wales, Oxford: British Archaeological
   Reports 76
Schieffelin, E. (1976), The Sorrow of the Lonely and the Burning of the
   Dancers, New York: St Martin's Press
Schlee, G. (1992), 'Ritual topography and ecological use: the Gabbra of
   the Kenyan/Ethiopian borderlands', in E. Croll and D. Parkin (eds),
   Bush Base: Forest Farm, London: Routledge
Seamon, D. (1979), A Geography of the Lifeworld, London: Croom Helm
Seamon, D. (1980), 'Body-subject, time-space routines, and place-
   ballets', in Buttimer and Seamon (eds)
Seamon, D. and Mugerauer, R. (eds) (1989), Dwelling, Place and
   Environment, New York: Columbia University Press
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1982), 'Ideology, symbolic power and ritual
   communication: a reinterpretation of Neolithic mortuary practices',
   in I. Hodder (ed.), Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1987a), Re-Constructing Archaeology,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Shanks, M. And Tilley, C. (1987b), Social Theory and Archaeology,
   Cambridge: Polity Press
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1989), 'Archaeology into the 1990s', Norwegian
   Archaeological Review, 22:1-12
Sherratt, A. (1990), 'The genesis of megaliths: monumentality, ethnicity
   and social complexity in Neolithic north-west Europe, World
   Archaeology, 22: 147-67
Silko, L. (1981), 'Language and literature from a Pueblo indian perspec-
   tive', in L. Fiedler and H. Baker (eds), Opening up the Canon,
   Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press
Smith, A. and Cloutman, E. (1988), 'Reconstruction of Holocene vegeta-
   tion history in three dimensions at Waun-Fingen-Felen, an upland
   site in south Wales', Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
    London, Series B, 322: 159-219
Speck, F. (1923), 'Mistassini hunting territories in the Labrador peninsula',
   American Anthropologist, 25: 452-71
References                                                              217

Soja, E. (1989), Postmodern Geographies, London: Verso
Stanner, W. (1965), 'Religion, totemism and symbolism', in R. Berndt and
   C. Berndt (eds)
Stanner, W. (1966), On Aboriginal Religion, Sydney: Oceania Monograph
   No. 11
Stanton, Y. (1984), 'The Mesolithic period: early post-glacial hunter-
   gatherer communities in Glamorgan', in H. Savory (ed.) Glamorgan
   County History, Vol. II, Cardiff: University of Wales Press
Strehlow, T. (1965), 'Culture, social structure, and environment in
   Aboriginal Central Australia', in R. Berndt and C. Berndt (eds),
   Aboriginal Man in Australia, London: Angus and Robertson
Strehlow, T. (1970), 'Geography and the totemic landscape in central
   Australia: a functional study', in R. Berndt (ed.), Australian Aboriginal
   Anthropology, Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press
Summers, P. (1941), 'A Mesolithic site near Iwerne Minster, Dorset,
   Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 7:145-6
Taçon, P. (1991), 'The power of stone: symbolic aspects of stone use and
   tool development in western Arnhem Land, Australia', Antiquity, 65:
   192-207
Tanner, A. (1979), Bringing Home Animals, Newfoundland: Institute of
   Social and Economic Research
Taun, Y.-F. (1974), Topophilia, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall
Taun, Y.-F. (1975), 'Space and place: humanistic perspective', Progress in
   Human Geography, 6
Taun, Y.-F. (1977), Space and Place. The Perspective of Experience, London:
   Arnold
Taylor, J. (1980), 'Environmental changes in Wales during the Holocene
   period', in J. Taylor (ed.), Culture and Environment in Prehistoric Wales,
   Oxford: British Archaeological Reports, British Series No. 76
Taylor, L. (1989), 'Seeing the 'inside': Kunwinjku paintings and the
   symbol of the divided body', in H. Morphy (ed.), Animals into Art,
   London: Unwin-Hyman
Thomas, J. (1991), Rethinking the Neolithic, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press
Thorpe, I. (1984), 'Ritual, power and ideology: a reconstruction of earlier
   Neolithic rituals in Wessex', in Bradley and Gardiner (eds)
Tilley, C. (ed.) (1993), Interpretative Archaeology, Oxford: Berg
Tilley, C. (in press), An Ethnography of the Neolithic, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press
Turnbull, C. (1961), The Forest People, London: Jonathan Cape
Turnbull, C. (1965), Wayward Servants, New York: Natural History Press
Turnbull, C. (1983), The Mbuti Pygmies. Change and Adaptation, New York:
    Holt, Rinehart and Winston
Wagstaff, J. (1987a), 'The new archaeology and geography' in J. Wagstaff
    (ed.)
218                                                               References

Wagstaff, J. (ed.) (1987b), Landscape and Culture. Geographical and
  Archaeological Perspectives, Oxford: Blackwell
Wainwright, G. (1959), 'The excavation of a Mesolithic site at Freshwater
   West, Pembrokeshire', Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies, 18:196-205
Wainwright, G. (1963), 'A reinterpretation of the microlithic industries of
   Wales', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society, 29: 99-132
Watson, P., LeBlanc, S. and Redman, C. (1971), Explanation in
  Archaeology, New York: Columbia University Press
Webley, D. (1959), 'The neolithic colonization of the Brecknockshire
   Black Mountains', Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies, 18: 290-4
Webley, D. (1969), 'Aspects of Neolithic and Bronze Age agriculture in
   South Wales', Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies, 23: 285-90
Webley, D. (1976), '"How the west was won": prehistoric land use in the
  southern Marches', in G. Boon and J. Lewis (eds), Welsh Antiquity,
  Cardiff: University of Wales Press
Weiner, J. (1991), The Empty Place, Bloomington: Indiana University Press
West, C. (1956), 'Report on the bones from Pipton long cairn', Appendix
  in Savory
White, L. (1964), 'The world of the Keresan Pueblo Indians', in S.
  Diamond (ed.), Primitive Views of the World, New York: Columbia
  University Press
Williams, A. (1953), 'Clegyr Boia, St. David's (Pemb.): excavation in
   1943', Archaeologia Cambrensis, 102: 20-47
Williams, N. (1982), 'A boundary is to cross: observations on Yolngu
  boundaries and permission', in N. Williams and E. Hunn (eds),
   Resource Managers: North American and Australian Hunter-Gatherers,
  Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press
Williams, R. (1973), The Country and the City, London: Chatto and
  Windus
Wymer, }. (ed.) (1977), Gazetteer of Mesolithic Sites, London: Council for
  British Archaeology Research Report 22
Zvelebil, M. (ed.) (1986), Hunters in Transition, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press
Index




        219
220   Index
Index   221
