Chapter 5
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the
Chalk Downland

Introduction

In this chapter I want to consider the relationship between places
and monuments in an area of chalk downland in southern
England, Cranborne Chase, straddling the county boundaries of
Dorset, Hampshire and Wiltshire. While the archaeological land-
scapes considered in the previous two chapters have often been
considered as peripheral to the main areas of early Neolithic set-
tlement, Cranborne Chase has been regarded as one of the most
important 'core' areas of Neolithic Wessex in southern England.
It is a topographically well-defined chalk plateau bounded to the
west by the river Stour, to the north by the Nadder and to the east
by the Avon. The northern and western sides have steep and
impressive escarpment edges. To the east the dip slope running
down to the Avon valley is less sharp and precipitous. The chalk
plateau is highest in the north, approaching 300 m., and gently
dips down and gradually loses itself in the sandy Dorset coastal
heathlands of pine, heather and gorse to the south. From the
highest point, Win Green, in the north the Needles and the Isle of
Wight can be seen some 50 km. away in the distance on a clear
day.
    Cranborne Chase is a bold, open landscape in which the lines
of the land and its contours are far more significant than its
shades, colours and local details. The chalk plateau, roughly
rectangular in form and running for roughly 30 km. in a SW-NE
direction, is broken up by deep coombes and the Ebble valley in
the north. To the south a number of roughly parallel stream and
river valleys, the Crichel and Gussage brooks and the headwaters
of the rivers Allen and Crane, break up the chalk. This gives rise
to a rolling landscape of shallow open valleys separated by gentle

                                                               143
144                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


rounded ridges around 100 m. high, running NW-SE. Numerous
dry valleys lead off the main valleys, giving the local topography
of the southern areas of the Chase a more diverse character.
   Geologically, the chalk downland is broken up on the surface
and alleviated by alluvial deposits along the river and stream
courses, Greensand exposures along the western and northern
escarpments, and areas with clay with flints in the central part of
Cranborne Chase. The highest point in central and southern areas
of the Chase is marked by the sandy and gravelly Reading
beds which cap Penbury Knoll, crowned today with gnarled
pines and visible for up to 12 km. or more across the rolling
downland. From Penbury Knoll there are panoramic views
across the Chase to Win Green in the north and southwards to the
Dorset coast.
   Cranborne Chase was, undoubtedly, one of the great ceremo-
nial landscapes of the early Neolithic in Britain. It contains one of
the major concentrations of earthen long barrows in southern
England, and by far the two most impressive earthworks to be
constructed anywhere in Britain during the Neolithic, the 10 km.-
long Dorset Cursus and a complex of causewayed enclosures on
Hambledon Hill on its western periphery. Field-walking over a
twenty-year period has also recovered the largest and best prove-
nanced collection of Mesolithic flintwork from anywhere on the
chalk downland of southern Britain.


The Mesolithic Landscape

Virtually all the collections are surface flint scatters. Two small
excavations and one more extensive one have been carried out
(Catt et al. 1980; Lewis and Coleman 1984; Higgs 1959). Field sur-
veys have documented 27 major flint scatters in the central area
of Cranborne Chase and in surveyed areas to the north (Arnold
et al. 1988; Ross 1987) (Fig. 5.1). The overall density of sites is
high, ranging between 0.2 and 0.6 sites per square kilometre in
surveyed areas. On the basis of the presence/absence of diagnos-
tic microlith types six sites belong to the earlier Mesolithic and
two to the later Mesolithic (Arnold et al. 1988: 120), while the
majority have both earlier and later microlith forms. Taking
frequencies of microliths into consideration six sites are domi-
nated by earlier material and ten by later forms.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                     145




Figure 5.1. The distribution of Mesolithic locales in central areas of
Cranborne Chase and finds of early Neolithic leaf-shaped arrowheads in
relation to surface geology.
Key: 1: Greensand; 2: Clay-with-flints on chalk; 3: River gravel on chalk;
4: Reading Beds; 5: Mesolithic locales; 6: 1-5 leaf shaped arrowheads;
6: (large symbol) > 5 leaf-shaped arrowheads.
PK: Penbury Knoll. After Arnold et al. 1988: Fig. 2 and Barrett et al. 1991b:
Fig. 2.4.




   The fact that most assemblages contain both early and later
Mesolithic flintwork points importantly to continuity in the
choice of locales and the exploitation and use of particular areas
of the landscape. Mesolithic occupation began here perhaps as
early as 6,500 BC and continued for 2,000 years or longer, with
repeated visits to the same places. Locales on the Greensand, to
the north, appear to have been occupied later than those on the
river gravels and areas of clay with flints. The spatial distribution
of the flint scatters tends to be compact, most sites on the clay
with flints covering an area of about 80 by 50 m. Some are consid-
erably larger, one near to Iwerne Minster covering an area of
300 X 200 m., within which smaller, more tightly defined flint
146                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


concentrations could be identified (Summers 1941). Spreads of
material locales found on the Greensand may be up to twice this
size (Arnold et al. 1988: 122). The flint scatters on the excavated
site at Downton situated on a river terrace and dominated by
later microlith forms covered an area up to 265 sq. m. (Higgs
1959: 214).
   The only structural evidence from these sites is from Downton
and St Giles Field, Woodcutts. At Downton a series of 23 stake
holes in two discrete areas defining semi-circular or oval areas
were identified, together with concentrations of charcoal, worked
flints and cooking holes. These may be remains of light shelters
with stakes driven into the ground to support them (Higgs 1959:
231). Trial excavations at the Woodcutts site revealed traces of
sub-surface digging of Mesolithic date, but the excavated area
was too small to provide any basis for an interpretation (Catt et al.
1980: 72).
   Field visits were made to a sample of twelve of the Mesolithic
findspots. Four typical locales can be distinguished in relation to
the local topography and geology:
   1. Places close to springheads on the Greensand in the north on
sloping terrain (n = 2);
   2. Places on gentle south-facing slopes in undulating terrain on
areas characterized by clay with flints in central areas of
Cranborne Chase (n = 5);
   3. Places on alluvial deposits in valley bottoms (n = 2);
   4. Places on local high points on flat or sloping terrain (n = 3).
There is nothing particularly remarkable or distinctive with
regard to these places in relation to local topographical features
of the landscape, apart from the evidence for substantial
Mesolithic occupation and activity on Penbury Knoll/Pentridge
Hill, the highest point in the central area of Cranborne Chase
(Wymer 1977: 69, 76; Lewis and Coleman 1984). Field-walking
and a limited excavation here has recovered a large flint assem-
blage at a number of separate locations, dominated by early
microlith forms, but with a small representation of later types. Of
the locales mentioned above, Arnold et al. (1988) have noted that
the second type (on the clay with flints) is by far the most com-
mon, and there is indeed a remarkable degree of preference for
areas with rich flint deposits on clay soils.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                 147


   It is of interest to note that most of the locales are clustered in a
broad NE-SW band running across the centre of Cranborne
Chase, running from the escarpment edge by Hambledon Hill to
the west to Penbury Knoll in the east, with outlying and more iso-
lated site locations on Greensand deposits to the north. This band
of Mesolithic sites is clustered between 2 and 4 km. north of the
Dorest Cursus and the main concentration of long barrows on
Cranborne Chase. They may mark an important axis of move-
ment across the landscape and its alteration through local wood-
land clearance - an axis which only later, in the early Neolithic,
became formalized and culturally embedded by means of monu-
ment construction.


Locales and the Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'

Bradley and others (Bradley et al. 1984: 89; Bradley in Arnold et al.
1988: 125; Barrett et al. 1991b: 30) assume that Mesolithic occupa-
tion on Cranborne Chase effectively came to an end around 4,000
BC, and that there was a hiatus between Mesolithic occupation
and the early Neolithic settlement in which substantial areas of
the chalk downland came into use for the first time, as opposed to
the preferential occupation of areas with clay with flints during
the Mesolithic. Thus, in this scenario, for a period of over 1,000
years Cranborne Chase was unoccupied before the first Neolithic
settlement and the construction of long barrows. One possible
reason suggested for this is that late Mesolithic settlement shifted
from inland to almost exclusively coastal exploitation. Why this
should happen remains unexplained. Some sort of gap between
the late Mesolithic and early Neolithic remains commonplace in
the literature on southern England, but may be more a product of
archaeological categorization and the crudeness of relative dating
with regard to flint assemblages than anything else. Indeed,
Jacobi notes with reference to late Mesolithic settlement in
Hampshire that there were 'no obvious areas whose uptake by
early farmers will not have impinged in some way upon preexist-
ing patterns of territoriality' (Jacobi 1981: 23). Looking at the
overall distribution of Mesolithic and early Neolithic locales in
the landscape, continuity rather than a hiatus may be envisaged
in relation to both settlement and patterns of exploitation of ani-
mal and plant food resources.
148                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


   The early Neolithic evidence is dominated by ceremonial
monuments - earthen long barrows, the causewayed enclosures
on Hambledon Hill on the western fringe of Cranborne Chase
(Mercer 1980, 1988) and the Dorset Cursus (discussed below).
Apart from these sites the only evidence from 'domestic' contexts
is the distribution of leaf-shaped arrowheads, one excavated flint
assemblage beneath a long barrow (Drew and Piggott 1936), and
small ceramic collections from beneath two long barrows and the
Dorset Cursus and from settlement pits on Handley Hill closely
associated with Wor barrow (Barrett et al. 1991b: 30-2). The
distribution of leaf-shaped arrowheads, like the Mesolithic flint
industries, is strongly related to areas of clay with flints, and
there is a concentration of finds on Penbury Knoll. The only
change from the Mesolithic pattern is that some findspots now
appear on the chalk downland in areas where the long barrows
and the Cursus were built. All findspots with over five arrow-
heads occur in areas already occupied during the Mesolithic (Fig.
5.1). This evidence points not only to the continued use of the
same areas of the landscape, but to continuity in economic activi-
ties, with hunting, fishing and gathering still playing, as in Wales,
a dominant role, supplemented by limited numbers of domesti-
cated animals, the remains of which have been almost exclusive-
ly recovered from ritual rather than domestic sites. Moreover,
metrical analysis of early Neolithic flint industries has demon-
strated technological continuity with the later Mesolithic (Pitts
and Jacobi 1979). Gardiner notes that later Mesolithic and early
Neolithic flint assemblages may easily be confused in the absence
of diagnostic pieces (Gardiner 1984: 19), while Care has demon-
strated that the same surface flint sources were exploited for axe
production in both the Mesolithic and the Neolithic (Care 1979).
Bradley himself notes that Mesolithic activity on Cranborne
Chase 'set in motion an oscillation between upland and lowland
settlement which was to continue throughout the prehistoric
period' (in Barrett et al. 1991b: 30). Loess soils, today heavily
eroded, appear to have originally mantled the whole of the chalk
downland and areas with clay with flints on Cranborne Chase, so
that a shift of some Neolithic activity away from areas of clay
with flints cannot be explained as a result of a wish to exploit
better-quality and more easily tilled soils as part and parcel of a
fully-fledged agricultural system (Fisher 1991). Mesolithic activity,
as noted by Care, may have substantially affected the forest
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               149

cover, creating regions of more open country on the chalk down-
land attractive to later Neolithic occupation (Care 1979:100).
    Animal bones from earlier Neolithic contexts associated with
the Thickthorn Down barrow, and primary silts in the ditch of the
Dorset Cursus, include ox, pig, sheep, aurochs, and red and roe
deer, with wild and domestic cattle being most frequent (Jackson
1936; Legge 1991). Legge notes the high proportion of wild ani-
mals represented by the finds from the Cursus ditch - at least 25
per cent - and that the majority of the remains were whole skulls
or parts of skulls, or mandibles, i.e. they do not seem to be ordi-
nary butchery deposits (Legge 1991: 55). Cattle remains also
dominate the fauna from Hambledon Hill (Mercer 1980: 61).
Flotation has also recovered some evidence of wheat and barley
cultivation here, on the fringes of the Chase.
    Excavations under the Thickthorn Down long barrow at the end
of the Cursus revealed a narrow-flake industry of early Neolithic
date, together with a leaf-shaped arrowhead and plain bowl sherds
(Drew and Piggott 1936; Barrett et al. 1991b: 31). As Bradley points
out, this probably represents an occupation site over which the
barrow was subsequently built. From the old land surface
beneath the mound a microlith was recovered, and 'the fact that it
was found on and not under the turf-line suggests little differ-
ence in age [from the Neolithic flintwork]' (Clark 1936: 91). Since
the southern barrow on Thickthorn Down is one of only three
totally excavated examples on Cranborne Chase the association
between the find of a microlith and an early Neolithic flake
industry sealed by later barrow construction is of particular interest.
     Excavations on the two major ceremonial monuments of the
 early Neolithic, Hambledon Hill and the Dorset Cursus, have
 similarly recovered Mesolithic material. At Hambledon Hill exca-
 vation of the primary silts of the ditch recovered unspecified arte-
facts of Mesolithic date (Farrar 1951: 105-6). Excavations of the
 west ditch of the Cursus provided two bone samples giving late
 Mesolithic radiocarbon dates of 4510 and 4950 BC (Barrett et al.
 1991b: 46); and late Mesolithic occupation of the nearby floor of
 the river Allen, over which the Cursus crosses, is well attested by
 flint scatters (Arnold et al. 1988; Wymer 1977: 70).
     Such evidence can, of course, all be dismissed as purely
 fortuitous; but at the very least it points to the long-term use and
 significance of particular locales in the landscape. Undoubtably
 one of the most symbolically significant of these was Penbury
150                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Knoll, the highest point of the central area of Cranborne Chase,
from which there are extensive views in all directions. As has
already been noted, concentrations of earlier and later Mesolithic
and early Neolithic flintwork occur here. It is of great interest to
note that not only does the Dorset Cursus begin due north of
Penbury Knoll (see below), but this high point can be seen from
no less than 31 of the long barrows (80 per cent) on Cranborne
Chase. With one exception those barrows from which Penbury
Knoll is not visible occur on the extreme periphery of their over-
all distribution on Cranborne Chase, and are associated with the
escarpment edge defining the area of chalk downland to the
north, west and east (see the discussion below). A wish that
Penbury Knoll should be visible from the barrows seems to have
played a part in deciding where to place them. Shifting some of
the barrow sites away from their present locations, sometimes a
matter of only a few hundred metres or less, would have made
Penbury Knoll invisible. This hill, today capped, as perhaps in
the past, by gnarled pines (Fig. 5.2), was undoubtedly steeped in
ancestral associations, social memories and myth.


Earthen Long Barrows

There are 39 extant or destroyed earthen long barrows known
from Cranborne Chase (Ashbee 1984: Chapter 2; Kinnes 1992:
8-9). They have been well surveyed and documented in the liter-
ature (Grinsell 1938-40, 1957, 1959; RCHM 1972, 1975, 1979;
Barrett et al. 1991b: Chapter 2). Three have been totally or partial-
ly excavated and a further five have been subject to antiquarian
investigation to a limited extent (Kinnes 1992: 21-3). The barrows
exhibit considerable diversity in size, ranging in length from
20 m. to just over 100 m. and from 12 to 30 m. in width (Table 5.1).
Some of this variation is the result of differential denudation and
destruction. Most would originally have been up to between
3 and 4 m. high at the highest end. One exceptionally long exam-
ple on Martin Down, which is 150 m. long, may either be a bank
barrow or a barrow with an added earthen 'tail' (Barrett et al.
1991b: 51). Mound form may be parallel-sided, trapezoidal or
oval, but as a result of denudation is often impossible to assess
accurately without excavation. Most do appear to have originally
been trapezoidal in form, tapering in size from a higher and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   151
152                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape

Table 5.1. Morphological characteristics of the long barrows on Cranborne
Chase. Map Numbers refer to Fig. 5. 4. Orientation (largest and highest
end first), L = maximum recorded length; W = maximum width; D =
Ditch type: A, parallel with mound; B, semicircular enclosing one end of
                barrow; C, completely enclosing barrow.

Barrow Name                   Map         Ort.         L     W       D
Pimperne                        1    SSE-NNW          106    27      A
Gussage, Parsonage Hill         2    SSE-NNW           26    19      A
Thickthorn Down, North          3    SE-NW             47    20      B
Thickthorn Down, South          4    SE-NW             25    20      B
Thickthorn Farm                 5    SSE-NNW           30    18      A
Chettle House (Bar)             6    ENE-WSW           98    20      ?
Chettle Wood                    7    SE-NW             58    20      ?
Gussage South-East              8    ESE-WSW            ?     ?      ?
Gussage Cow Down, South         9    SE-NW             64    14      B
Gussage Cow Down, North        10    SE-NW             50    26      A
Donhead St Mary                11    ENE-WSW           40    18      ?
Drive Plantation               12    SE-NW             37    27      ?
Wor Barrow                     13    SE-NW             45    23      C
Salisbury Plantation           14    NE-SW             43    18      ?
Martin Down, South             15    SSE-NNW          102    18       7
Martin Down, Central           16/17 SE-NW            150    21       A
Martin Down, North             18    SE-NW             29    21       A
Martin, Long Barrow Lane       19    SE-NW             40     ?       ?
Duck's Nest                    20    SSE-NNW           44    30       A
Toyd Down, Knap Barrow         21    SE-NW             95    30       A
Toyd Down, Grans Barrow        22    SSE-NNW           58    18       A
Coombe Bissett                 23      E-W             51    17       A
Whitsbury Down                 24      SSE-NNW         30    19       B
Round Clump                    25      SE-NW           72    27       B
Rockbourne Down                26      SSE-NNW         60    27       A
Vernditch Chase, North         27      E-W             23    16       A
Vernditch Chase, South         28      SE-NW           36    24       A
Giant's Grave, Breamore        29      NE-SW           68    26       A
Giant's Grave, New
Court Down                     30      NNE-SSW         61     15      A
Sutton Down                    31      E-W?            23     18      A
Whitesheet Hill, Ansty         32      ENE-WSW         41     23      A
Hambledon Hill, North          33      SSE-NNW         69     15      A
Hambledon Hill, South          34      S-N             26     12      A
Telegraph Clump                35      E-W             96     24      A
Little Down                    36      SE-NW           38     24      A
Race Down                      37      SE-NW           35     15      ?
Tollard, Farnham               38      SE-NW           43     15      ?
Pistle Down                    39      SE-NW           20     17      ?
Furze Down                     40      ENE-WSW         56     24      ?
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland              153


broader to a lower and narrower end. The orientation of the bar-
rows tends to be repetitive and standardized. The majority
(66 per cent) are orientated either SE-NW or SSE-NNW with the
larger and higher end to the south but there are a number of
interesting exceptions (Table 5.1). Most originally had continuous
or interrupted quarry ditches running parallel to the axis of the
mound and flanking it, some with an intermediate berm between
the mound and the ditch (Fig. 5. 3).
   At least five barrows in the centre of the distribution, closely
associated with the Dorset Cursus, have an unusual ditch con-
struction, with the ditches carried around either one, or in the
case of one site, Wor Barrow, around both ends of the barrow
(Barrett et al. 1991b: 32). Two barrows to the east of the Cursus
also possess U-shaped ditches (RCHM 1979: xxi)




Figure 5.3. Selected groundplans of long barrows on Cranborne Chase.
Excavated: 1: Thickthorn Down; 2. Wor Barrow phases 1-2; 3 Wor
Barrow phase 3. Unexcavated: 4: Duck's Nest; 5: Grans Barrow, Toyd
Down; 6: Round Clump; 7 Furze Down. Not to scale. For orientation and
dimensions see Table 5.1. X = position of burials. Extent of mound
stippled. After Barrett et al. 1991b: Fig. 2.9 and RCHM 1979: Fig. 3.
154                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


   Of the three reliably excavated barrows on Cranborne Chase,
Wor Barrow (Pitt-Rivers 1898; discussion in Kinnes 1992: 22-3
and Barrett et al. 1991b: 48-33) is still the most illuminating, with
a complex structural sequence, beginning with a long mortuary
enclosure with a narrow entrance at the SE end flanked by a post
bedding trench, continuing with an embanked mortuary cham-
ber, and ending with an oval-shaped mound with encircling
ditches with causeways at the SE and NE ends. The mortuary
chamber contained three articulated and three disarticulated
(skull and longbone bundles) skeletons, all male. The only arte-
facts recovered were undecorated early Neolithic pottery and an
antler pick in the main barrow ditch. The southern barrow on
Thickthorn Down (Drew and Piggott 1936) may have been built
successively outwards in bayed sections from the SSE end,
defined by rows of hurdles, one running laterally down the
mound, the others at right-angles to it (Barrett et al. 1991b: 37;
Kinnes 1992: 22). It contained no burials, but may have covered a
turf 'mortuary structure'. The surrounding ditch is of U-shaped
plan, open to the higher SSE end, where a triangular post-hole
setting occurred. Early Neolithic bowl sherds were found
deposited in the primary silts of the NE ditch segment, and
domestic and wild animal bones, including domestic cattle, red
deer and wild ox, along virtually the entire length of the flanking
ditches, along with deposits of flint-knapping debris. Rescue
excavations at Hambledon Hill South recovered only the
displaced remains of one adult male inhumation. The ditch
segments contained early Neolithic undecorated bowl sherds, a
fragment of a stone axe and flintwork (Mercer 1980: 43).
   From the sheer size and scale of the barrows and the rather
limited numbers of human remains from many excavated exam-
ples, both from Cranborne Chase and elsewhere in southern
Britain, it is possible that burial of the dead may have been of sec-
ondary importance to the experiential impact that they must have
had as upstanding monuments on Neolithic populations moving
around in the landscape.
   The barrows can be broadly subdivided into three main
groups: (i) a series of 15 mounds closely associated with the
Dorset Cursus and all within 2 km. from it; (ii) a loose western
group of seven barrows; and (iii) an eastern group of nine monu-
ments. In addition to these there are eight more isolated barrows
on the fringes of Cranborne Chase (Fig. 5.4). The majority of the
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   155
156                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


barrows occur on their own, but distances to first nearest neigh-
bours are short (mean =1.5 km.). Three barrow pairs occur, and
one cluster of three monuments, all situated at distances of 300 m.
or less.


Patterns of Intervisibility

Patterns of intervisibility between the barrows on Cranborne
Chase are shown in Fig. 5. 5. These were assessed through multi-
ple visits to every barrow site in clear weather conditions over a
period of five weeks. In some cases localized obstructions such as
hedges, trees or buildings or later prehistoric earthworks in the
immediate vicinity of the barrows meant that these observations
had to be taken a short distance away from the barrow site; but
this should not unduly affect their reliability. For some sites in or
adjacent to dense woodland extrapolations were based on an
assessment of the contours of the intermediate terrain. It should
be remembered that these are the barrows that are intervisible




Figure 5.5. Intervisibility between the long barrows on Cranborne Chase.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             157


today in what is for the most part a relatively open and treeless
landscape. Judging the precise relationship between the contem-
porary pattern and the prehistoric situation is difficult, since this
crucially depends on the amount of woodland cover. A number
of factors indicate that the degree of visibility between barrows
during the Neolithic may have been similar or indeed higher
than today. It has been argued that the Neolithic environment on
the chalk downland of Wiltshire and Dorset was characterized in
the earlier Neolithic by woodland clearance and long periods of
grassland, possibly maintained by grazing (Evans and Jones
1979). Results of analyses of the molluscan data from three exca-
vations in the central area of Cranborne Chase give a more fine-
grained picture. Molluscs from the buried soil surface under the
Thickthorn Down South long barrow suggest an open landscape,
while those from two sections through the west ditch of the
Dorset Cursus 700 m. apart and about 4 km. to the east of the
Thickthorn barrow produced contrasting results, one pointing
towards an open landscape, the other a rather densely wooded
location which remained largely unaltered until the late Neolithic
(Entwistle and Bowden 1991). It is worth noting that the samples
from the Dorset Cursus ditch are both derived from a low-lying
stretch of the monument where it crosses a dry river valley, a
damp catchment area of the river Allen. The molluscan evidence
may be interpreted as providing a picture of a relatively open
upland landscape on the chalk ridges, on which the barrows were
constructed, and a highly variable degree of clearance and activi-
ty in more low-lying valley locations.
    It also needs to be remembered that the present-day intervisi-
bility of the barrows is actively depressed by virtue of thousands
of years of denudation and destruction, so that their profiles are
lower and more blurred. They are also covered with turf and veg-
etation, whereas when first constructed they would be gleaming
white chalk masses, and, even if sited in woodland, would be
likely to be surrounded by substantial clearings. Finally their
location on high points must surely indicate a desire that they
were meant to be seen from relatively long distances. In sum
 there is little evidence to suggest that barrows which are promi-
 nently sited and intervisible today might not also have been dur-
 ing the period of their initial construction and use.
    Intervisibility between the barrows is high in the centre of
 their distribution, with every barrow being intervisible with one
158                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


or more barrows in the western, eastern and Cursus groups. Such
is the degree of prominence of some barrows that others up to
eight or nine km. distant can be seen on the skyline (Fig. 5.5). By
contrast, only one of the outlying barrows (Fig. 5.5: No. 11) is
intervisible with the barrows in the centre of the overall distribu-
tion, and in no other case are the other seven outliers intervisible
either with each other or with those in the centre of Cranborne
Chase. A clear contrast exists, then, between barrows being inter-
visible in the centre and invisible on the periphery of their overall
distribution. Part of the process of siting barrows in the centre of
Cranborne Chase was their relationship to other barrows and the
Cursus while, on the periphery, a relationship to topographic
features of the landscape, rather than to other monuments,
appears to have been of paramount significance.
    The barrows may be ranked according to the dominance of
their visual field in relation to others. Being able to see other bar-
rows from each mound was clearly an important factor in the
location of many of them. In general, it is possible to distinguish
between (i) those monuments in which visibility was a primary
concern in their location, situated on local high points, false crests
and skylines and (ii) those in which visibility was not a dominant
concern, situated at lower points in the local terrain. This is a dis-
 tinction between a local field of monument visibility and a more
 generalized one. In general terms the closer the barrows are sited
 to the Cursus the higher their degree of intervisibility. Barrows in
 the western group are intervisible with between one and three
 other sites. For some in the Cursus group the numbers of barrows
 visible from any one site increases dramatically, up to eleven
 other sites. Those barrows with the highest level of intervisibility
 with others occur at the terminals of either end of the Cursus on
 Thickthorn Down (six other sites) and Martin Down, and include
 the northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down (seven other sites),
 itself enclosed by the Cursus. The barrow with the highest degree
 of intervisibility marks the beginning of the Cursus on Martin
 Down (11 other sites). Barrows in the eastern group have a uni-
 formly high degree of intervisibility, with between four and
 seven other barrows visible from any one site. The exception is
 the two long barrows on Toyd Down (Fig. 5.5: Nos. 21 and 22),
 one or both of which are visible from eleven other sites.
     It is of interest to note that those barrows with the highest
 degree of intervisibility with others form members of pairs of
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             159

larger barrow groups. In the eastern group the only pair of
barrows to occur are those mentioned above on Toyd Down. In
the Cursus group pairs or groups of barrows sharing the same
alignment are associated with the beginning, end and central
stretch of the monument, but only one of the barrows is highly
visible, the northernmost barrow on Thickthorn and Gussage
Cow Down and the southernmost one on Martin Down. In the
western group, where levels of barrow intervisibility are much
lower, pairs of barrows do not occur.
    One explanation for this pattern might be that sites that were
particularly important in the prehistoric landscape and highly
visible 'attracted' other barrows through time, and sites built
later elsewhere were deliberately sited so as to be intervisible
with one or more other barrows. In this manner the construction
of barrows on Cranborne Chase gradually created a series of
visual pathways and nodal points in the landscape. While some
or many barrows are visible from others in the centre of the dis-
tribution, comparatively few (30 per cent) are intervisible looking
directly down the long axes of the barrows across the landscape.
All these cases occur among the barrow pairs/groups associated
with the Cursus and the pair on Toyd Down in the eastern group.
In all, except the last case, the barrows share the same alignment.
Most barrows seem to have been located, therefore, to be seen
 from the side rather than along their long axes. Looking down the
 long axes of the barrows the Cursus is visible from 12 sites. Most
barrows in the Cursus group channel or 'direct' vision towards
 this monument, with only a few exceptions.
    Many barrows are today located on footpaths, and originally
 the majority of these mounds may have been located along track-
 ways or natural paths of movement through the landscape. The
 point at which tracks join may have been emphasized and
 marked out by a small cluster (2 or 3) of barrows.
    The orientation of the long axes of the barrows is closely relat-
 ed to that of the local topography, and in most cases they are
 aligned so as to run parallel to the contours along ridge axes (Fig.
 5.6). In other words, the form of the monument duplicates that of
 the surrounding landscape in its immediate vicinity. They are sit-
 uated on high points, with panoramic views in all or three out of
 four cardinal directions. However, fourteen sites (36 per cent) are
 situated immediately below rather than on the highest point in
 the local terrain that surrounds them, with the land rising up and
160   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               161


restricting visibility in one or more cardinal directions. Eight of
these cases occur in the Cursus group and the other five are
isolated barrows on the fringes of the overall distribution. The
higher and wider end of these barrows is situated up the slope in
these cases (Fig. 5.7). Such an arrangement suggests that the bar-
rows were meant to be seen and approached from a particular
direction along a particular path or route, and the siting of those
along the Cursus was intimately related to the position of this
monument in the landscape. By contrast to the chambered cairns
of the Black Mountains, the long axes of the barrows do not direct
attention to features of the topography beyond them; they rather
form part of that landscape itself. Local differences in the orienta-
tion of the barrow axes can generally be explained with reference
to the local topography.
    In the centre of the distribution in the Cursus group chalk
ridges cut up by valleys run NE-SW, an orientation duplicated
by many of the barrows. In the western group variations in bar-
row orientation are closely related to more localized differences
in the terrain. For example, the barrow at Chettle Bar is orientated
E-W and runs along the top of a small chalk spur that also has an
E-W axis. The Drive Plantation barrow (Fig. 5.8) and the
Salisbury Plantation barrow in the Cursus group, orientated
respectively SE-NW and NE-SW, are similarly aligned along
localized ridges. In this respect it is important to note that the bar-
rows fit into the immediate topography of their surroundings
rather than being related to a more generalized pattern of the
 landscape. The orientation of barrow axes was a localized deci-
 sion, and not governed by a more abstract set of rules stipulating
how they should be orientated. Those barrows on the margins of
 the overall distribution are intimately related to the escarpment
 edges of Cranborne Chase. To the west, those on Hambledon Hill
 are orientated N-S along the spine of this hill island (Fig. 5.9).
 Barrows on Sutton Down and Whitesheet Hill are orientated in
 relation to the escarpment edge. Standing on these barrows look-
 ing along their axes an observer's view is directed along the
 escarpment and towards spurs jutting out from it in a manner
 somewhat analogous to the situation encountered in the Black
 Mountains (Fig. 5.10). The same is true of the barrow at New
 Court Down, whose long axis runs parallel with the contours of
 the escarpment edge rather than is the case with barrows in the
 centre of the distribution in relation to a localized ridge. The
162   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   163
164   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   165
166                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


primary relationship of these barrows, on the margins of the dis-
tribution, is to the escarpment edge itself, the break between
highland and lowland. Intervisibility with other monuments is
not important. What these barrows appear to be doing is to mark
out the internal space of Cranborne Chase as significant and spe-
cial by ritualizing and emphasizing its margins. Moving beyond
them into the centre of the distribution the local topography of
ridge and valley becomes emphasized, with a visual relation
between barrows and the Cursus, discussed below.

Hambledon Hill
Two long barrows are associated with another monument com-
plex of different form on Hambledon Hill. Hambledon Hill is a
massive clover-leaf-shaped hill set apart from the steep western
escarpment edge of Cranborne Chase, with the river Stour flow-
ing close to its western flank and the river Iwerne cutting it off
from the chalk plateau to the east. In effect it is a very distinctive
'hill island', a dominant landmark which can be seen from a great
distance away to the north, south and west (Mercer 1988: 89). In
the liminal space of this island of a hill a massive series of enclo-
sures were constructed, along with the two long barrows, during
the earlier Neolithic (Figs. 5.11 and 5.12 ).
    The main enclosure, a rounded triangle in shape, was situated
on the crown of Hambledon Hill, consisting of an inner bank sur-
rounded by interrupted ditches. The enclosures on Hambledon
Hill bound off interior spaces that are already bounded by the
contours of the land. In this manner, cultural islands were created
in a topographic space that was already an island. It is likely that
this island quality of the place was already understood and
appreciated by the Mesolithic populations who visited it and
stayed there for longer or shorter periods before venturing up
and down the chalk escarpment to the east, demarcating the main
mass of Cranborne Chase. During the earlier Neolithic this locale
simply became ritualized in a visible form through the construc-
tion of the permeable membranes of the causewayed enclosures.
    Associated with the main enclosure are mutiple cross-dykes
cutting across the spurs of the hill to the west, south and east.
Both the cross-dykes and the banks and ditches of the main enclo-
 sure were constructed so as to run up to natural breaks of slope
on the hill. One barrow was incorporated within this construction,
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   167
168                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 5.12. Plan of the earlier Neolithic enclosures on Hambledon Hill.
                                               Source: Mercer 1980: Fig. 9.
                      By kind permission of Edinburgh University Press.
being situated in a not particularly prominent position on sloping
land between the southern cross dykes and the main enclosure
boundary. The other is set prominently, its long axis running
along the spine of the northern spur of Hambledon Hill about 400
m. outside the main enclosure. The main enclosure construction,
like the barrows, is clearly related to the contours of the land
encircling the domed summit of the hill, while the surrounding
cross-dykes cut across the land between precipitous breaks of
slope on either side. Although there exists a basic contrast
between the bounded circular form of the enclosure and the lin-
earity of the long barrow axis, the placement of the enclosure
repeats the close duplicative relationship to natural topography
of long barrow location on Cranborne Chase in general, while the
linear cross-dykes associated with it cut across the contours of the
land in a similar manner to the Dorset Cursus.
   Excavation of the interior of the main enclosure revealed the
basal segments of around 80 pits (top segments having been
destroyed by ploughing). These had been dug into the chalk and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland              169

partially allowed to silt up; and then a wide range of materials -
pottery, stone axes, granite rubbers and antler were deposited in
them. A considerable quantity of this material was derived from
distant sources - Devon and Cornwall. Some of the pits show
signs of recutting and more than one phase of deposition, and the
possible erection of posts to mark their positions. The ditch of the
main enclosure also revealed careful deposition of materials, but
of an altogether different character. In discrete segments of the
ditch human bone, animal bone - mainly cattle - pottery and axes
had been placed, probably in leather bags. Other deposits
consisted of carefully placed human skulls without lower
mandibles or associated vertebrae, indicating that they had been
placed in the ditch in skeletal condition. After this initial phase of
use the ditch silted up, and then was subject to recutting on a
number of occasions and further deposition of disarticulated
human skeletal material, skull fragments, pottery and flint arte-
facts. Mercer describes the main enclosure as ' a gigantic necrop-
olis constructed for the exposure of the cadaveric remains of a
large population' (Mercer 1980: 63). A minimum of 70 individuals
located in the 20 per cent of the main enclosure ditch that was
excavated indicates a possible minimum dead population for the
site of 350 individuals. The main enclosure was very possibly an
exposure area for corpses with associated ritual pit depositions,
with some material being taken away and left in the ditches.
Hambledon Hill was, in Mercer's words, 'a vast, reeking open
cemetery, its silence broken only by the din of crows and ravens'
(Mercer 1980: 63).
    Sixty per cent of the dead population at Hambledon Hill were
children, a proportion contrasting with the relatively few child
remains excavated from earthen long barrows in southern
England. Many authors have argued for a close association
between causewayed enclosures and long barrows in southern
England (e.g. Renfrew 1973a,b; Mercer 1980,1988; Thorpe 1984;
Thomas 1991; Edmonds 1993) and that, given the evidence for the
 disarticulation, differential selection and arrangement of human
 skeletal material at both the barrows and causewayed enclosures,
both played a role in a system involving not only the deposition
but also the circulation of ancestral bones. I shall suggest below
 that these practices may have been intimately related, in a com-
 plex ritual cycle, to the third class of monument found on
 Cranborne Chase, the Dorset Cursus.
170                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


The Dorset Cursus

At the time of its initial use the Dorset Cursus was one of the two
most spectacular monuments in Neolithic Britain, rivalled in size
and the sheer scale of its construction only by the earthworks on
Hambledon Hill just 12 km. to the west of its south-west terminal
end. The Cursus itself runs for almost 10 km. across the central
part of Cranborne Chase from Martin Down in the north-east to
Thickthorn Down in the south-west (Figs. 5.13 and 5.14). It con-
sists of two parallel banks with external ditches linked together at
the two terminal points with cross banks with external ditches. It
is now, for the most part, only visible in the form of soil and crop
marks, but sections of it are still well preserved in three places:
the south-west terminal in an unploughed field on Thickthorn
Down, a section of the south-east bank on Bottlebush Down and
traces of both banks in Salisbury Plantation. Aerial photographs




Figure 5.13. The Dorset Cursus and associated long barrows. For barrow
names see Table 5.1. MD: Martin Down; BB: Bottlebush Down; TD:
Thickthorn Down. A: Pentridge section of the Cursus; B: Gussage sec-
tion of the Cursus.
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                     171




Figure 5.14. Longitudinal profile and plan of the Dorset Cursus.
                                      Source: Barrett et al. 1991: Fig. 2.14.
                     By kind permission of Cambridge University Press
172                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


and probing (Atkinson 1955) have verified its course and shown
it to have been constructed in two stages, an earlier and longer
stretch, the Gussage Cursus, running for 5.6 km. from Bottlebush
Down westwards, and a later 4.3 km. stretch, the Pentridge
Cursus, continuing from the original north-east terminal
onwards to Martin Down. On the basis of probing and excavation
(Atkinson 1955; Barrett et al. 1991b) the banks appear to have
been unbroken by causeways except for gaps near to the Martin
Down end. Excavation has shown the ditch to have been steep-
sided and flat-bottomed, about 3 m. wide at the top, 2 m. wide at
the bottom and 1.2 m.-1.4 m. deep (Barrett et al. 1991b: 43). The
bank was probably revetted, being located about 1 m. inside the
ditch, and parts of the ditch have traces of recutting. Startin
(in Barrett et al. 1991b: 46) has estimated that the banks may orig-
inally have stood at least 1.7 m. high and that the labour invest-
ment required to dig the ditch and construct the bank would be
somewhere approaching half a million worker-hours. The results
of Atkinson's survey and excavations suggest that only one of the
ditches of the Cursus maintained a precise alignment, that on the
SE side, the NW side having been constructed by means of a
series of offsets taken from the SE side; but in sections of the
Allen valley at least the NW ditch may have been constructed
first (Atkinson 1955: 9; Barrett et al. 1991b: 47).
    The Cursus is directly associated with at least nine long bar-
rows (see Figs. 5.13 and 5.14). Two are incorporated within its
course and another seven are directly aligned in relation to its ter-
 minals or, as is the case on Gussage Cow Down, with a barrow
incorporated by it. Of the 39 long barrows which occur on
Cranborne Chase the course of the Cursus would have been visi-
ble from at least 14 (36 per cent). Penbury Knoll, below which the
 Cursus starts, is visible from all but eight of the barrows (80 per
 cent), and two particularly prominent barrows (Gussage Down
 North and Martin Down South) are intervisible with a large num-
ber of barrows from which the course of Cursus itself could not
 be seen (Fig. 5.5). No less than 22 barrows (57 per cent) are within
 5 km. of the Cursus, and only four are over 10 km. distant, on the
 far fringes of Cranborne Chase to the west, north and east. The
 course of the Cursus is unique in linking up pairs or groups of
 barrows situated no more than a few hundred metres apart on
 Martin Down, Gussage Cow Down and Thickthorn Down.
 Within the entire Cranborne Chase group of barrows there is
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               173


only one other site away from the Cursus, Toyd Down, where
two long barrows, Knap barrow and Grans barrow, occur very
close together at a distance of less than 200 m. Contrasting with
the groups of barrows directly associated with the Cursus the
long axes of Knap and Grans barrows are not orientated on the
same axis but in different directions. The Cursus must have been
deliberately constructed so as to link up not only the maximum
number of barrows possible but groups of barrows. If we attempt
to draw imaginary straight lines for an alternative Cursus else-
where in Cranborne Chase such a situation would not be possi-
ble. In no other location in the landscape could so many barrows
and barrow pairs be linked together (see Fig. 5.4).
   Radiocarbon dates from primary silts in the Cursus ditches
indicate that it was constructed around 2,600 BC. Dates from the
bottom and primary silts of the ditch of Wor Barrow, just to the
north of the Cursus, bracket a time-range of about 2800-2700 BC,
and those from other earthen long barrows in southern England
generally fall within the time span 2800-2500 BC (Barrett et al.
1991b: 51-3; Barrett and Bradley 1991: 9). An exceptionally early
date for the southern barrow on Thickthorn Down at the end of
the Cursus of 3210 BC may be contaminated and too early. The
available absolute dates point to the construction of long barrows
before, during and after the construction of the Cursus on
Cranborne Chase. The occurrence of precise alignments of long
barrows in relation to the Cursus banks at its terminals and the
incorporation of two barrows in the Cursus itself (see below)
point to a particularly close set of relations between the two classes
of monuments, and perhaps a similar ritual and funerary sym-
bolic significance. In the first instance the Cursus linked barrows
already in the landscape. Subsequently other barrows were
linked to it, an ongoing presenting of the past.


Walking the Cursus

The Pentridge section of the Cursus (Figs. 5.14 and 5.15) begins
in the north-east in a relatively flat area of Martin Down. The ter-
minal of the left bank is almost exactly 2 km. due north of the
highest point of Penbury Knoll. From the vantage point of
Penbury Knoll the entire stretch of the first section of the Cursus
is visible, including both the terminals on Martin Down and
174   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                175

Bottlebush Down. Parts of the second stretch of the Cursus lead-
ing up to the barrow on Gussage Cow Down and the south-west
terminal on Thickthorn Down are also visible from here, but not
intermediate sections of the second half, where the Cursus dips
down into the Gussage and Wyke valleys. From Penbury Knoll a
spur of high ground swings round to the north and dips down,
extending to about 400 m. south of the beginning of the Cursus.
The terminal end of this spur is marked and further emphasized
by a large barrow, today just over 100 m. in length, the second
largest in the entire Cranborne Chase barrow group, only exceed-
ed in length by a few metres by the Pimperne barrow in the
extreme west of the overall distribution. Unusually, this barrow,
rather than following the contours of the immediate topography,
cuts across them - i.e. the direction of the slope of the spur runs
parallel with the long axis of the barrow (Fig. 5.16). Its specific sit-
ing makes it highly visible both from the Cursus terminal and
from eight of a group of nine long barrows situated to the east of
the Cursus. Although the Cursus terminal would not be visible
from these barrows this barrow served as a marker for the point
at which it began. The inference that can be drawn from this is
that the group of barrows situated to the east of the Cursus may
be later in date than those associated with its NE terminal end.
    The prominent barrow on the arm of Penbury Knoll,
mentioned above, is orientated NNW-SSE, with its higher and
broader end up-slope at the SSE end. The NNW end is exactly
aligned on the NE end of the Cursus and clearly related to it.
About 250 m. due north another massive barrow is sited only
about 10 m. to the south-east of the Cursus end, and again exactly
aligned on its NE end. The mound, 150 m. in length, is by far the
largest in Cranborne Chase (Fig. 5.17). It has been variously inter-
preted as two conjoined long barrows with continuous side
 ditches set end to end (Crawford and Keiller 1928: 232; RCHM
 1975) or a bank barrow (Ashbee 1984: 15). Bradley has recently
reinterpreted it as a classic long barrow, its broader end to the
 east, with a 'tail' added to, but not continuous with, the eastern
 end at a later date, the Cursus blocking possibilities for further
 expansion to the north-eastern end, which might otherwise be
 expected (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51). About 250 m. to the
 north of the Cursus a smaller, now much ploughed-down,
 barrow occurs, aligned again on the north-east terminal, as does
 another small barrow in Vernditch wood, 2.4 km to the north.
176   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   177
178                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Penny and Wood (1973: 47) have remarked on the precise
geometrical relationship of these four barrows to the Martin
Down terminal, one which seems very unlikely to be purely of a
fortuitous nature - a point which Bradley has also forcefully
made (in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51) (see Fig. 5.15). All these barrows
and the Cursus terminal are, or may have been (one is now in a
plantation), intervisible, reinforcing their association.
   The symbolic importance of the Cursus terminal is thus
marked out in the landscape in a particularly effective manner
by: (i) a precise relationship with four barrows; (ii) terminating
by the largest long barrow on Cranborne Chase; (iii) being situat-
ed due north of another massive barrow, intervisible with an
exceptionally high number of other barrows to the east, sited on a
spur of Penbury Knoll, the highest point and most outstanding
natural landmark in the central portion of the Chase, visible from
all but a few peripheral barrows in their overall distribution.
From this starting-point the Cursus almost immediately begins to
dip down gently and swings away from the barrows to the south-
west, before following a much more regular course for the next
2.4 km. After less than a few hundred metres the northern termi-
nal would become obscured to an observer walking down the
Cursus and looking back to the starting-point. Following this
gentle slope the land then becomes undulating, slightly higher to
the north of the Cursus, dipping down at first and then rising up
steeply to a spur of Penbury Knoll to the south. The Cursus grad-
ually rises up a gentle slope crossing the modern approach road
to Pentridge village. A narrow causeway crossed the Cursus on
the initial part of this rise, 1 km. from the Martin Down terminus,
the only one documented for the entire length of the first stretch
of the Cursus (Atkinson 1955: 8), affording uninterrupted views
towards Penbury Knoll through the Cursus banks to the south
and across rolling downland to the north. This would probably
be the last point at which an individual, walking down inside the
possibly 1.7 m. high Cursus banks, would be able to have an
extensive view of the landscape beyond and outside it to the left
(south) or the right (north).
   The initial 3 km. stretch of the Cursus running towards
Bottlebush Down follows a course that runs parallel to an arm of
Penbury Knoll extending as far west and south as the upper
reaches of the Crane valley (Fig. 5.18). This provides the domi-
nant focal viewpoint to the south, and the ridge top would be
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   179
180                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


visible on the skyline beyond the left Cursus bank. To the north
the land is gentle and undulating, and nothing would be visible
beyond the right-hand bank of the Cursus to those moving along
within. Beyond the modern approach road to Pentridge the
Cursus crosses a 350 m. stretch of relatively flat land constituting
a localized high point, the land dipping away at first to the south,
and then rising up towards Penbury Knoll. It then gradually rises
up for another 750 m., crossing two shallow dips to another local-
ized high point, a flat ridge top, now covered by Salisbury plan-
tation, which extends for about 400 m. In the centre of this flat
area the first monument along the course of the Cursus, in the
right-hand or northern bank, is encountered. This is a long bar-
row, orientated NE-SW, of medium size, 43 m. long, 18 m. wide
and now 2.4 m. high at the NE end, tapering off to the south-west.
This barrow orientation is highly unusual for the Cranborne
Chase group of barrows taken as a whole, and is only shared by
one other barrow on the extreme periphery of the overall distrib-
ution to the east, the Giant's Grave, Breamore. The barrow is
clearly orientated to run parallel to the contours of the ridge top,
which is the case for many others in the Cranborne Chase group;
but its orientation is precisely the reverse of the norm, SE-NW,
with the broader and higher end to the SE. To any observer familiar
with the usual orientation of long barrows and the placement of
the higher forecourt end, this would constitute a striking surprise
and contrast. In comparative visual effect to the barrows at the
beginning of the Dorset Cursus, this is the world reversed.
Another point of significance is that the barrow is incorporated in
the right-hand or north-west bank of the Cursus, whereas all the
emphasis on alignments of the barrows at the Martin Down ter-
minal was on the left-hand or south-east terminal point, another
 contrast and reversal.
    Field survey (Atkinson 1955: 7; RCHM 1975) has shown that
 the north-west bank of the Cursus runs up to and is aligned on
 the barrow at both ends, but that the long axis of the barrow dif-
 fers from that of the Cursus banks by about 10 degrees.
 Atkinson's inference is that the Cursus was constructed so as to
 be aligned on a previously existing barrow. Bradley makes the
 suggestion that because the alignments are not precise this bar-
 row might have been built alongside an early (marking out?)
 phase of the construction of the Cursus, and only incorporated
 into the bank when the earthwork was enlarged (Bradley in
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland               181

Barrett et at. 1991b: 49). Whether this barrow predates, postdates
or is contemporary with the construction of the Cursus cannot be
established without excavation. Whatever the precise chronolog-
ical relationship, the lack of precise incorporation into the Cursus
bank is of considerable symbolic significance. This was intended
to be the case: the monument should be both incorporated into
the Cursus banks and maintain its identity and visual impact by
being differentiated from them. One means of differentiation was
the difference in height and width of the barrow from the Cursus
banks, particularly marked at the higher NW end, the other the
slight difference in orientation. Walking down the Cursus the
barrow would only be visible to an observer approaching it from
a short distance away - a matter of no more than 100 m.
Encountering it would constitute a surprise, and the greatest
visual impact on an observer would be for someone moving
south-west from the Martin Down terminal in the north-east.
    The barrow is situated approximately two-thirds the distance
(2.6 km.) along the first stretch of the Cursus, and from it neither
the terminus on Martin Down, with its associated barrows, nor
that on Bottlebush Down are visible. The only other barrow that
might have been visible, and this only if an observer stood on top
of the barrow looking out, would be Wor barrow, situated
 1.3 km. on the skyline to the north-west (the view is now blocked
by a plantation).
    A few hundred metres beyond the barrow the Cursus begins
to dip down, at first gently, and then very steeply into a dry val-
ley. Today the valley is cut along its bottom by a deep drainage
ditch, which is water-filled in winter. At the time of the construc-
tion and use of the Cursus the valley bottom would have been
boggy land, and water-filled for much of the year. This valley is,
without doubt, the most dramatic, steep-sided, change of relief
 along the entire length of both sections of the Cursus (Fig. 5.19). It
also marks the point at which the familiar landmark of the arm of
 Penbury Knoll to the south of the Cursus tapers away and disap-
 pears. Walking down into the boggy depths of this valley provides
 a sensation of the entire world being removed. Views along the
 valley itself would be blocked by the Cursus banks, that behind
 and in front by the steep slopes of the terrain. The top of Penbury
 Knoll itself becomes invisible for the first time, and with it, the
 familiarity and reassurance of a well-known landmark, steeped
 in ancestral associations going back to the Mesolithic, is lost.
182   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland             183

   Up to this point the first section of the Cursus traverses only
very gently undulating terrain, the differences in relief being
slight, and the Cursus axis itself parallels and follows the axis of
the high ground of Penbury Knoll, meeting its northern, and fol-
lowing its southern ridged spurs. The Cursus is keyed into and
follows the line of the high ground running to the south of its
south-western bank. The relationship of the axis of the cultural
monument to that established by the natural topography is one of
imitation or duplication. The Cursus is sited at a distance varying
between 200 and 500 m. from the point at which the much higher
ground of the upper parts of the ridges of Penbury Knoll rise up
on its southern side. It is thus situated at an appropriate distance
away to maximize the visual impact of the change of relief and
also to afford a comfortable angle of view over the top of the
Cursus banks (depending on their exact height), which are not
too close and not too far away. The Cursus itself is dovetailed into
the contours of the immediate landscape surrounding it to the
north and the south as if forming a natural and integral part of it.
Crossing this first very steep-sided valley that relationship now
dramatically changes to one of contrast or contradiction. Rather
than following and being situated below the orientational axes of
high points in the landscape the Cursus slashes and traverses its
way across them until its final termination point on Thickthorn
 Down. The long barrow in Salisbury Plantation is thus located
immediately before an important transition in the relationship of
the monument to the local topography. Another important
 change occurs from this point onwards: the course of the Cursus
becomes much less regular and more sinuous, with a number of
 important changes of direction. From a point roughly 200 m.
 south of the terminal on Martin Down until just beyond the
barrow and the edge of this steep valley the course of the Cursus
 has a very regular alignment.
    Emerging from the valley, the climb to the summit of
 Bottlebush Down, now traversed by the Cranborne to Sixpenny
 Handley road, is a steep one. From the summit of Bottlebush
 Down the impressive barrow traversing the Cursus at right
 angles, on Gussage Cow Down, becomes visible for the first time,
 just over 3 km. distant, looking down the Cursus, and the familiar
 landmark of Penbury Knoll is visible once more looking back-
 wards. The first section of the Cursus ends, as it began, undramati-
 cally, dipping away to the south-west down a gentle slope.
184                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


    Walking at a steady pace, and without stopping, it takes no
more than an hour to proceed along the first 4.3 km. stretch of the
Cursus. The terrain is gentle and easy until the steep valley just
before the end of the first stretch. The second, Gussage, section
(Figs. 5.14 and 5.20) is longer, about 5.6 km., and takes about one
hour and fifteen minutes to walk. To a much greater extent than
the first, it is characterized by long vistas along the Cursus axis as
it proceeds down and up two roughly parallel ridges, on both of
which long barrows are sited, completely dominating the view.
In the first section of the Cursus, after leaving the Martin Down
terminal, monuments were absent or hidden. In this second sec-
tion they were meant to stand out on Gussage Cow Down and
Thickthorn Down. Their presence, rather than to be hidden, and
to surprise, was to be constantly felt (Fig. 5.21).
    The second stretch of the Cursus begins on the midpoint of a
slope and runs down to cross the base of a wide and shallow dry
valley, the source area of the river Allen. At the point at which the
Cursus crosses the valley bottom, where the modern road runs to
Wimborne St Giles, the terrain would, in the Neolithic, have been
wet and marshy for much of the year. The course of the Cursus
crosses over and drops down an ancient Pleistocene river cliff just
before reaching the lowest point on the modern road (Fig. 5.22).
The banks and ditches of the Cursus were constructed on either
side of this topographic feature. One end of it adjoined the north-
ern bank, with the southern bank enclosing the other end with a
gap of around 30 m. The drop in relief to anyone walking along
the Cursus towards the south-west terminus is both sudden and
unexpected. The Cursus here, then, encloses another surprise -
this time not a hidden monument, but a hidden relict cliff down
which the unwary might easily tumble. Until this point the old
familiar landmark of Penbury Knoll is visible looking back.
Going down the cliff slope it disappears from sight once more at
the point at which marshy land is reached, a repetition of the sit-
uation encountered in the dry valley towards the end of the first
 (Pentridge) stretch of the Cursus. Ahead the prominent barrow
 on Gussage Cow Down dominates the view.
     Crossing the modern road the Cursus rises up to the barrow, at
 first gently and then more steeply. As it does so Penbury Knoll
 gradually becomes visible once more looking behind.
 Progressively moving up the slope to approach the long barrow
 on Gussage Cow Down the barrow outline becomes more and
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   185
186   A   Phenomenology   of   Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   187
188                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


more indistinct, fading away into the skyline. As it does, looking
behind, the outline of Penbury Knoll and its accompanying
ridges becomes clearer and clearer in the distance. That which is
near and in front successively fades away, that which is far away
becomes more distinct. The barrow is sited in such a manner that
it is completely obscured by the upward slope of the hill until the
crest of that hill is almost reached. Altogether it is out of sight for
about 550 m. of the course of the Cursus (five minutes' walking
time) up the steepest part of the slope. It only looms into sight
again at a distance of around 70 m. away.
    The ridge of Gussage Cow Down, on which the barrow stands,
marks the highest point over which the Cursus crosses from the
Bottlebush terminal. The barrow is situated approximately at the
midpoint of this second stretch of the monument, and from it the
Bottlebush Down terminal and the barrow marking the terminal
point on Thickthorn Down would also be visible (it is now con-
cealed by a thick hedge immediately in front of it). As the Cursus
climbs up to the Gussage Cow Down barrow it alters direction
twice within 230 m., creating what Bradley terms a 'dogleg' effect
(Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 47). Bradley suggests that this is
because the entire Cursus length from the Bottlebush Down
terminus was aligned on the Gussage barrow, but that it drifted
off course and had to be corrected in the lee of the hill where that
barrow could not be observed (ibid.). These changes in the course
of the Cursus going up the hill do not make much impression
from a map; but they would have had considerable visual impact
when viewed from the Bottlebush terminal and experienced by
those walking up the Cursus. Such a 'dogleg' effect does not
occur further on at the point at which the Cursus rises up to
adjoin another barrow on Thickthorn Down, where a similar
sighting 'problem' occurs, nor is there any evidence for sudden
changes in direction where the Cursus crosses the narrow and
steep dry valley before climbing up to Bottlebush Down towards
the end of the Pentridge section. The 'dogleg' effect may perhaps
be more satisfactorily understood by suggesting that it was an
intentional design feature put in place to emphasize further the
now hidden approach to a monument of central social and
symbolic significance.
    Gussage Cow Down is a ridge situated midway between the
Allen and Gussage valleys. The ridge top itself is orientated
NW-SE. The banks of the Cursus do not climb this ridge directly
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                189

from the bottom of the Allen valley, at right-angles to the direc-
tion of the slope, but obliquely, and are set in a roughly diagonal
fashion in relation to it. The Cursus thus not only cuts across the
natural axis of the landscape as defined by the ridge of Gussage
Cow Down with the valleys on either side of it, but it does so
obliquely, while also including the 'dogleg' change of direction.
Little more contrast with the overall topography, or shape of the
land, could be effected than the inclusion of all these three fea-
tures simultaneously.
   By contrast, the two long barrows situated on the ridge top of
Gussage Cow Down both duplicate the ridge axes, being orien-
tated SE-NW along their long axes, with their broadest and high-
est ends facing SE, the norm for Cranborne Chase. These barrows
are not sited on the highest point of the ridge top, but a little way
below it to the north, at a distance of 240 m. from each other. The
long axes of these two barrows are precisely aligned on each
other, and, as mentioned above, the northernmost barrow stands
in the centre of the Cursus and at right-angles to it. It is this north-
ern barrow that is sited so as to be particularly conspicuous
viewed side-on (Figs. 5.7; 5.21 and 5.22). It is intervisible with no
less than seven other barrows (see Fig. 5.6), contrasting with the
southern barrow, which is only visible from a short distance
away, sited as if it were only meant to be seen from the northern
barrow and the Cursus. The inference that might be drawn from
this is that the southern barrow was intimately related to the
northern one, and built with reference to it and its location in the
middle of the Cursus.
    Penny and Wood (1973: 58-9) and Bradley (in Barrett et al.
 1991b: 56) have noted and emphasized that the northern barrow
on Gussage Cow Down is aligned in such a manner that the mid-
winter sun can be observed setting behind the barrow on the sky-
line from the Bottlebush terminal. Dramatically, the rays of the
dying sun move from the SE to the NW end of the barrow, with
 the last flicker of light at the end of the barrow.
    Both barrows on Gussage Cow Down are of medium size
 (50-65 m. long), the southern barrow being a little longer than the
 northern one. The southern barrow is surrounded by a well-
 defined U-shaped ditch open towards the northern barrow and
 the Cursus. The ditches surrounding the northern barrow are
 now ploughed out, but from aerial photographs (Crawford and
 Keiller 1923: plate XVI) appear to run parallel to the mound long
190                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


axis without curving around either end. The barrow is sited off-
centre to the Cursus, being much nearer to the NW bank than
that to the SE. The reason for this would seem to be fairly obvious
- that anyone walking along the Cursus should pass by the side
of the barrow rather than walk over it, and do so at the broader
and higher SE end, where the mortuary chamber and forecourt
area for ritual activities would be sited.
    Approaching the northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down the
view farther west along the Cursus is completely blocked until
the barrow itself is passed (Fig. 5.23). The outline of the southern
barrow would be similarly concealed from view by the Cursus
banks until the point at which the northern barrow was reached.
The Cursus thus contains another surprise: the unexpected bar-
row to the south, hitherto concealed from view both by virtue of
its specific siting and by the Cursus banks. Passing around the
southern end of the northern barrow would thus have an added
significance, in that this would permit the southern barrow to be
seen (Fig. 5.24).
   , Immediately after passing round the northern barrow the final
stretch of the Cursus to Thickthorn Down becomes visible, with
the exception of a stretch which runs over the bottom of the
Gussage valley and its stream, a tributary of the river Allen (Fig.
5.25). Both the barrows on Thickthorn Down, one located just to
the south of the Cursus terminal, and the other aligned on it (see
below), would be visible from this point (as mentioned above,
they are now concealed by a thick hedge), but not the cross-banks
 of the Cursus terminal itself, which is located just below the sky-
 line. The impression given would be that the Cursus itself contin-
ued beyond this point. From the Bottlebush Down terminal the
 whole length of the Cursus up to the Gussage North long barrow
 incorporated within it had been visible. This contrasts interest-
 ingly with the situation encountered on reaching that barrow,
 where the view is visually truncated, concealing the next valley
 bottom beyond, with the Thickthorn North barrow being located
 outside the Cursus banks to the left, and the terminus invisible
 beyond the brow of the hill.
     Walking down the slope away from the barrow Penbury Knoll
 becomes invisible immediately, and the Gussage barrow itself
 after 300 m. The Cursus descends into a slight dip before rising
 up again after another 300 m., at which point the barrow behind
 becomes visible once more. The Cursus then runs over relatively
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   191
192   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   193
194                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


flat land for a further 600 m. before finally gently dipping down
into the Gussage valley and crossing a stream, which is today
water-filled except during dry spells in the summer.
   The Cursus then gradually rises up to Thickthorn Down,
crossing the slope in a diagonal fashion once more. Half-way up
this slope the northern Thickthorn barrow by the Cursus terminal
would become invisible on the skyline. The Cursus does not
deviate to include the barrow in its course, but runs up the hill
and ends just beyond the brow to the north-east of the barrow.
The two barrows on Thickthorn Down, in exactly the same man-
ner as the pair on Gussage Cow Down, duplicate the natural axis
of the ridge top. They are similarly sited to the north of the high-
est point of the ridge, and views to the south along the ridge top
from them are consequently limited. They are both aligned on the
south-east terminal point of the Cursus bank, duplicating the
situation encountered at the Martin Down terminal. Both the
Thickthorn barrows have U-shaped ditches surrounding the
mound, but unlike those at Gussage Cow Down South these
ditches are open at the SE rather than the NW end, i.e. away from
the Cursus. In other words the relationship of the ditches enclos-
ing the barrows to the south of the Cursus on Gussage Cow
Down and on Thickthorn Down is reversed.
    The Cursus terminal cross-bank and side-bank ends are excep-
tionally well preserved on Thickthorn Down, and particularly
massive (Fig. 5.26). There is no causeway known, so that anyone
leaving the Cursus would have to climb out of it over the terminal
bank. Bradley has remarked on the massive nature of the
Thickthorn terminal cross-bank, suggesting that the Cursus bank
here was both considerably higher and larger than those found
along the rest of its course and had been deliberately enlarged.
He makes the very interesting interpretation that the Cursus
cross-bank here had been constructed so as to resemble a massive
long barrow (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 51). Building on these
observations, it is pertinent to note that the Thickthorn terminal,
with its barrow-like cross-bank, is built on sloping ground, with
the higher end at the SE and the lower end facing NW, i.e. exact-
ly like the two barrows on Thickthorn Down, with their higher
ends at the SE associated with and aligned on it.
    What visual impact would this have had on someone
 approaching the terminal who had not experienced the visual
impact of the monument previously, but had progressed along
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland   195
196                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


the course o£the Cursus from the Martin Down terminus? Going
up the slope to Thickthorn Down the two long barrows would be
out of sight. Coming to the brow of the hill the Cursus banks
would effectively continue to block any view of the Thickthorn
barrows; but instead one's vision would be funnelled towards the
massively constructed terminal cross-bank blocking any view
across the landscape to the west - a feature entirely concealed
until this point. On the basis of previous experience of the barrow
hidden in the right Cursus bank on the ridge covered by
Salisbury Plantation and the barrow placed at right-angles to the
Cursus on Gussage Cow Down, together with the orientation and
shape of the cross-bank, the obvious (but incorrect) conclusion
would be that this was another barrow, but far more massive
than anything previously encountered from the Martin Down
terminus onwards. The Cursus cross-bank on Thickthorn Down
is just over 100 m. long. Emerging from the Cursus, the real long
barrows on Thickthorn Down would be visible to the south, and
a number of other barrows scattered over the landscape in the
distance to the north and west; looking behind to the east, the
northern barrow on Gussage Cow Down, and Penbury Knoll,
marking the start of the Cursus on Martin Down.



The Empty Place - A Ritual Passage

The precise purpose of the Cursus has remained somewhat
enigmatic. Penny and Wood (1973) attempt to explain it as a
gigantic astronomical observatory; but most of the solar and
lunar alignments they discuss in relation to other long barrows
and round barrows in the vicinity seem unconvincing apart from
the most basic one, mentioned above - the midwinter sunset
behind the Gussage North barrow. Another suggestion common-
ly put forward is that the Cursus must be some kind of ceremoni-
al or processional way concerned with a cult of the dead
(Atkinson 1955: 9). Bradley rightly stresses the manner in which
the Cursus links together a series of long barrows, and suggests
that there may have been an important distinction between the
barrows, possibly related to the rising moon, and the Cursus,
with its solar alignment. He argues that:
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland                    197

  the entire layout of the Cursus seems to be intended to exclude out-
  siders: only for those inside the great enclosure was the design of the
  monument apparent. It may be that the building of the Cursus was
  the ultimate expression of ... changes in attitudes to the dead. It inte-
  grated the separate long barrows scattered along the upper limits of
  the settlement pattern, and at the same time, bound them together in
  a complex design which could only be appreciated by those who had
  access to certain specific points inside the monument. By incorporating
  into its structure an important astronomical alignment, those who
  built it made those developments appear to be part of the functioning
  of nature (Bradley in Barrett et al. 1991b: 58).

Bradley stresses a number of important points in this passage -
the ritual function of the Cursus, the fact that it could only be
understood from the inside, and an ideological role in naturaliz-
ing a set of cultural practices and relating them to the passage of
time and the seasons. Rather surprisingly, he also suggests that
the Cursus would be unsuitable for processions, as it crosses
rivers (ibid.: 47). In the account of walking the Cursus I have
repeatedly emphasized the manner in which the spatial structure
of the monument and its relationship with topographic features
of the landscape and associated barrows constantly surprises
someone moving along it for the first time. I want to argue that
the experience of walking along it was an essential ingredient in
its meaning, and that this movement took place, as described
above, from the NE to the SW.
   The point about the direction of movement is fairly easily
established - the Cursus simply does not make sense when mov-
ing down it from the SW end. First, the important solar alignment
is not visible from the SW. Second, it might be expected that the
monument should end at a dramatic position in the landscape,
and the Martin Down terminal, at the top of a gentle slope, does
not meet this expectation. Indeed, its location in the landscape
more or less repeats that of the earlier Bottlebush terminal, with a
long down-slope view. Third, features such as the partially hid-
den barrow in the bank of the Pentridge section of the Cursus, the
hidden Pleistocene river cliff, and the massively enlarged Cursus
terminal cross-bank on Thickthorn Down in the Gussage section
would have little or no visual or somatic impact when
approached from the NW, and would not surprise.
    The Cursus is a massive linear space bounded by banks with
external ditches curving round at its ends, with the highest and
198                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


most massive terminal cross-banks in the SW. In its linearity,
external ditches and emphasized terminal point it resembles a
massive unfilled long barrow. It differs from most barrows in its
overall orientation and relationship with the landscape, crossing
rather than following its contours, for much of its length. The
Cursus was deliberately designed so as to include two previously
constructed barrows within it, and the orientations of others at
both terminals are clearly related to it. In this sense it presenced
the past in the present, and part of its meaning was constituted by
its relationship to the barrows and the specific manner in which it
connected them together.
    The Gussage Cursus has a clear symmetry in its arrangement.
It runs down a slope, over an ancient river cliff, crosses water,
moves up a slope to the ridge top where the Gussage Cow Down
barrow is located, moves down another slope, crosses water and
runs up to its terminus on Thickthorn Down. It is not hard to
imagine how such a monument worked in terms of initiation
ceremonies involving liminal states and rituals of reversal.
Novices are taken out of the mundane everyday world and into
the enclosed and bounded space of the Cursus. They move along,
going down-slope, shut out from the world in the direction of the
dying sun, stumble down the concealed ancient river cliff, and
then cross wet land to reach the Gussage barrow in the centre of
the Cursus. They experience it moving out of sight and changes
in the Cursus direction. When they eventually approach the bar-
row they move round its higher SE end with great ceremonial,
and see for the first time the barrow outside the Cursus to the
south, with its open unenclosed lower end facing them, and are
instructed with tales of the ancestors and supernatural beings.
Ahead on Thickthorn Down two other barrows are visible, but
outside the Cursus. They move down the slope, cross water and
continue up-slope to Thickthorn Down, where the barrows are
concealed and the massive barrow-like terminus blocks the view.
Climbing out of the Cursus they return to the everyday world
 with the ditches around the Thickthorn barrows in the 'right'
 place at the lower end.
    There are an obvious set of structural contrasts here: between
 high and low, down-slope and up-slope, wet and dry, barrows
 with ditches open at the NW and then the SE ends, barrows within
 the monument and barrows outside it, and plays on the visibility
 and invisibility of barrows in relation to movement, creating a
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland            199

series of contrasts and surprises. Within the enclosed world of the
Cursus the Gussage Cow Down barrow is itself placed at a high,
dry point within liminal space, and water must be crossed to
reach and to leave it.
    The Pentridge extension to the Cursus modifies the simpler
pattern of the initial Gussage Cursus to introduce more contrasts
and surprises. The extended Cursus from Martin Down to
Thickthorn Down begins, like the Gussage Cursus, down-slope;
it ends up-slope. It begins just to the north of the most dominant
and familiar landmark in the area, Penbury Knoll, visible from
virtually all the long barrows in the Cranborne Chase group. It
now both begins and ends with barrows located outside the
Cursus, aligned on the SE terminal point. In approximately the
mid-point of each stretch barrows are included within the monu-
ment at high points; but their relationship to the Cursus itself is
reversed, at first respecting and then cross-cutting its axis. The
first barrow inside the Cursus is hidden, the second highly visi-
ble. The first barrow stands on its own, the second is associated
with a barrow outside the Cursus. Both barrows on Thickthorn
Down are outside the Cursus. So in relationship to the long bar-
rows with which it is associated the extended Cursus from its
starting-point has varying degrees of incorporation - total in the
Pentridge section (the barrow forms part of the Cursus banks),
partial on Gussage Cow Down (one barrow is outside the Cursus).
The Pentridge section of Cursus at first parallels high ground to
its left; and then, once the first barrow is reached, this relation-
ship is reversed, and it crosses rather than follows valleys. The
pattern is one of symmetries and differences, repetitions and
reversals, requiring, as Bradley rightly stresses, an insider's
knowledge and detailed ritual instruction to understand them
and their significance. The Cursus, through its form and the con-
nections it creates with other monuments, establishes through
formalized successional movement along it, a spatial story.
    The Cursus represents a formalized structuring of the experi-
ence of landscape by those entering and using it. It acted not only
as a conduit of movement, but as a barrier blocking a less struc-
tured encounter with the barrows on Cranborne Chase. As
 Barrett (1994) has recently argued with reference to the some-
 what later ceremonial monuments of Durrington Walls, Avebury
 and Stonehenge, it is highly unlikely that it was formally planned
 and conceived. It represents rather a series of construction
200                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


projects that were modified and whose meaning and significance
became altered though time, thus transforming the biographies,
myths and encounters of people with the landscape. The very act
of people coming together to construct the monument, camping
nearby for several weeks or months, to re-establish, augment and
develop it, was important in itself and not simply a matter of the
creation of a container for various forms of subsequent activity.
    It is not unlikely that, on Cranborne Chase, part of the narra-
tive meanings of the Dorset Cursus were linked not only to initi-
ation rites, but also to the themes of death and the regeneration of
life. It may have operated as a linear conduit through which both
bodies and bones were being moved between the barrows in the
central part of the Chase and Hambledon Hill. Bodies were per-
haps being taken out of Cranborne Chase to a death island of the
setting sun immediately beyond its margins to the west, and
being allowed to decompose, with selected bones being returned
to the barrows in the central ritual arena of the Chase itself. The
pollution of death was thus being removed and dry, clean and
ritually pure bones returned. Given the massive effort required to
construct the Cursus, the barrows themselves, and the enclosures
on Hambledon Hill, and the long-distance movement of pottery,
axes and other materials during the Neolithic, such a system of
corpse movement does not appear inherently unlikely. On
Hambledon Hill artefacts were carefully offered and deposited in
the pits inside the enclosure and in the ditches as if they were
bones. In turn the bones of the skeleton became treated as arte-
facts, being deposited in the barrows and circulating among the
living.


Conclusion

The slight early Neolithic 'settlement' evidence, contemporary
with the construction of the barrows, the Cursus and Hambledon
Hill, suggests that Cranborne Chase may have been an area that
was not permanently settled, but periodically visited by a num-
ber of surrounding social groups, to perform rituals, bury the
dead and manipulate ancestral bones. The escarpment periph-
eries were marked out by barrows aligned along its axes, empha-
sizing transition up to an important sacred space. The barrows
situated in the centre of the Chase were situated so as to duplicate
Ridges, Valleys and Monuments on the Chalk Downland           201

the contours of the land, while the Cursus dramatically cuts
across them, linking the monuments together. Hambledon Hill
was a heavily ritualized death island to the west, to which bodies
were taken in processions and from which ancestral bones were
circulated back to the barrows on the Chase. In this area the
visual relationship between monuments and their sequential
ordering along the formalized path of movement marked out by
the Cursus was as essential a part of their meaning as the ritual
topography itself that these monuments helped to create and
sustain.
Chapter 6
Conclusion: Ideology and Place:
Restructuring the Connections

'The flow of movement is a flow of the mind.' I have argued that
during the Mesolithic, in all three study areas, ancestral connec-
tions between living populations and the past were embodied in
the Being of the landscape and an emotional attachment to place
that had a generalized power and significance in relation to
human activity as a series of known, named and significant
places linked by paths of movement to which populations repeat-
edly returned during their seasonal activity rounds. These
Mesolithic populations made relatively little impact on the land
apart from establishing clearings around their camp-sites and
burning off areas of woodland to stimulate browse.
    In the earlier Neolithic the relationship between populations
and the landscape became restructured and took on a different
form. The ancestral powers and meanings in the landscape now
became actively appropriated by individuals and groups through
the construction and use of chambered tombs, long cairns and
long barrows, and on Cranborne Chase by the Cursus and the
enclosures on Hambledon Hill. These monuments served to
make permanent, anchor, fix and visually draw out for percep-
tion the connections between people and the land for the first
time. Ancestral powers now became double. The tombs pres-
enced and marked out the bones of the ancestral dead in the land-
scape. In so doing they visibly brought the presence of the
ancestral past to consciousness. Their specific morphological
characteristics and their landscape settings also served to relate
the bones of previous generations to a more generalized ancestral
 power embodied in the topography and symbolic geography of
 place and paths of movement which had already been constituted
 in the Mesolithic. The location of important points in the external
 world became captured in the orientation of morphological

202
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections          203

features of the monuments and their placement in the landscape.
Their settings were deliberately chosen to fix a certain vantage
point in relation to perception of the world beyond. During the
Mesolithic the significance of place was understood in terms of its
setting in the landscape. In the Neolithic this was reversed - the
landscape was now understood in terms of its relationship to the
setting of the monuments.
   In other words, the setting of place became much more
anchored. Megalith building and long barrow construction
implies a need to represent in a physical form and capture per-
manently ancestral connections with the landscape. In south-
west Wales this was effected by constructing monuments near to
important topographical markers in the land such as rock out-
crops. In the Black Mountains the long axis of the chambered
cairn was of paramount significance. It imposed a form, a direc-
tional line across the topography, producing an axis directing
vision in a prescribed direction outward from the monument
itself and pointing towards escarpment spurs or along prescribed
routes of movements along the Usk and Wye valleys. On
Cranborne Chase, the long barrows, rather than directing vision
beyond themselves, outward towards topographic features, are
sedimented into the lie of the land itself, following its contours.
    Discussing the three different landscapes, and moving from
west to east across Wales and southern England, I have attempted
to take the reader on a textual journey involving a number of basic
transformations. First we move from a case of a lack of monu-
ment visibility to intervisibility. Second, there is an increasing
emphasis on movement; and third, there is a greater emphasis on
the elimination of difference in monument form from case 1 to
case 3. Finally there is also a basic contrast between Cranborne
Chase and the situation in south-west Wales and the Black
Mountains. The relationship between monuments of fundamen-
tally different forms and uses (the barrows, the Cursus and the
causewayed enclosure on Hambledon Hill) was as important
here as was the relationship to the topography. Siting a barrow
on Cranborne Chase was much more intimately linked to the
position of other previously constructed barrows than it appears
to have been in Wales. Increasingly, through the construction of
the Cursus, formalizing one path of movement between the bar-
rows, and, no doubt, blocking others, one type of monument
could only be 'read' and understood here in relation to the others.
204                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


    The building of the monuments prevented the ritual and
mythological significance of particular places being lost and
forgotten. They stabilized both cultural memory of place and
connections between places. The cultural appropriation in the
Neolithic of already established ancestral powers in the land-
scape through monument building served to increase its symbolic
potency and power. Through the mediation of the tomb time
became frozen, with the drawing of the past into the present. The
tomb objectified ancestral powers in the landscape. In this way
these powers became not just subjects of knowledge but objects
of knowledge too, resources to be worked upon and manipulated
for the sectional social interests of individuals or particular social
groups.
    The architectural forms of cairn and barrow, Cursus and
causewayed enclosure, in their different ways, signify a will to
make ancestral powers in the land visible, to be seen and remem-
bered, but always from a particular perspective provided by the
vantage points of the monuments. As we move around in space
our perspective of the landscape alters. What the monuments
did, in their different ways, was to freeze perspective through the
architectural lens of the monuments themselves - their orienta-
tions, entrances and exits, façades, forecourts and passage-ways.
They are then about establishing control over topographic per-
spective and the individual's possibilities for interpreting the
world. Experience of the landscape in the Neolithic became medi-
ated and channelled through fixed and permanent architectural
form. Landscape perception, now being structured through
monuments and relationships between them, became far more
 'focused'. Experience of the ancestral past now came into being
 within the specific setting of monuments and their relationships
 to the outside world. This, in turn, is linked with control of
knowledges of the ancestral past which are mediated through the
 cultural form of the monument and the character of the deposits
 left in and around it. Ancestral powers in the landscape could
 now only be deciphered from experiencing them at the site of the
 tomb or by passing down the Cursus or entering a causewayed
 enclosure. This in effect represents a closing down and restriction
 of a variety of 'points of view' - both literal and metaphorical.
 The monuments both deployed and captured an ancestral history.
 Acting as mnemonic markers they coded historicity and sacred
 power in particular places, creating a hierarchy of valued points
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections              205

in the landscape on pathways channelling movement through it
and sustaining knowledge of it. This logic, involving a re-order-
ing of the visible, constituted a vital component of power rela-
tions during the Neolithic, serving to differentiate between those
who were included in the knowledges required to decipher the
landscape and those who were excluded.
    In this respect it seems pertinent to note that, considering the
overall distribution of megalithic monuments in Wales and
southern England, where we find chambered tombs or long bar-
rows we also usually have evidence of a substantial amount of
Mesolithic activity. In areas where there are no monuments there
is little or no Mesolithic evidence either. Such a generalization
could also be extended to other areas of Europe, such as Brittany,
the Netherlands and much of southern Scandinavia.
    'Our body, to the extent that it moves itself about, that is, to the
extent that it is inseparable from a view of the world and is that
view itself brought into existence, is the condition of possibility ...
of all expressive operations and all acquired views which consti-
tute the cultural world' (Merleau-Ponty 1962: 388). At one level
monument construction solved the existential problem of how to
experience the natural world and the powers embedded in it
when none of the perspective views of it as the human body
moves through space can exhaust it. Horizons for experience are
always open and changing. Through the culturally embedded
horizon of the tomb and its setting the landscape became visibly
encultured. In turn, the relation of the tomb to the landscape
served to naturalize the ancestral powers embodied in the cultur-
al form of the monument and its bone and artefact deposits. They
are being represented as part of an immutable natural order of
things. The natural world as mediated through the tomb becomes
the horizon of all horizons, the style of all possible styles, guaran-
teeing for experience a given rather than a willed unity as a frame-
work for knowledge of the social and its connection with the past.
The monument draws together and serves to coalesce the natural
and the cultural as a framework for experiencing and under-
 standing the world. What appears - the monument - 'hides'
contexts in which it does not appear. It captures and draws atten-
 tion, domesticating the view of the landscape. The monuments,
 then, are to do with the formation and stabilization of attitudes
 toward the world. They acted as signifiers of part of a structure of
 knowledge, an iconography of human intentions, a resource for
206                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


power and social control. With the advent of monument
construction the landscape increasingly starts to become not just
a subject of human symbolic labour but an object of that labour
too.
    In the above paragraph I wrote of the view of the landscape in
the Neolithic's, becoming 'domesticated', and I now want briefly
to explore how this might relate to subsistence practices. It
appears that, in the areas I have considered, cultivation was
probably not important; but the herding of domesticates, particu-
larly cattle, began to assume an increasing significance during the
Neolithic. The herding and tending of animals formed part and
parcel of the new 'order of thought', manifested so dramatically
through monument construction and use. Domestic animals
during the Neolithic had a much greater symbolic exchange-
value than their utilitarian use-value as food on the hoof. Part of
the process of thinking about the landscape in a fresh way now
involved thinking it through animals. There are two main aspects to
this. First, as I have argued at length elsewhere (Tilley in press),
the symbolic potential and evaluation of food derived from
domesticates, as opposed to that acquired through foraging, con-
stituted a major preoccupation in exchange, feasting and ritual. It
is not surprising, then, that the vast bulk of domestic animal
bones known from the British Neolithic occur on ceremonial
rather than domestic sites, and that many of these deposits are
highly structured, i.e. come from specific parts of the animal,
such as the preponderance of skulls and mandibles found in the
Cursus ditches, discussed above. Meat from domestic animals
was exotic and highly prestigious, and became a requirement for
ritual practice - quite literally food for thought. Although still
probably contributing the bulk of the subsistence base, food
acquired from foraging gradually became down-graded in status
during the course of the Neolithic, and producing food for ritual
events provided a major stimulant for an increasing emphasis on
domesticates.
    Second, in general terms, it might be expected that there
would be more ideological continuity in terms of the importance
 attached to paths, as opposed to boundaries, between hunter-
 gatherer-fishers and populations which had incorporated a
 pastoral component, than between hunters and settled agricul-
 tural societies. Herding meant changing attitudes to grazing
 land, to property and inheritance, to over-wintering stock, food,
Conclusion: Ideology and Place: Retracing Connections         207

ritual and ceremonial. Herding involved seasonal movements
along pathways through the landscape, as in the Mesolithic, but
with altogether different connotations. It obviously required a
great deal more social commitment and ideological investment in
the process of this movement, which would, as did the monu-
ments, increasingly serve to inscribe and 'fix' the landscape.
Moving animals along paths already in use from the Mesolithic
objectified them in just the same way as I have argued that monu-
ments 'captured' the ancestral connotations of topographic fea-
tures of the landscape. The movements of animals would
physically inscribe these paths across the landscape much more
prominently than the feet of hunter-gatherers following the
movements of game, and it would become increasingly difficult
(both in practical and symbolic terms) to take different ways. The
monuments, then, sedimented the symbolic potency of locales in
the landscape, domestic animals the paths of movement between
them and the ceremonies conducted in and around them. This is
not to impy any economic determinancy. It is rather a matter of a
social, political and ideological transformation that had profound
consequences for an entire Neolithic way of life, involving both
continuity and change from the Mesolithic.
   I have suggested that, as cultural markers, one of the purposes
of the megaliths in the Black Mountains and south-west Wales
and the long barrows on Cranborne Chase would seem to have
been to draw attention to the symbolic and social significance of
the natural topography and markers within it, such as the coast,
rivers, rock outcrops, spurs, escarpments and ridges. Such mark-
ers and places were almost certainly in use during the Mesolithic
preceding the construction of these Neolithic monuments. The
Mesolithic hunter-gatherers would have used them, as they can
be used today, as reference points and orientational foci. These
were obvious locations for stopping, resting, telling stories,
 observing game movements. As such they would be named and
be invested with narratives and mythologies. In a sense the rock
 outcrops, cliffs and escarpment edges of South-West Wales and
 the Black Mountains are natural untamed non-domesticated
 'megaliths' or stone groups.
    The occurence of flint scatters at these locales would have had
 considerable significance during the Mesolithic and early
 Neolithic for a recognition, reading and understanding of place.
 Like the difference between primary forest and regenerating
208                                                               References


areas, differences in the composition of these scatters- waste,
flakes, cores, microlith forms and discarded tools would act so as
to recall memories of previous visits, activities, events and sea-
sons. Reading these signs from places visited by previous genera-
tions Mesolithic archaeologists would also be able to infer, like
the contemporary archaeologist, the types of activities that had
taken place.
   What happens in the Neolithic is the constitution of a different
sense of time, place and social identity, through monument
building, and also by means of the herding of domesticates on
pathways across the land. Cultural markers are being used to cre-
ate a new sense of place, harnessed to legitimize patterns of social
control relating to restricting access to knowledges deemed
essential to group reproduction, while continuing to make refer-
ence or lay claim to already established ancestral connections
with, and pathways through, the landscape. An already encul-
tured landscape becomes refashioned, its meanings now con-
trolled by the imposition of the cultural form of the constructed
monument.


