Chapter 2
The Social Construction of Landscape
in Small-Scale Societies: Structures of
Meaning, Structures of Power

Introduction

In this chapter I want to discuss relationships established
between people and the landscape in small-scale 'traditional'
societies, reviewing some of the discussions in the ethnographic
literature relating to hunter-fisher-gatherers and subsistence cul-
tivators. The aim is to underline the affective, emotional and sym-
bolic significance of the landscape and highlight some of the
similarities and differences in the relationship between people
and the land, and the manner in which it is culturally construct-
ed, invested with powers and significances, and appropriated in
widely varying 'natural' environments and social settings.
    A caveat is in order: in general terms the anthropological liter-
ature, in contrast with that of human geography, is not exactly
replete with discussions of the significance of landscape. It is rare
to even find an entry in an index referring to 'landscape', or use
of the term in a book, article or chapter title. Landscape has
remained a neglected area of study, and detailed accounts are
few and far between. Two books, currently in press as I write, are
exceptions which prove the rule (Bender 1993; Hirsch and
O'Hanlon, in press). One, I think erroneous, conclusion that
might be drawn from this is that the landscape simply does not
matter, or the category is irrelevant to understanding the manner
in which populations in small-scale societies interact with, under-
stand and relate to their physical surroundings.
    However, a great number of texts do make mention of the" sig-
nificance of the land. For example, Barth in his introduction to a
monograph on the Baktaman of Papua New Guinea notes that
'Baktaman are highly oriented towards space in ordering their

                                                                  35
36                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


experience. The vocabulary and grammar of their language impel
a speaker constantly to specify relative location (distance, direc-
tion, and above/below on a slope) of observer and actor in
describing events; and they have a variety of means to describe
landscape features and shapes. There is also a wealth of place
names of differing order by which to designate area and specific
location. Places also serve to recall events in the past - stories and
anecdotes that I was unable to elicit in conversation in the men's
house would suddenly surface in the forest with the opening 'this
is the spot where ...' (Barth 1975: 18). Yet despite the evident sig-
nificance of the land for the Baktaman this remains unelaborated
in Barth's otherwise excellent account. Similarly, although Hugh-
Jones (1979) devotes a great deal of attention to discussing the
paramount symbolic, cosmological and social significance of the
river for the Pira-parana of North-west Amazonia, it remains
uncontextualized in terms of a wider concept of the landscape, its
topographic and physiographic features, cultural and symbolic
significances through and by means of which these peoples live
out their lives.
    Turnbull (1961, 1965, 1983), discussing the Mbuti hunter-
fisher-gatherers of the Ituri rain forest, Zaire, emphasizes the
generalized significance of the forest as provider, spiritual entity
and mystical force. He contrasts the Mbuti attitude to the forest
with that of the Bantu farmers, who fear and loathe it, people it
with evil forces and constantly struggle to maintain their hard-
won clearings against its encroachment. To the Mbuti the forest is
a vital life-engendering and empowering force, to the Bantu a
symbol of everything they are struggling against. For the Mbuti
the land is a subject of labour, for the Bantu an object of labour.
The Mbuti are constantly moving about and changing their
encampments within the space of the forest. They view their
world from the perspective of following and creating tracks and
paths through the forest. The Bantu, on the other hand, have a
 fixed relationship to their environment, viewed from the vantage
 point of the village clearing. The ordered life of the village is sur-
 rounded by the chaotic, malevolent and unseen world of the for-
 est into which they are loath to venture. Yet this is about as far as
 Turnbull's fascinating account goes on the subject of the land-
 scape, and it would be unwise to generalize from it, viz: all
 hunter-gatherers tend to view the land from a decentred
 perspective in which many places within it are of equal rele-
 vance, while farmers have a more centred or concentric frame of
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         37

reference, focused on the village looking out. These are more
likely to represent two extremes along a continuum of variation
of cultural responses.
    While the significance of the landscape, glossed by the use of
terms such as 'space' or 'environment' in the anthropological lit-
erature, receives widespread acknowledgement as constituting a
fundamental part of existential existence among both hunters
and farmers, it is rarely foregrounded in any discussion (with
some exceptions, see below). Why this apparent lacuna? As indi-
cated in Chapter 1, the answer would seem to be that 'landscape'
is an unstable category, sitting uneasily between opposed ecolog-
ical or 'naturalistic' and ideological or 'culturological' approaches
to human society in the literature. In my view this is precisely the
contemporary interest and power of employing such a category
today. It may provocatively be used to draw together approaches
that tend to be held apart in the literature or are conceptualized
as occupying radically different domains of human action and
experience which are only tangentially related. Rather than
attempting any extensive discussion of the literature as a whole
in so far as it explicitly or otherwise addresses the issue of land-
scape, its physical forms, perception and meanings, an enormous
and possibly not very illuminating task, I have decided to con-
centrate in this chapter on a number of specific examples drawn
from widely separated geographical locations.
    It would be difficult to find two more contrasting areas in
terms of topography, climate and resource availability than
Australia and Alaska and subarctic North America; but despite
these differences the existential relationship between the
Koyukon, the Mistassini Cree and the Aborigines and the land-
 scape is remarkably similar in some respects, a point whose sig-
nificance I attempt to emphasize in the discussion below of the
 relationship between hunter-fisher-gatherer communities and
 the land. In discussing subsistence cultivators my examples are
 drawn from the Tewa of New Mexico and a number of
 Melanesian societies.


Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers and Landscape

Landscapes of the Dreamtime
It is impossible to consider the Australian Aborigines adequately
without considering landscape, so strong is their relationship
38                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


with it. As Morphy points out (1993: 206) this appears to be one of
those cases in which indigenous perceptions, as opposed to theo-
retical preoccupations, have actively and consistently determined
rather than constrained the nature of anthropological representa-
tions of society. The Aboriginal landscape is one replete with a
highly elaborate totemic geography linking together place and
people. Formed in the Dreamtime, the landscape provides an
ancestral map for human activity. It is sedimented in history and
sentiment. The landscape is not something 'natural' and opposed
to people, but totally socialized. It is a symbolic form, a series of
signs relating to the ancestral past on which people draw in day-
to-day experience and through which they live. According to
Stanner (1965: 215), the grounding basis of Aboriginal mythology
and enduring proof of its correctness was the evidence of design
in the world in the sense of pattern, shape, form and structure,
which was itself proof of intent. This design was manifest in the
landscape itself, its topographic features and physiographic pat-
terns, flora and fauna, constituting a vast sign system whose sig-
nificance was to be read and interpreted. In the process
populations emotionally bound themselves to the land and the
design inherent in its ordering.
    Each group of Aborigines originally moved around a particu-
lar area of territory in a traditional pattern, exploiting the fauna
and flora of their environments. A striking feature of Aboriginal
life that cannot be over-emphasized is the intense personal bond
between groups and their home territories. Attachment to and
knowledge of a particular stretch of land was a fundamental part
of existence. The desert, described by Strehlow (1965), Berndt
 (1972) and others, is by no means uniformly arid, and includes
low undulating ridges, sand-dunes covered by grass and scrub,
claypans and shallow creek beds, stretches of dry sand-hills,
 expanses of pebbles and rocky outcrops. During wet seasons the
whole area abounds in edible plants, roots and game. In protract-
 ed dry seasons populations are forced to aggregate close to per-
 manent water sources. A great deal of traditional Aboriginal life
 was focused on the theme of water. Berndt notes that the Balgo
 population of the southern Kimberleys of Western Australia dis-
 tinguish eight physiographic features which are water-produc-
 ing, including soaks, temporary and virtually permanent creeks,
 swamps and rockholes (Berndt 1972: 179). People identify specif-
 ic tracts of land as their 'country' not just in terms of an area with
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          39

demarcated boundaries, but much more intimately in terms of
specific locales, such as waterholes, sand ridges, claypans and
camping grounds. Specific sites are claimed to belong to individ-
ual social units, and the total of these constitutes the territory of a
group. Territories are made up of significant sites, rather than
being conceived in a more abstract spatialized manner as rela-
tively well-defined areas of land with boundaries containing sites.
As Ingold puts it: 'land does not contain sites; rather the sites con-
tain the land' (Ingold 1986:150). People do not, therefore, restrict
themselves to delimited territorial areas, but may wander over
areas claimed in the same way by other groups. Most usually
groups do not range beyond 300 km. from their traditional terri-
torial area.
   According to Dixon (1976) tribal boundaries in Australia are of
two basic kinds. Over large tracts of Australia they are centred on
waterlines, separated by tracts of drier relatively infertile country
along which imprecisely defined boundaries occur. In less arid
country they may more typically lie along river courses them-
selves. In a discussion of Yolngu social boundaries Williams
(1982) comments that they are always marked by natural fea-
tures, many of which may be far from obvious to an outsider. The
more obvious boundaries are related to prominent land forms
such as hills, mountains, cliffs, streams, rivers and watersheds.
Other boundaries may be marked by changes in gradient on a
slope or changes in vegetation or soil or rock types (Williams
1982:141-3). Combinations embracing different types of physical
characteristics may be employed. A boundary may be located, for
example, just below the crest of a hill, where a slight change in
gradient occurs in association with a change in soil type or vege-
tation. In general terms a bounded area of land bears the name of
a dominant and striking physiographic feature which is the pri-
mary referent point, and may be the most important site, such as
a large pool of water in a billabong (intermittent stream).
Boundaries of coastal land defined by physical features such as
clusters of rocks jutting out into the sea or even changes in the
colours of offshore waters are used to extend land boundaries
outward across the sea to the horizon (ibid.: 144-5).
   Boundaries, as with virtually everything else in the Aboriginal
system of knowledge, are related to mythologies. Strehlow (1965)
shows how the boundaries of each njinana (local section group) of
the Aranda in the Western desert were demarcated by episodes
40                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


in myths which relate the points at which ancestors travelling
across the landscape reached boundary points. Boundary points
were known as 'barriers', and beyond them myths could not be
told, songs sung nor a series of ceremonies be performed by
members of a section area who shared these traditions with
neighbours (Strehlow 1965:138).
    The whole landscape is criss-crossed by a multitude of tracks
following the main watercourses and extending in a variety of
directions from one site to the next, incorporating all topographi-
cal features that are symbolically and economically significant.
Mythical beings created these tracks, and present-day popula-
tions move along them while hunting and gathering. Topographic
features of the landscape act not only as boundary-marking
devices of varying types and orientation points on tracks, but
play a central role as a sign system and are crucial in the forma-
tion of Aboriginal concepts of creation, spiritual power and
world order (Berndt 1972,1974,1976; Morphy 1991, Morphy n.d.;
Munn 1970,1986; Stanner 1966). The landscape both constitutes a
referent for much of the symbolism and acts as a sign system for
mythological events. It simultaneously passes on and encodes
information about the ancestral past and is integral to the mes-
sage. The landscape is the fundamental reference system in
which individual consciousness of the world and social identities
are anchored. Emotional ties with the land are obviously related
to economic dependencies, the exigencies of gathering and hunt-
ing; but just as significantly to mythic beings, who create and sus-
tain the fertility of the land and stimulate the natural increase of
species. For the Aborigines the earth came into being as a result of
the actions of the ancestors. These ancestors continue to exist in
spirit form, and in the era of creation they travelled the earth, and
in their doings created the topographical features. The move-
ments of the ancestral snake created the meanderings of the
watercourses, the blood of the ancestors formed red ochre and so
on. Objects used by the ancestors, such as baskets or digging
sticks, may be left behind when they went into the earth.
Ancestors may therefore leave behind a wide variety of indica-
tions of their presence, and are not uniquely related to any one
type of transformation or metamorphosis. The landscape was one
in which the ancestors hunted and gathered, and so every aspect
of it has generalized ancestral connotations. It contains the bodies
 of the ancestors inside it and is also the metamorphosed forms of
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          41

the ancestors, the tracks they made and the imprint of their bod-
ies. For example, where an ancestor sat down a waterhole may be
created. The ancestors both created the world and interacted with
it. They gave birth to human beings and their correct form of
social organization and religious practices. Ancestors may be
wholly human or part human and part non-human, male or
female. Their number is indefinite. The initial naming of ancestral
sites is attributed to the ancestors, like their physical creation, and
the names of the sites may be thought of as ancestors' proper
names. 'Ancestral naming and transformation create a determi-
nate fixed phenomenal reality grounded in the specificity of form
and verbal sign (proper names)' (Mum 1970: 143).
    The tracks of the ancestors cross the territories where the
Aborigines live, and each patrilodge controls a number of tracks
and the ancestors associated with them. Clans can be distin-
guished on the basis of the particular nexus of dreaming tracks
they control. Munn notes that 'narratives bind events to an objec-
tive geographical space through the listing of named places. This
spatial localization yields the basic symbolism of transgenera-
tional continuity, since the sense of continuity over the genera-
tions is "carried" in the experience of the country as a network of
objectively identifiable places, the prime "givens" of the external
environment' (Munn 1986: 214-15). The landscape is thus filled
with meaning and memories, redolent with the actions of the
past. The ancestral beings fixed in the land itself, in the trees,
hills, lakes, sand-dunes and watercourses, become timeless refer-
ent points for the living, according to Morphy (n.d.), outside the
politics of daily life. Through day-to-day life activities individu-
als learn of this ordered world of ancestral activity, which
becomes part and parcel of their experience of place.
    Berndt has described in detail the complexity of the dreaming
tracks or 'water-lines' and their relationship to the topography.
Three major tracks in a small slice of Balgo territory in the
Western desert contained no less than 73 different named loca-
 tions (Fig. 2.1). These locales are 'big names', each of which may
be associated with a number of 'smaller names' that are no less
 significant (Fig. 2.2). At any place part of the essence of the
 mythic being referred to is materially manifested in one way or
 another. On Elcho island in north-eastern Arnhem land Berndt
 records 164 named places with ancestral associations, noting that
 this is only a partial list. Here, where the main economic resource
42                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 2.1. Dreamtime tracks, Balgo territory, Western Australia. Three
major tracks are shown. Numbered topographic locales are all 'big
name' places with a variety of mythological and ancestral associations,
e.g. 6: Gilanggilang lake where the great Rainbow serpent emerged; 21:
Dedi rockhole associated with Wilbin, wild cat.
                                           Source: Berndt 1972, Fig. 5.2.
                      By kind permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston.




Figure 2.2. 'Small names' within the big name locality Luwana Spring or
Lake Lucas (Fig. 2.1 No. 54). Each of these 12 names relates to a specific
topographic feature, e.g. site 1 is a soak and rockhole associated with
Wadi Bududjuru, a small kangaroo rat who sits within a hole at this
place and is represented by a stone into which he turned.
                                            Source: Berndt 1972: Fig. 5.3.
                      By kind permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         43

was fish, the concentration of named locales is coastal, with rela-
tively few inland sites (Berndt 1976:147-55). Local people belong
to a territory and to sites within it by means of patrilineal descent,
and use the word djaga in relation to it, meaning 'looking after' or
'cherishing', the same word used by parents in relation to their
children (Berndt 1976: 156). Thus all persons are linked in an
enduring way with a series of locales, and can never of their own
accord sever this association. Temporarily unoccupied tracts of
territory will always have someone 'looking after' the named sites
(Berndt 1972: 193; 1976: 160). This is not a matter of ownership,
but rather that living populations act as custodians. The sites are
visible and tangible expressions of segments of myth told in sto-
ries and in song. These myths not only concern the activities of
the ancestors, but also encode information about locales vital to
group survival locating in space sources of water and other char-
acteristics of the environment relevant to its economic exploita-
tion. Myths 'represent in toto the experience and heritage of the
people concerned, a basis for social as well as economic living'
(Berndt 1972:188).
    Perhaps the most striking example of topography embodying
living mythology is Ayers Rock in the middle of Australia, an
enormous dome-shaped rock monolith with a flattened top rising
almost vertically from an extensive desert plain (Fig. 2.3). Ten dif-
ferent totemic mythical beings created the topography of the
rock. Most of the southern face was created by a battle between
liru (poisonous snakes) and kunia (carpet snakes). Minor portions
were also created by linga (sand lizards) and metalungana (sleepy-
lizards). The activities of the mala (hare-wallabies) created most
of the northern face, with other ancestors creating highly specific
parts of the topography. Other ancestors created the western face,
 such as the marsupial mole, who was responsible for creating pot
 holes and caves (Mountford 1965) (Fig. 2.4 ). The mythic associa-
 tions of the rock are of two basic types. The first relate to ances-
 tors who rested and performed activities there and then passed
 on for hundreds of kilometres along their dreaming tracks. The
 second refer to ancestors who originated at the rock and stayed
 there. There is virtually no place on the surface of the rock,
 whether it be a striated surface, boulder, declivity, rockhole or
 cave that is not a named ancestral locality (Fig. 2.5). Ayers rock
 was not only a total mythological fact for the surrounding popu-
 lations, a perceptual field encoding knowledge of the world, but
44   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies   45
46   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         47

a focus for linking present populations to the past ancestral
forces, involving rock engraving, painting and initiation rites.
Both the external surfaces of the rock were decorated at specific
points with ancestral associations, and twelve caves on the north-
ern and southern sides contain paintings depicting dreamtime
events (Mountford 1965:157 ff.).
   Morphy (1991, n.d.) describes the Yolngu of North-east
Arnhem Land as having a particularly rich vocabulary for topo-
graphic and environmental description which serves to segregate
environmental zones which are linked both to seasonal resource
exploitation and the mythological system. There is a close corre-
spondence between topographical zone and ancestral track, and
the distribution of ancestral beings is related to that of natural
species. Major ritual sites correspond closely to paths of move-
ment. The dreamtime tracks, as elsewhere, tend to follow the
watercourses, and the greatest density of mythological activities
is generally associated with major camp sites. The landscape is
thus represented in myth and represents the myth. It is a
mnemonic for past generations and a means of establishing conti-
nuity with the past. Time becomes collapsed into space, in that
the time it took ancestral beings to take their journeys is never a
part of the myth. Time becomes a sequence of named places with-
out the 'befores' and 'afters'. Disrepectful behaviour towards the
land and its species can cause illness or death.
   Layton (n.d.) discusses the intense personal and biographical
relationship between people, the land and ancestral beings in
central Australia. While places are intimately related to ancestral
activity, so are the living. All individuals are first identified with
one of the Tjukurpa beings at birth according to where the puli
(stub of their umbilical cord) fell off, and their personalities are
expected to follow those of the ancestors of which they are an
embodied part. In this manner people are identified with places,
a connection which cannot be severed. Persons 'hold' land by
means of this intimate personal association and by continuing to
live in and care for it. Proof of this 'holding of the land' is bound
up with detailed knowledge of and interpretation of physio-
graphic features linked to ancestral activities. Failure to protect
 songs, ceremonies and sacred objects is equivalent to giving the
land away. In other words the ancestral past has to be continual-
ly brought into and related to activity in the present. Anyone who
regularly forages in a region needs to be intimately acquainted
48                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


with ancestral lore, ceremony, song and sacred objects, which
become the grounding basis for all life movements. People can-
not 'hold' a country as children, but only when they have become
'big'. Those who own an estate have pre-eminent rights to it by
(i) controlling access to it through controlling knowledge of
ancestral lore associated with the terrain; (ii) demanding some-
thing from people from another country who temporarily come to
hunt there; (iii) punishing trespassers on sacred sites (Layton
n.d.). At death the living must relinquish their claims to a country,
and their descendants must take care of it, perform the correct
ceremonies and guard the ancestral relics. Alienation of any part
of the country from its rightful owners and their heirs is a viola-
tion of the entire moral order, a desecration (Munn 1970:150).
    Physiographic features of the landscape play a crucial role in
ritual practices. Within any clan territory localized sacred sites
occur to which unauthorized access is forbidden. Only those who
know the land can call and prepare ceremonies. Sacred sites
always occur near to water, and while access to the water itself is
not physically defended the sites are. Senior men only may visit
these sites, take care of them, and perform rituals. Rock art locales
form one such category of sites. Layton (n.d.) notes that depic-
tions of the landscape in Australian Aboriginal art are notable for
the bird's-eye view they adopt, a decentred perspective in which
numerous points have equal value. Sacred sites and ancestral
tracks linking them become laid out as on a map, but these 'maps'
have much more in common with the sensuous places of
medieval 'cartography' than they do with a Euclidean geometric
space of modern cartographic representation.
    Painting rocks was an important part of a process by which
populations could tap into ancestral powers at specific topo-
graphical locations. Sites of particular importance in representa-
tions of landscape frequently refer to the places where the
ancestors came out of and (having grown tired) went back into
the land, between these two events creating their dreaming tracks
and localized features of the topography. Munn (1973, 1986)
regards the processes of 'coming out' and 'going into' the land
 (an inside/outside distinction) as a fundamental principle of
Walbiri cosmology that is used to explain and structure the spa-
 tiotemporal ordering of human existence. Each of the Aranda sec-
 tion areas contained at least one important ceremonial centre at
 which ancestors are believed to have emerged from the ground to
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies           49


populate the surrounding countryside. All the main mythologi-
cal characters associated with emergence from these sacred sites
were revealed through dramatic performances re-enacting ances-
tral doings, and each site had its own ceremonial cycle involving
the revelation of sacred objects, songs, rites, poetry, dance and
drama (Strehlow 1965: 140). The ancestral beings had the power
of bringing into existence the plants and animals of their totem
when induced to 'emerge' by the rites. Having created the land
their continuous presence ensured its regeneration.
   In the art of the Walbiri the circle is the locus out of which the
Dreaming emerges and finally returns. The circle and the line
provide a kind of spatial and conceptual model linking the
dreamtime with the present. The circle (with female sexual con-
notations) is the present-day country, with the dreamtime ances-
tors at the centre and hidden inside it. The line conjoined to it
(with male sexual connotations) is the path or track moving
beyond the boundaries of place into the landscape beyond, repre-
senting a constant association between past and present (Fig. 2.6).
In more general terms an inside/outside distinction is crucial in
understanding Walbiri concepts of and relationships to land. The




Figure 2.6. Walbiri circle-line design as cosmic model.
Source: Munn 1973: Fig. 8. By kind permission of Oxford University Press
50                                            A Phenomenology of Landscape




South




North




Feature Block
     A    Beach, Female, Nyapililngu, Sandhills, Burrkun.
     B    Lake, Marrawili.
     C    Bush, Male, Guwak, Sandbank, Burrkun.

Meanings Associated with Loci in the Manggalili Template.
     1. North end of lake, gullies in the sandhills, burrkun.
     2. Nyapililngu, burrkun complex.
     3. Nyapililngu, burrkun complex.
     4. Marrawili tree, cloud,guwak.
     5. Wild plum tree grove, burrkun complex.
     6. Cashew tree grove, ngaarra ceremony ground,
        burrkun.
     7. Lake, emu, spears, menstrual blood.
     8. Dry lake bed, emus and spears.
Figure 2.7. Landscape and meanings in Yolngu art. Nyapililngu on the
sand dunes. Artist: Bokarra. Clan: Manggalili.
                                        Source: Morphy 1991: Fig. 10.9.
      By kind permission of the author and University of Chicago Press.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies        51




       Figure 2.7, cont.

dreamtime ancestors still exist inside the earth or under the
ground, they are 'covered over' and lie beneath the visible physi-
cal surfaces of the land. Art applied to the body or to the surfaces
of rocks may, in the context of ceremonies, act so as to 'pull out'
ancestral forces (Munn 1973: 198). In increase rites ancestral
forces have generative powers which serve to replenish the land.
For these rites to be fully effective they had to take place at the
original geographical sites (Strehlow 1970:132).
   This inside/outside distinction is a prominent theme in some
Aboriginal body art and in barkcloth paintings. Yolngu paintings
refer simultaneously to mythological events and topographic fea-
tures. They both record in visual form a narrative of dreamtime
events and present a 'map' of a particular area of land. The land-
scape created by ancestral actions provides the primary medium
for encoding mythological events by ordering them in space, and
52                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


boundaries and design elements in the paintings refer to this
landscape (Fig. 2.7); but, as Morphy points out, the ordering of
landscape representations in art and in mental representations
and understandings of it is a product of continual interpretations
and reinterpretations of place. The positions of places 'corre-
spond to the relative positions of places in the landscape ... but
the topographical plotting of positions would produce a very dif-
ferent shape' (Morphy 1991: 237). Landscape and art are both
models of and models for reality, i.e. they are both ordered by
something beyond themselves (the landscape as it actually exists)
and serve to order that external reality and make sense of it.
   One particular type of art, X-ray paintings, depict the internal
body organs and bones of ancestral beings at an 'outside' denota-
tive level of meaning. At another 'inside' level of meaning they
refer to spatial relationships between important topographic fea-
tures of clan lands. As Taylor puts it 'the metaphors of these
paintings express the way Kunwinjku (Aborigines of western
Arnhem Land) conceive of the spatial organization of sites in
their lands in terms of an abstract model of the divided yet organ-
ically related body parts of the ancestral being that created those
lands' (Taylor 1989: 381). There is an intimate connection
between body parts of the ancestral being in these paintings and
locales of significance in the landscape. This mode of experienc-
ing the world may even extend to the human body itself, through
painting designs on it and even in relation to features such as
birthmarks' being seen as equivalent to sacred sites within clan
lands. The body becomes a metaphor for the topographic organi-
zation of clan lands. The significance of landscape is thus
inscribed not only in day-to-day encounters with its topographic
and physiographic features but in portable and non-portable art
and in relation to the scars, marks, painting and surfaces of indi-
vidual human bodies. It would indeed be hard to find a more
encompassing sensibility of the relationship between biography,
identity and place than this. Since every person carries within
him- or herself a life force ultimately derived from ancestral
powers, living populations and ancestral forces are inseparably
 connected. People do not, for example, actively create designs in
artworks; but these designs are passed to them through dreams
and are derived from the ancestors. Among the Walbiri, women
 who sleep together may share the same yawalyu designs (Munn
 1986).
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          53

    Taçon (1991) has discussed the manner in which the land and
its ancestral significances may be actively appropriated through
technologies such as systems of stone-tool production and use.
The most significant tools, such as stone axes and spear points,
controlled and used by men, embodied ancestral powers. A large
number of these ancestors turned into stone at their final resting
point. The Rainbow Serpent, one of the most potent of the ances-
tors in western Arnhem Land, swallowed other ancestors and
then was forced to vomit their bones, forming rocky sandstone
and quartzite escarpments. Quarrying stone for axes is, therefore,
quarrying the bones of the ancestors. The axes are themselves
formed from ancestral bones - hence their potency. Quartz tools
are particularly potent, as brightness and iridescence are highly
valued. Objects and substances that shimmer and 'emit' light,
such as quartz, white pigment, fat and blood, are spiritually
charged with power (Morphy 1989; Taçon 1991). It is not surpris-
ing that quarries were dangerous places, and access to them and
their products was tightly controlled in many cases. The killing
power of a stone tool is significantly linked to its ancestral source,
and it is the power within it that saps the life out of the victim,
causing a searing, burning pain (Jones 1990: 27, cited in Taçon
 1991:203-4). Stone is considered to be a male substance, while the
earth and its products, such as pigments used for painting, are
gendered as female. Ceremonial objects could be empowered by
painting, which created a symbolic linkage between male and
female essences. By contrast, tools used for killing would be
dulled through decoration. It was 'necessary that their "male"
 qualities not be covered over so that they remain potent to pene-
 trate flesh and, in the process, to be "painted" with blood' (Taçon
 1991: 205). Stone and bone were both symbols of persistence, and
 hence it is not surprising that clefts and holes in rock escarpments
were frequently used for secondary burial, a placing of the bones
 of the dead back inside the bones of the ancestors.
    The landscape constitutes for the Aborigines a fundamental
 form of mediation, in which the experience of self is rooted in the
 objectified forms of ancestral transformations. Human subjectivi-
 ty is constituted in relation to the land. There is a constant linkage
 effected between subject and object, object and subject, which
 provides a sense of an enduring moral and social order. The land
 is both separated from the self and incorporated. The land is a
 collective resource constantly being drawn on in daily life experi-
54                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape


ences, a collective representation stabilizing the world through
the authority of precedence and other selves embodied within it.
The identities of individuals are constructed in and through the
material remains of ancestral transformations linking them to
previous generations and their contemporaries, a world in which
every prominent feature is associated with a mythological event.
Life-spans are locked into the experience of an ancestral past that
binds the universe in a limited topographical space. The narrative
of myth is a model of and for social action.

Forests of Eyes, Rivers of Identities
Tanner (1979), in a discussion of religious ideology in relation to
hunting practices among the Mistassini Cree Indians of Quebec
province, Canada, notes at the beginning of his account that
Mistassini is the name of a village and of a band of Indians. The
village is situated by a large lake, Lake Mistassini, meaning 'big
rock' and referring to a large rock along the western shore of the
lake, a name traditionally also used to refer to the Indians inhab-
iting the region (Tanner 1979: 6). They are thus immediately 'situ-
ated' in the landscape and with reference to the details of its
topography. Tanner notes that boundaries (notional rather than
fixed or absolute) between hunting territories are generally locat-
ed along high ground or large rivers, and their overall pattern is
influenced by travel routes, themselves strongly related to inter-
connected lake and river systems. Mistassini also refer to their
hunting grounds by saying 'my path' or 'my road' or 'my river'
(Speck 1932: 460), indicating the temporary social appropriation
of terrain within a path of movement which may vary from one
year to the next. Territory is intimately bound up with life-paths
and movements.
    Within any particular hunting territory a patchwork of differ-
ent habitat types exists, each of which favours a particular mix of
animal populations. The Cree make great use of their intimate
knowledge of the vegetation in planning hunting and trapping. A
complex system of classification exists for water bodies according
to the type of lake or river bottom, the nature of the banks and
shores, the form of the currents and types of vegetation (Tanner
1979: 45). Hunting and trapping require frequent residential
change in terms both of types of dwellings and of locales; yet in
Cree ideology the illusion is fostered that the place of residence is
always the same, and this is effected by a standardized internal
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          55

arrangement of domestic space. Whatever the type of dwelling -
log cabin, large dome tent or wooden-framed canvas-covered
tent - it is arranged internally in terms of a rigid division of space
related to gender, age and authority, and family units, so as to
appear to occupy the same space. Whatever the actual camp-site
the Cree, then, are always staying in the same place. Coupled
with this idea of stability despite movement there is a general
reluctance to use old camp-sites in the forest when the group is
hunting. A camp-site should be placed on ground that is clean
and unpolluted by previous occupation, a place that will not be
offensive to the spirits of game animals and other magical entities
that aid hunting. Abandoned camps should be cleaned of refuse,
and they become sacred places. A short time after the camp-site is
left the 'spirit' of the hunting group flies over the place, and if all
is as it should be future hunting success will follow. The door-
way, symbolically crucial transition point between the inside and
outside of the winter dwelling, should face both the rising sun
and a body of water. Consequently camps are almost always on
the western shores of lakes. The rising sun is positively valued,
and it is auspicious for the hunter to go out of the doorway facing
the rising sun.
    In many rites and myths the dominant conception of space is
framed in terms of a concentric model, with camp space at the
centre surrounded by topographical or physiographical space,
 the forests and lakes inhabited by animals, at the farthest reaches
of which and above and below are located spiritual entities
associated with natural forces. A distinction is thus drawn
between inside and outside, and the hunting journey, conceived
 as a process of going out, moving in a circle and returning, medi-
 ates between the two domains.
    Everything in the Mistassini world has a spirit - people,
 animals, rocks, clothes, moccasins, tents, doorways of tents and
 thus becomes throughly humanized. Spirits reside in anything
 that can be named, and in a manner akin to that among the
 Aborigines the landscape by this means becomes socialized and
 populated with spiritual entities and powers, frequently by
 associating or linking different ones together. For example,
 weather control is an important part of Cree ritual. Winds are
 conceived to blow from four different cardinal directions, and
 weather is primarily attributed to the actions of the winds and
 their spirits. There is also a strong set of beliefs about mountains,
56                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


considered to be the dwelling-places of spirits and places where
shamans go to practise magic (Tanner 1979: 98). One rite involves
a summer-born or winter-born person pointing at a particular
mountain in order to bring either warm weather or a snowstorm,
respectively.
   The Koyukon landscape of north-west interior Alaska, like
that of the Cree, is one filled with networks of paths, names and
associations. People know every feature of the landscape in
minute detail. The lakes, river bends, hills and creeks are named
and imbued with personal and cultural meaning. Nelson (1983)
points out that the intimacy of the relationship between people
and the land is such that it is difficult for a Westerner to either
believe or understand. People move in a world that constantly
watches - a forest of eyes: 'A person moving through nature -
however wild, remote, even desolate the place may be - is never
truly alone. The surroundings are aware, sensate, personified.
They feel. They can be offended' (Nelson 1983:14). The natural
and the supernatural or the mythological are inseparable, so that
perception of the natural environment extends from the empiri-
cal into the spiritual. Ideology forms a fundamental aspect of
day-to-day subsistence activities, and cannot be separated from
'economic' concerns. As with the Cree, all animals, some plants
and some inanimate objects such as rocks possess spirits.
   Mythologically the world and everything in it was created
during the 'Distant Time'. Stories explain the world's origin in a
time when animals and natural entities were human. In the
Distant Time the landscape acquired its present form. Humans
died and were transformed into the animals and plants encoun-
tered in the environment and features of the earth such as hills or
mountains (Nelson 1983: 16). Relatedness among animals is
revealed by Distant Time stories and by observation of specific
behavioural characteristics, for example the bones in the head of
the sucker fish resemble the objects it stole. A tendency to get
along means that animals are relatives. Certain landforms pos-
sess a special spiritual power that must be placated or shown def-
erence, and the entire earth's surface is filled with a generalized
power, sink taala, essential for shaman's medicine (ibid.: 35). A
nebulous but threatening spirit power is associated with many
places on the land, bodies of water and mountains. These are
places cursed by shamans or have acquired power in a time
beyond memory. The entire system of geographical orientation is
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies                57


intimately connected with an intricate web of waterways that
simultaneously threaten and sustain life. People orientate them-
selves in relation to rivers and river currents (upriver; downriver;
toward the water; away from the water; and four prefixes mea-
sure distance, for example dodot: nearby downriver) rather than
in terms of cardinal directions. Relations of distance and nearness
are not defined in simple geometrical terms. Rivers are also used
to define and sustain social boundaries. Koyukon people identify
themselves with reference to river drainages delineating individ-
ual or group terms. Despite continuous human activity for mil-
lennia the Koyukon impact on the environment has been slight.
The only tangible evidence of this long occupation is scattered
camp-sites, trails, widely dispersed village clearings, and the
overgrown remnants of abandoned locales. The imprint on the
land is fundamentally of a cultural character - one of an invest-
ment of meaning: 'the flow of land becomes also a flow of the
mind ... Almost nothing visible remained to associate [the aban-
doned settlement] with humanity. Only the memory of people
and events set this place apart from its surroundings and gave it
special meaning ... Each living individual is bound into this pat-
tern of land and people that extends throughout the terrain and
far back across time' (Nelson 1983: 243).
   When the Koyukon people cross their land the recollection of
events, the recognition of named places and locales, the aware-
ness of boundaries, not only invest it with meaning but perpetu-
ate the knowledges necessary to locate resources and orientate
themselves in space. As with the Aborigines, individual identities
and biographies are so closely connected with the landscape that
one can act on the other.


Subsistence Cultivators and the Land

Parallel Worlds in Melanesia

   'You realise that this tree isn't really a tree. It is actually a man, but
   you and I can't see him because we are only living beings. Our eyes
   aren't clear. We are not able to see things as they really are'
                                   (Informant cited in Harrison 1988: 325).

For subsistence cultivators in Melanesia the relationship with the
landscape is no less intimate than among Arctic or Australian
58                                          A Phenomenology of Landscape


hunter-gatherers. Malinowski noted the intimate relationship
between myth and the landscape as lived and perceived:
     The mythical world receives its substance in rock and hill, in the
     changes in land and sea. The pierced sea-passages, the cleft boulders,
     the petrified human beings, all these bring the mythological world
     close to the natives, make it tangible and permanent. On the other
     hand, the story thus powerfully illustrated, re-acts on the landscape,
     fills it with dramatic happenings, which, fixed there for ever, give it a
     definite meaning (Malinowski f 922: 330).

   More recently, Guidieri and Pellizzi (1981:13) refer in a gener-
al sense to two distinct 'surfaces' of existence in many Melanesian
societies. One is fixed, the land of the dead ancestral forces; the
other, the land of the living, is mobile, but always gravitating in
relation to the first. In this manner in many societies a distinction
is drawn between a perceptual order, the plane of everyday exis-
tence, and an invisible and underlying order of spirit beings,
including totemic ancestors and ghosts of the dead. These spirits
are not visible in their real forms, but are 'visible' in metamor-
phosed transformations in the form of animal and plant species,
rivers, mountains and rocks. This hidden order of existence, like
the Aboriginal Dreamtime, is atemporal, but constantly intersects
with and influences the world of the living. Among the Avatip on
the Sepik river in north-west Papua New Guinea to own land is
intimately bound up with magical and ritual responsibility for its
fertility:

     To the villagers all land and bodies of water are fertile because they
     contain the rotted bodies and body-fluids of totemic ancestors. Many
     parcels of land are criss-cross complexes of old levees left by shifts in
     the course of the river; people say these have human outlines, and
     still bear the shapes of the ancestors who 'fell down' upon them in
     mythical times (Harrison 1988: 323).

In this manner the land becomes humanized and socialized as
something replete with ancestral energies that requires care and
constant sustenance through ritual magic. Beneath the apparent
surface of the landscape, but intimately bound up with it, there is
a hidden topography best known to (and influenced by) ritual
experts in these societies, but emotionally and cognitively perti-
nent to all. Aspects of the social and ancestral past are both
recorded and experienced at specific locales in terms of topo-
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies       59

graphic and physiographic features. Possessing detailed and
accurate knowledge of the landscape is bound up with knowl-
edge of intangible worlds and ancestral powers embedded with-
in it, control of which is deemed essential for group production
and reproduction.
    Whereas in the West there is a tendency to privilege temporal
relationships between events in narrative accounts, typically in
Melanesia it is spatial relationships that are emphasized. Events
are anchored and given significance in terms of particular locales
and their interconnections as linked points in space. Particular
locales are of essential importance in 'fixing' events and acting as
mnemonics, thus creating a sense of social identity and establish-
ing linkages between past and present, the worldly and the
supernatural. Kiichler (1993) has recently emphasized the point
that landscape may act powerfully as memory, a template in the
process of memory work that is not fixed and static, but some-
thing drawn upon in social encounters and disputes over land.
    Specific locales in the landscape may be powerful visual
reminders of myths and themselves become, through the passage
of time, objects of knowledge, the accuracy of which may validate
the myths. Landscapes anchor events, and thus act so as to ensure
their enduring significance for populations moving around and
experiencing them on a daily basis. The landscape provides per-
manent markers around which life flows and within which
meanings become sedimented.
    Poole (1986), in a particularly vivid account, discusses this
intertwining of a physical and natural and cultural and super-
 natural ordering of things in relation to the significance of the
 landscape and the oil that seeps out of it in Bimin-Kuskusmin ter-
 ritory in Highland Papua New Guinea. The Bimin-Kuskusmin
 live in a rugged mountainous area in West Sepik province. Their
 territory is bordered to the west by the dramatic Strickland Gorge
 and on all other sides by formidable mountain ranges. In their
 mythology the known world is bounded and covered by the
 canopy of the sky, linked to the earth by massive limestone pil-
 lars and trees just beyond the farthest extent of human experi-
 ence. A mountain chain separates the northern and southern
 Bimin-Kuskusmin valleys, and this chain is the spine of the land;
 the seeping oil hidden in a hollow and issuing from a rock crevice
 is the marrow of the mountain spine. For the Bimin-Kuskusmin
 the forest is a realm of immense ritual importance and spiritual
60                                          A Phenomenology of Landscape


power linking the living with the dead and humans with spiritu-
al entities:
     Along limestone ridges and outcroppings the forest growth becomes
     markedly stunted or blighted, and jagged karst formations jut
     through this sparser foliage. Myriad streams, springs, caves, sink-
     holes, rock outcroppings, crevices, cliffs, and other 'natural' features
     of the lower and mid-montaine terrain are identified with ancestral
     events in myths that add sacred contours to the landscape. Lightning-
     scarred trees and places of landslides - all sign's of Afek's [the great
     cassowary, 'mother' of the game animals and father of the sacred
     semen-oil] power - are remembered for the mysterious, 'supernatur-
     al' events that have occurred there. Tiny knolls and forest glades are
     vividly recalled as the sites where a hunter crouched in fear when the
     whistle of a witch, the rumble of an earthquake, or the howl of an
     anquished spirit... was heard in the vast stillness ... At deep sinkholes
     the spirits of the dead find passage to the ancestral underworld, and
     ancestral spirits return through these passages to haunt and to bless
     this domain (Poole 1986:175).

   The oil was at the centre of all life and ritual practice.
Dedicatory shrines were constructed in a clearing near the oil
seep containing pig, human and cassowary skulls and rock crys-
tals, thought to be animate, sentient and highly sacred. The oil is
carefully collected in a depression encircled by sacred red
Cordyline plants. In an annual cycle of rites ritual experts present
sacrificial morsels of food to the ancestral skulls and the crystals.
The ancestral spirits are then said to return from the underworld
to increase the flow of sacred oil. This central ritual site links
together all Bimin-Kuskusmin, whether living or dead, in a com-
mon bond with the land and its resources. The oil represents 'the
source of fertility, growth, renewal and change for all faunae, flo-
rae and humans that dwell on the land ... and even beyond to the
farthest reaches of known human settlement' (Poole 1986: 171).
Only adult men who have undergone the ordeals of a ten-stage
initiation cycle taking place over a decade may approach the
sacred site of the oil. The sacred oil is central to rites of regenera-
tion in which the fertility of the forest is ensured. Oil-soaked taro
is fed to domestic boars, the burying of bamboo tubes of oil is car-
ried out to promote the growth of taro, oil is rubbed on the skin to
make it glisten and ensure personal well-being. Shrines through-
out the forest are anointed with oil. The oil is conceived to flow
under the landscape itself in the realm of the spirit world. Proof
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies          61

and concern (attributed to white infiltration and to the dire ritual
consequences of their discovery of the source of the sacred oil)
about something's being amiss are areas of unwanted expanding
grasslands in parts of Bismin-Kuskusmin territory. In these areas
the oil has ceased to flow and the forests have dried up.
   For the Foi and the Kaluli of the southern highlands of Papua
New Guinea, the relationship with the landscape is no less inti-
mate. They know the course of every body of water, each of
which is named. Important landmarks, such as prominent hills,
pools in rivers, large trees, are all named and significant places.
The naming of places extends to ancestral and more recent events
that have taken place. Watercourses provide referents for loca-
tion and direction: 'the waters, as they turn and fall, generate new
localities for every new configuration of land. The name of a
locality carries, in effect, its own geographical coordinates, which
place it in determinate relation to the brooks and streams that
flow through the forest' (Schieffelin 1976: 30). Animals, plants
and people are all fundamentally related inasmuch as in origin
myths they were all originally human. People have food and
shelter by virtue of the plants and animals to which they are
simultaneously opposed and ancestrally related (ibid.: 95).
    Foi territory is characterized by a twofold division: (i) that cen-
trally located and permanently occupied by the longhouse soci-
ety and its gardens; and (ii) the hunting grounds, Ayamo,
seasonally occupied for hunting, fishing, trapping and collecting
(Weiner 1991: 33). Movement between these two areas was tradi-
tionally periodic. Ayamo is much larger than Foi gardening terri-
tory, and the population disperses in it. Since these areas are
occupied at different seasons and are the focus of rhythmic peri-
odic movements, notions of landscape and temporality become
interlinked. Changing topography and activities thus have an
inbuilt temporal dimension. Creeks and rivers provide major
 spatial boundaries used to provide a sense of orientation through
 space and forming the most common borderlines between clan
 territories. Clan areas are orientated around the mouth and
 source of identifying streams (ibid.: 40). Distance and nearness, as
 among the Koyukon, are related to the flow of water. Virtually all
 place-names have a lexical significance and make use of geo-
 graphically descriptive words referring to specific topographic
 features, such as 'creek', 'ridge', 'raised ground', 'grove', 'spur',
 'bend in river', 'mountain', 'waterfall'. They also refer to human
62                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


events and activities at particular locales. The sum of a Foi per-
son's existence is, in essence, the sum of the tracks he or she has
made or used during his or her lifetime. A historical conscious-
ness is thus bound up with movement through space. In Foi poet-
ry, Weiner argues, the moving image occurs as a result of the
serial juxtaposition of linked place-names and species, which
together create a sense of place. By serially listing place-names
temporal spans are automatically invoked, and a sense of life
movement through a region is constructed. Weiner puts the point
particularly well: in showing 'someone else the extent of his land
and resource holdings, a Foi man is revealing the fundamental
lived dimension of his "Being-there", through the attitudes of
care and the actions of concernful appropriation of earthly space,
the historical record of the impressions he has made on the land,
the inscriptive evidence of his life' (Weiner 1991: 45).
    The Foi existential landscape, like that of Australian
Aboriginal groups, the Mistassini Cree, the Koyukon and the
Kaluli, is doubly imaged, consisting of ancestrally constituted
places over which and between which the day-to-day move-
ments of people are transcribed. All these populations key into
and draw on ancestral powers. The life path of an individual both
iterates an ancestrally created world and creates its own particu-
lar and personalized path.
    In many areas of Melanesia myth is not only embodied in 'nat-
ural' landforms, but also in the form of ancestral stones dotting
the landscape (Malinowski 1922; Leenhardt 1930; Riesenfeld
1950; Kahn 1990). Leenhardt records that in New Caledonia 'each
stone has a name, a history, a life, we might even say a personali-
ty, resulting from the spirit enclosed within it. Often in [remote]
valleys I've asked the name for every detail of the land, each
notable tree; and the landscape transposes itself into a scheme it
would be impossible to transcribe on a map, in which each name
is title to a chapter' (Leenhardt 1930: 241, cited in Kahn 1990: 54).
Kahn reports that on the coastal mainland of Milne Bay Province
 stones, some with incised geometric designs, are particularly fre-
 quent. They usually represent mythical heroes or heroines who
 turned into stone, and some of them may play a prominent part
 in mythological narratives anchoring the stories to the ground.
 Sometimes the stones may represent the petrification of the per-
 sonal equipment of the ancestors left behind on journeys (Kahn
 1990: 59).
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies         63


Mountains, Mesas and Tetrads
A number of accounts have emphasized the social and cosmo-
logical significance of the land among native American Indian
hunter-fisher-gatherers and farmers (e.g. Brody 1981; Hallowell
1955; Harrington 1916; Momaday 1974; Ortiz 1969; Parsons 1939;
White 1964). Here I want to refer to one of the richest of these
accounts, written by Ortiz, an anthropologist who also comes
from the society he studies and interprets, the Tewa, a pueblo-
dwelling population engaged primarily in subsistence horticul-
ture in the American South-west. Ortiz (1969) describes the Tewa
view of existence in terms of six discrete and hierarchical levels or
categories of being:
   6. Dry food who never did become
   5. Towa é
   4. Dry food who are no longer
   3. Made people
   2. Towa é
   1. Dry food people
These are also cultural categories used to divide and classify
the entirety of Tewa social and supernatural existence. 'Dry
food people' play no official roles in political or ritual life. The
Towa e make up the core of the political organization of the
Tewa. The 'Made people' constitute a hierarchy of eight dis-
crete but interrelated organizations, including the members of
two moiety societies, the medicine men, the Kwirana or 'cold'
clowns, the Kossa or 'warm' clowns, and the Hunt, Scalp, and
Women's societies (Ortiz 1969: 17). The other three categories
are supernatural counterparts of the first three. When someone
in category 1 dies he or she becomes a spirit of level 4; level 5
represents the spirits of people in category 2; while level 6 is
constituted by the souls of the Made people and of all the
deities recognized in Tewa mythology before the emergence of
humanity.
   These social and supernatural categories are superimposed on
the landscape in the form of a series of tetrads or groups of four,
and related to cardinal directions, topographical features, settle-
ment locales, paths of movement and a system of colour classifi-
cation (Fig. 2.8). The outer tetrad of the Tewa world is bounded
by four sacred mountains, each with unique characteristics. To
the north is the Hazy or Shimmering Mountain, to the west the
 64                                                 A Phenomenology of Landscape

                                              North
                                           Blue/Green
                                 Tse Shu Pin (Shimmering Mountain)
                                       [Conjilon Peak: 60 miles)




                                         Tema Yoh




                 Toma Yoh                                        Tsi Mayoh


West                                                                             East
Yellow                                                                          White
Tsikomo (Obsidian Covered Mountain)                      Ku Sehn Pin (Stone Man Mountain)
[Tsikomo: 15 miles]                                      [Truchas Peak: 20 miles]




                                          Tun Yoh




                                           South
                                            Red
                                     Oku Pin (Turtle Mountain)
                                     [Sandia Crest: 80 miles]




      Sacred Mountain
      Mesa
      Shrine: + one stone   ++   many stones
      Dance plazas
      Earth mother naval


 Figure 2.8. Landscape and cosmology in the Tewa world. Based on Ortiz
 1969: Fig. 2.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies       65

Obsidian-covered Mountain, to the south the Turtle Mountain
and to the east the Stone Man Mountain. These mountains vary
between 25 and 130 km. in distance from San Juan pueblo, the
largest of six surviving villages in New Mexico. All these four
sacred mountains can be seen from some reasonably high loca-
tion in Tewa country. For any particular pueblo the most sacred
of them, object of repeated pilgrimages, tends to be the nearest.
A lake or pond is associated with each mountain, in which the
'Dry Food People Who Never Did Become', the most sacred
supernatural category of beings, dwell linked with the appropri-
ate directional colour. On the top of each mountain there is a nan
sipu or earth navel, within which the Towa e spirits live, watching
over the world of the living. This is a keyhole-shaped stone
structure in which the bottom end is always kept open and
directionally orientated toward one or more of the Tewa vil-
lages. It constitutes a point at which the living may communicate
with the spirit world. It 'gathers blessings' from the three world
levels and directs them through the open end back to the Tewa
villages.
    A second internal tetrad is constituted by making reference to
four sacred Tsin , flat-topped hills (mesas) created by the Towa e
of the directions. These are located approximately midway
between the mountains and the village. As they are much closer
to the Tewa pueblos they therefore cannot provide, on the
ground, a system common to all; and, in practice, different hills
constitute cardinal reference points according to the location of
any particular village. Each of these hills is sacred because it is
believed to be dark and foreboding, and each has a cave or
tunnels running through it. These are thought to be inhabited by
masked supernatural whippers who are impersonated by the
 Towa e. Unlike the sacred mountains, the Tsin are very dangerous
places for anyone but the Towa e to be, because of the presence of
the masked whippers. As with the mountains, the hill closest to
any particular pueblo is the most mythologically significant. A
 third tetrad is made up of the four principal shrines of the direc-
 tions. These are the most important of numerous shrines found in
 the landscape around each Tewa village. These shrines are
 marked by large single stones or collections of stones. These are
 places in which souls live, and are endowed with sacred quali-
 ties. The final inner tetrad is made up of four dance plazas within
 the village. All public rituals must be performed at least four
66                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


times on each of these dance areas. In addition there is a 'moth-
er earth navel middle place' within the centre of a village, the
most sacred ritual centre of all. Ritual dances and other perfor-
mances must be initiated here, because it is at the centre of the
village. It is circular in shape and, unlike the navels on the
sacred mountains, open in all four cardinal directions.
Contrasting the two types of navels, Ortiz interprets their rela-
tionship in the following manner: 'The mountain earth navels
gather in blessings from all around and direct them inward
toward the village; the mother earth navel is the source of all
these blessings, so they are directed outward in all directions. By
the system of ideas at work here, everything good and desirable
stays within the Tewa world. This is how relentless and perva-
sive this tetramerous aspect of Tewa symbolic classification is'
(Ortiz 1969: 21-2).
    In Tewa cosmology the world is constituted by three levels,
that of the middle, mapped out in the landscape as a series of
sacred tetrads; the underworld; and the above. These worlds
replicate each other, and mediation between them is achieved
through the sacred points of the mountain lakes, the earth navels
and the shrines. These are points of entrance into other worlds,
between a plane of Being and a plane of Becoming. The tops of
the mountains are not only points of entry to the world below
(conceptually more elaborated in Tewa thought than the upper
world ) but points at which the upper, middle, and underworlds
come closest to intersecting. Their especial holiness is manifested
by the presence of concrete signs such as clouds (a source of pre-
cious moisture) and evidence of lightning strikes on trees (Ortiz
 1969: 25).
    From this striking example, considerably simplified from
Ortiz's rich ethnography, the significance of landscape as a con-
 cretization of a living mythology structuring and ordering the
 entirety of Tewa social existence and ritual practice could not be
 clearer. The myths and rituals give meaning to the land and the
 land itself provides constant tangible evidence of the efficacy and
 truthfulness of myth as objectified mythology and mythologized
 objectivity. The landscape provides a concrete means by which
 the Tewa can understand their world and their place within it.
 Meaning and order are imposed on the concrete details of the
 land to answer basic and fundamental questions about the order-
 ing and nature of social existence.
Social Construction of Landscape in Small-Scale Societies        67

Conclusion

Disregarding all the particular descriptive details, what is clear
from all these accounts, whether of hunter-gatherers or subsis-
tence cultivators, is the symbolic, ancestral and temporal signifi-
cance of the landscape. Writing about an economic 'base' in
relation to resource utilization or landscape use seems quite irrel-
evant here. The landscape is continually being encultured, bring-
ing things into meaning as part of a symbolic process by which
human consciousness makes the physical reality of the natural
environment into an intelligible and socialized form. The land-
scape is redolent with past actions, it plays a major role in consti-
tuting a sense of history and the past, it is peopled by ancestral
and spiritual entities, forms part and parcel of mythological sys-
tems, is used in defining social groups and their relationship to
resources. Histories, discourses and ideologies are created and
re-created through reference to the special affinity people have
with an area of land, its topography, waters, rocks, locales, paths
and boundaries.
    It appears to be evident enough that the significance of land-
scape for different populations cannot be simply read off from
the local 'ecological' characteristics of a 'natural' environment,
whether desert, Boreal forest, rain forest or tundra. Nor can it be
related in any simple manner to the mode of subsistence (hunter-
gatherer/cultivator/mixture of the two) or pattern of dwelling
(mobile/sedentary). It, rather, cross-cuts these determinisms and
distinctions. A much stronger argument can be made that, in all
the social contexts I have considered, landscape is intimately
related to myth and obeys the same kind of logic as that which
structures myth viz metaphor, allegory, synecdoche etc.
 Landscape is, in substantial part, a mythopoesis and using terms
such as hunter-gatherers or subsistence cultivators detracts from
rather than clarifies the relationship between peoples and land-
 scapes. What the cases I have discussed share is the selection for
 myths that stress the conventional and a form of ordering that
 classically 'resolves' contradictions in social practices.
