Part II
Prehistoric Landscapes
Introduction
Human Space and Prehistoric
Landscapes

It was something like that. I take it as axiomatic that relationships
between peoples and landscapes in prehistory were just as inti-
mate and affective as those discussed in Chapter 2. The problem
is, of course, to specify exactly in what that something might con-
sist. It is neither possible, nor desirable, to try to directly model
the significance of prehistoric landscapes explicitly in terms of
any of the contemporary examples. We can be sure the situation
was different. An examination of the range of modern examples
simply provides a conceptual background for attempting to think
through the archaeological evidence encountered in the field.
    In this and the next three chapters I want to consider evidence
from the Mesolithic and Neolithic in south Wales and southern
England, attempting to demonstrate both long-term continuities
and changes in the relationships between populations and the
land. The character of the material evidence to hand is, of course,
hardly ideal. For the Mesolithic it consists almost entirely of sur-
face flint scatters representing various temporary and seasonally
occupied locales and task-specific sites. Using map grid refer-
ences to find these sites, there is nothing to be seen on the ground,
nothing to indicate that you have even arrived, except, in a few
cases, the scars of recent excavations. For the Neolithic settlement
evidence is virtually absent, and the primary evidence consists of
different types of upstanding monuments in the landscape. Here,
at least, you are certain that you have actually arrived and the
walk is over.
    I have chosen to study three areas in detail: Pembrokeshire,
south-west Wales, the Black Mountains area of south-east Wales
and Cranborne Chase in southern England (Fig. 3. 0). These have
the advantage of possessing Mesolithic find material; and the
Neolithic monuments found in each region - portal dolmens and

                                                                  71
72                                       A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.0. Location of the study areas. 1: South-west Wales; 2: The Black
Mountains; 3: Cranborne Chase.

chambered monuments, chambered long cairns of 'Cotswold-
Severn' type and earthen long barrows, respectively - each repre-
sent the main forms found in southern Britain as a whole. The
'natural' landscapes in which these sites and monuments are
found contrast dramatically, from the rock-strewn south Wales
coastal peninsula to the inland sandstone massif of the Black
Mountains to the rolling chalk downland of Dorset. My consider-
ation of the earlier Neolithic in Dorset extends to include two
other principal classes of monuments found elsewhere in south-
ern England, but unknown in Wales, the Cursus and a cause-
wayed enclosure complex on Hambledon Hill. My initial
intention was to consider the long barrows on Cranborne Chase
separately; but, like Richard Bradley before me (in Barrett et al.
1991b: 36), I found it quite impossible to discuss them without
considering the Cursus. This may in itself be to say something of
Part II: Human Space and Prehistoric Landscapes                 73


interest about the power of that monument, even when, today, it is
scarcely visible on the ground.
   Although focusing on landscape the discussions also address
the 'problem' of the Mesolithic-Neolithic 'transition', one of the
black holes of British prehistory, a chronological drawer in the
traditional archaeological filing cabinet that remains almost
empty. Previous attempts to discuss the relationship between the
final postglacial hunter-fisher-gatherer populations of the
Mesolithic and the early Neolithic peoples who, in the received
wisdom, began to cultivate and garden, clear the land and keep
domesticates, have concentrated on the built environment. The
classic example has come not from Britain, but Brittany, where
much has been made of adduced structural and depositional sim-
ilarities between the graves in the Mesolithic cemeteries at
Hoedic and Teviec and early Neolithic long mounds (e.g.
Renfrew 1973a: 158; Sherratt 1990; Kirk 1993). Since, in Britain,
there is no architectural evidence, and very few Mesolithic buri-
als apart from remains in caves, such a linkage has not been pos-
sible to make in these formal terms. Here I attempt to trace
instead process rather than product, the means by which the land
became encultured and ultimately transformed into architectural
form during the Neolithic, when there arises a need to capture
and control what the landscape is about through the medium of
architectural morphology.
    From a very contemporary perspective, visiting sites in a
modern landscape, it is, of course, extremely difficult to attempt
to envisage, in the mind's eye, the prehistoric settings of locales.
Everything would appear to have changed; at first glance the task
seems hopeless. It is simply impossible to know exactly where
the trees and bushes were in relation to sites and monuments,
where the flowers bloomed and the rushes sighed in the wind.
 Even the greatest refinements in techniques such as pollen and
 molluscan analysis can provide only a relatively coarse assess-
 ment of these matters, and, concentrating on statistics and counts
 of oak and lime, arboreal and non-arboreal pollen, they tell us all
 too little of what the forests and open areas actually looked like
 and how the plants grew. The skin of the land has gone for good,
 and can only be partially recovered through the most diligent of
 scientific analyses; but not its shape. The bones of the land - the
 mountains, hills, rocks and valleys, escarpments and ridges -
 have remained substantially the same since the Mesolithic, and
74                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


can still be observed. Only the coastline has been radically
altered. It is the bones of the land and their relationship to sites
and monuments with which these archaeological studies are
principally concerned.
   As a contemporary subject observer interested in interpreting
the meanings of prehistoric landscapes I make no claims to an
empathetic understanding of their significance, to some incredi-
ble feat of being able to find and recover meaning in prehistoric
minds. To think that is either illusion or to act like God. However,
I believe that the experience of place is of fundamental signifi-
cance in the attempt to provide an account. There is one, all too
contemporary, experience of place with which most people will
be familiar. Locate a monument or site on a map. Drive for hours
in a car, and attempt to arrive as close as possible to the place.
Walk a shorter or longer distance, if necessary, and you are there.
In the case of all but a few well-preserved chambered monu-
ments the result is inevitably disappointing: a few overgrown
stones or a low mound covered with rank vegetation in summer
is hardly inspiring. You acquire little sense of the feel and charac-
ter of the land. A monument or place encountered in the course of
a walk between places is an altogether different matter.
Approaching it slowly, from different directions, and anticipat-
ing arriving, it is possible to observe in a much more subtle man-
ner the way in which it is related to its physical surroundings, the
lie of the land. Even a site which you cannot see, such as a
Mesolithic flint scatter, acquires in this way a greater significance
and interest. Even the most dilapidated monument becomes
worth visiting. To make the point in a slightly different way, all
places are in landscapes, but landscapes constitute the place.
Walk from one place to another or approach it from a different
direction and everything will change. Things that loomed large in
your visual field may become small, or look different. What was
at the centre may now be on the periphery; what could be seen
has now disappeared, and new horizons have come into view.
    This perpetually shifting human visual experience of place
and landscape encountered in the walk has not altered since the
Mesolithic. Things in front of or behind you, within reach or
without, things to the left and right of your body, above and
below, these most basic of personal spatial experiences, are
 shared with prehistoric populations in our common biological
 humanity. They provide tools with which to think and to work.
Part II: Human Space and Prehistoric Landscapes                75


   Looking at the two-dimensional plane of the modern topo-
graphic map with sites and monuments plotted on it, it is quite
impossible to envisage the landscape in which these places are
embedded. The representation fails, and cannot substitute for
being there, being in place. Similarly, an unfamiliar landscape
remains invisible. You do not know where, or how, to look. This
process of observation requires time and a feeling for the place.
After being there, after making many visits to the same locales,
the intensity of the experience heightens. Monuments that were
initially hidden from view on a first visit to a place can now be
seen, and patterned relationships between sites and their settings
become apparent.
Chapter 3
An Affinity with the Coast: Places and
Monuments in South-west Wales


Introduction

The geology of south-west Wales is particularly complex, consist-
ing of a series of sedimentary and igneous rock formations of
Pre-Cambrian to Carboniferous age. The landscape has been
greatly eroded to create a series of relatively flat surfaces at
approximately 60 m. intervals above sea level. Only small areas
of the land surface are 200 m. or more above sea level. Despite the
fact that this is a relatively low-lying area the coasts and some
inland areas display some quite dramatic variations in relief. The
greater part of north Pembrokeshire is made up of Ordovician
rocks, sandstones, grits and shales broken up by igneous intru-
sions. These igneous rocks are exposed in narrow strips, and
commonly form the numerous headlands along the north-west
coast where sheltered bays and inlets have been cut into the
softer shales. Inland they form impressive weathered rock out-
crops and ridges. Inland in the south of Pembrokeshire the land-
scape is gentler and more undulating being made up
predominantly of Devonian Old Red Sandstone and
Carboniferous limestone formations, locally eroded to create low
crags and rock outcrops. Along the coast great walls of impres-
sive precipitous cliffs are broken up to form sweeping bays and
dramatic headlands.
   The coastline of south-west Wales has long generated consid-
erable interest because of the presence of submerged early post-
glacial landscapes, exposed within the intertidal zone at very low
tides or when storms have eroded away more recent marine
sediments. These are made up of peat deposits with fallen tree-
trunks and stumps.

76
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales            77


Locales in the Earlier and Later Mesolithic
In south-west Wales the Mesolithic evidence almost entirely con-
sists of flint scatters, with a paucity of faunal collections associat-
ed with human activities. The surface flint findspots are
remarkably prolific, and have been documented and discussed
by a number of authors (Cantrill 1915; Gordon-Williams 1926;
Grimes 1932; Leach 1913; 1918; 1933; Wainwright 1963; Jacobi
1980; David 1990). They are almost solely confined to the coast for
both earlier and later Mesolithic assemblages. Earlier Mesolithic
flint scatters are concentrated along the south coast of Pembroke,
extending from Caldey island in the south-east to St David's
Head in the north-west. Later Mesolithic sites occur in the same
area, and also extend along the north coast as far east as Newport
(Fig. 3.1). These assemblages vary in size from small, highly local-
ized surface scatters, representing temporary occupations and
resting-places, to quite massive concentrations of microliths,
chipped flint, pebble tools, cores and lithic debris, suggesting fre-
quently visted locales. This material is locally derived from beach
shingles, and does not naturally occur on the cliff-tops bordering
the beaches where the majority of the sites are located.
    The dense concentration of the Mesolithic sites along the
southern coast of Pembrokeshire indicates that it was an area that
was extensively exploited throughout the Mesolithic. On the
basis of a survey of 20 sites along the Pembrokeshire coasts from
which there have been substantial lithic collections, as opposed to
isolated finds of one or a few artefacts, five broad types of locale
may be distinguished:
    (i) Cave and rock shelters in the faces of limestone cliffs. Four
of these are documented with Mesolithic material, three of which
are on Caldey island.
    (ii) Places on flat or undulating rather exposed ground high
up, situated directly on the margins of the cliff-tops and head-
lands, with extensive views along the coasts and across the sea,
but with restricted visibility inland. The classic case of such a
location is Nab Head, where the site is located on the heavily
eroding neck of the headland, with precipitous cliffs to the north,
west and east. Inland, to the south, the land rises up, and visibili-
ty is reduced to a few hundred metres. From the site there are
extensive views across the sea to locales where other Mesolithic
sites are found, to the south and east extending as far as Skomer
island and to the north and west to Ramsey island (Fig. 3.2).
78                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.1. The distribution of earlier and later Mesolithic locales in
south-west Wales. Places mentioned in the text:
1. Caldey Island                    7. Freshwater West
2. Nab Head                         8. Whitesands Bay
3. Manorbier Bay                    9. Newport
4. Swanlake Bay                    10. Frainslake
5. Cwm Bach                        11. Freshwater East.
6. Llanunwas
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   79
80                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape


    (iii) Places somewhat withdrawn from the cliff edges, and usu-
ally close to springs and streams. The land in most cases rises up
gently away from the cliffs, so that visibility inland is restricted to
a few hundred metres. From these sites there are more limited
views along the coasts, as far as the headlands permit, and visi-
bility across the open sea is restricted. Sites at Manorbier and
Swanlake bays, Cwm Bach and Llanunwas are typical of this
choice of location.
    (iv) Places at short distances from the bases of the cliffs now
exposed at low tide, as at Freshwater East (Leach 1913) and
Whitesands Bay, sometimes found in association with sub-
merged forests (Fig. 3.3).
    (v) Places on flat land or sand-dune areas in river estuary loca-
tions or localized marshy areas created by streams. Sites at
Newport, Frainslake and Freshwater West (Wainwright 1959) are
representative of such locations.
    During the earlier Mesolithic sea levels would have been much
lower than today, and locales now situated on cliff-tops would
have been, at the time of occupation, inland sites situated on the
tops of rock outcrops and steep hills overlooking an extensive
forested coastal plain. Caldey island, with its caves and rock shel-
ters, would have been linked to the present-day mainland. The
cliffs of south Pembrokeshire (Fig. 3.4) would have been the first
steep hills and crags encountered inland from the sea, visually
dominating a belt of marshy coastal plain broken up topographi-
cally by outcrops which now form offshore islands and rocks.
The cliffs seen today have been, of course, considerably steep-
ened by marine erosion. Sea levels rose throughout the
Mesolithic, crossing modern coastlines and flooding the coastal
and estuarine sites located below the cliffs at around 4700 BC. By
the early Neolithic the isostatic recovery of the land was greater
than eustatic sea level rise, and the relationship between land and
sea stabilized (Taylor 1980:117-19).
     Exploitation territories of the later Mesolithic sites would have
included tidal strips more substantial than today, inland terrain,
extensive marsh areas in some cases, and large areas of open sea,
pointing to the significance of marine resources such as fish and
seal. Evidence of faunal exploitation is limited to the eroding
foreshore peats of Atlantic age exposed by sea erosion around the
coasts of Pembrokeshire and mixed cave deposits, indicating
 exploitation of Bos, pig, and red and roe deer (Jacobi 1980:179-83;
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   81
82   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           83


Caseldine 1990: 40; Lewis 1990). Mollusc exploitation seems to
have been limited, although one midden site from Nanna's cave
on Caldey island has been claimed (Lacaille and Grimes 1955).
   The main regional woodland reflected in pollen diagrams
from south-west Wales appears to have been dominated by oak,
hazel and alder, with some local pine woodland and alder carr
and sedge fen plant communities developing in valley bottoms
and low-lying coastal sites (Caseldine 1990; Lewis 1990). At
Marros and Abermawr Lewis (1990) attributes increases in hazel
counts in pollen diagrams to an opening out of woodlands dur-
ing the middle Neolithic and the late Mesolithic to early Neolithic
respectively. Clearance of the woodland on a large scale, princi-
pally by burning, and the creation of a more open 'pastoral' land-
scape does not seem to have occurred until the middle or later
Neolithic onwards. During the earlier Neolithic, when the major-
ity of the chambered monuments were built and used, clearances
of the forest were of limited extent (Caseldine 1990; Lewis 1990).
    Some writers on the Mesolithic of south-west Wales have
stressed the great attractiveness of coastal areas as opposed to
inland and upland areas with regard to both possibilities for
resource exploitation and the availability of raw materials
(Wainwright 1963: 126; ApSimon 1976: 41), while others have
pointed to a correlation between the distribution of Mesolithic
sites and areas of more frost-free days (Webley 1976: 20-1; Jacobi
1980: 179; David 1990: 251). Important as factors of climate or
resource availability may be, the choice of locales on, or beneath,
or between, inland (in the earlier Mesolithic) or coastal (during the
late Mesolithic) landmarks - precipitous ridges and rock out-
crops that must have been dominant in the local environment -
seems highly significant. These, no doubt named, natural topo-
graphic features would have been invested with sets of local
meanings and would have had the effect of pinpointing the posi-
tions of camp sites and their inhabitants to populations moving
around in the coastal flatlands or waters and marsh areas sur-
rounding them. The lack of later Mesolithic inland sites may be
partially attributable to a lack of intensive survey work, and sites
 on the higher ground of the Preseli mountains and elsewhere
might well be expected; but the evidence that these populations
 had a special affinity with particular (now coastal) locales and
 areas is overwhelming. The entire area along the coast was exten-
 sively exploited. There is, on average, a findspot every four or
84                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


five hundred metres along some stretches, notably between
Angle Bay and Linney Head, south of Milford Haven (Fig. 3.5)
and between Porthlyski bay and Newgale sands, with many
more yet to be discovered.
   Some locales, such as Nab Head (Jacobi 1980; David 1990) and
rock shelters on the island of Caldey (Lacaille and Grimes 1955),
have clear indications of successive occupation of precisely the
same locality from the earlier to the later Mesolithic, despite the
fact that local environmental conditions and, consequently, avail-
ability of exploitable resources must have changed drastically
throughout the Mesolithic. Clearly deciding to stop at a particu-
lar place was much more than simply a matter of food acquisi-
tion. At Nab Head a series of earlier and later Mesolithic
industries have been documented from both surface finds and
excavations (Gordon-Williams 1926; David 1990). The location of
this site on the neck of a headland, whether we see it today, sur-
rounded by the sea (Fig. 3.2), or envisage it jutting out into a
wooded coastal plain, as in the early Mesolithic, is quite striking.
The stone-tool industry is particularly extensive. From recent
excavations at Nab Head II, dominated by later Mesolithic
microliths, over 23,000 pieces of flaked flint and stone were
recovered. The assemblage is dominated by backed bladelets, but
also includes two pecked and groundstone axes of probable late
Mesolithic date (David 1990: 248). Apart from the flint material
recovered at Nab Head I a shale 'Venus' figurine was found, and
a large quantity (690) of perforated shale beads are recorded both
from surface finds and excavation (David 1990: 245). This was
clearly a major manufacturing site for these beads. Single finds of
shale beads are known from three other sites in Pembrokeshire,
and as far away as Waun-Fingen-Felen in the Black Mountains,
suggesting either their inclusion in exchange systems between
Mesolithic communities or extensive population movements in a
seasonal round. It is likely, as David remarks, that a cemetery
may once have existed at Nab Head, although there is no trace of
it now, and bones are not preserved in the acid soils. The pres-
ence of the beads and figurine at Nab Head, its repeated occu-
pancy through thousands of years, and the dramatic location of
the site provide us with a tantalizing glimpse of the symbolic
dimensions of social Being-in-the-landscape during the
Mesolithic, the constitution of biographies in relation to place. As
 Bradley notes, this period has too frequently been characterized
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   85
86                                       A Phenomenology of Landscape


in the archaeological literature as one in which people simply had
ecological relations with hazelnuts, as opposed to social relations
with one another (Bradley 1984:11).
   Proximity to marked changes in relief and jagged rock out-
crops was clearly of great symbolic significance during the
Mesolithic in Pembrokeshire, irrespective of the relative positions
of land and sea during the earlier and later Mesolithic. Here it
might be pertinent to note Chase's comments about coastal
Aboriginal populations in Cape York peninsula, northern
Australia:

     Present-day beach people display a high degree of precision in delin-
     eating estate boundaries along the beachline and major rivers.
     Clumps of causarine trees, a rock formation, an intrusive finger of
     dune scrub or a small watercourse provide exact boundary delin-
     eation. Further inland, away from the intensive beach domus zone,
     boundaries are less precise and are conceived in terms of sites or
     unnamed environmental features (Chase 1984: 112).

I want to suggest that it was precisely because the coast provided
both rich economic resources and a wealth of named and distinc-
tive natural topographic markers that it was so symbolically
important to both Mesolithic and Neolithic populations. During
the Mesolithic it seems highly likely that settlement locales repre-
sent places on paths of movement, bound into the lie of the land
at marked changes of relief with a cosmological significance,
which were ordered sequentially in relation to each other.


The Mesolithic-Neolithic 'Transition'
It is becoming increasingly clear that the terms 'Mesolithic' and
'Neolithic' as a means of characterizing different economies and
social relations of production have outlived their usefulness in
archaeological discourse. The apparent hiatus between the final
Mesolithic and the early Neolithic is a product of these very
terms. All kinds of 'transitions' now seem required to provide
mediations between them (see for example Zvelebil 1986), from
supposedly highly mobile 'simple' hunter-gatherers to 'complex'
settled farmers. It is now generally accepted that Mesolithic com-
munities in Britain and Europe were in no sense less 'complex'
than those in the Neolithic, and the range of variation between
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales             87

social groups - economic, social and ritual - was equally great
(Price and Brown 1985; Gamble 1986). There is no necessary rea-
son to link the building of monuments with the production of an
agricultural surplus. And, indeed, it is important to remember
that not all surpluses are agricultural. A pastoral surplus which
does not require being 'settled' is perfectly possible, and some of
the 'classic' surplus societies are, of course, the hunter-fisher-
gatherers of the American North-West Coast. From the archaeo-
logical evidence there is little to suggest that anything like a fully-
fledged mixed farming economy existed in the earlier Neolithic
of Britain (Kinnes 1988; Thomas 1991: Chapter 2). Thomas has
cogently argued that wild food resources contributed a substan-
tial proportion of food supplies, and that a seasonal cycle of
movement lay at the heart of social and subsistence arrangements
(1991: 28). I explore the question of an economic 'transition' more
fully in Chapter 6.


Monument Construction and the Significance of Place

The coastal location of the Mesolithic sites is repeated in the over-
all distribution of the chambered monuments of south-west
Wales, which in the general absence of domestic sites are the
primary evidence for the Neolithic in the area as elsewhere in
Britain. The overall distribution of Mesolithic sites and Neolithic
burial chambers is complementary rather than exclusive. Many of
the monuments are situated in exactly the same general areas that
must have been habitually exploited during the Mesolithic (Fig.
3. 6). An inspection of the distribution map of Neolithic artefact
finds from non-funerary contexts in Wales also reveals that they
are particularly densely concentrated in those regions with
Mesolithic findspots in Pembrokeshire (Savory 1980). Some
specific site locales, such as the Caldey rock shelters, were
utilized during both the Mesolithic and the Neolithic (Lacaille
and Grimes 1955). Mesolithic locales and artefact findspots also
occur in very close proximity to some of the individual cham-
bered monuments, for example those at St David's, Manorbier,
Angle, Newport (Carreg Coetan Arthur) and Longhouse (Carreg
Samson).
   The only Neolithic settlement site known is Clegyr Boia
(Fig. 3.7). It may well have been a walled settlement, with
88                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 3.6. The distribution of Neolithic monuments in south-west
Wales
1. Pentre Ifan                        14. Tresewig
2. Bedd yr Afanc                      15. Coetan Arthur (St Davids)
3. Llech y Dribedd                    16. Carn Llidi
4. Trellyffaint                       17. St Elvies
5. Carreg Coetan Arthur               18. Hanging Stone
6. Cerrig y Gof                       19. Devil's Quoit
7. Carn Wen                           20. Colston
8. Penrhiw                            21. GarnTurne
9. Garnwnda                           22. Parc y Llyn
10. Garn Gilfach                      23. King's Quoit
11. Ffyst Samson                      24. Morfa Bychan
12. Carreg Samson/Longhouse           25. Gwal y Filiast
13. Treffynnon                        26. Mountain.
Monuments 1-6: Nevern group. C.I. : Cam Ingli peak; C.B. : Clegyr Boia
settlement site.
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   89
90                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


ramparts encircling an area in which remains of two or three
Neolithic huts, three hearths and a small midden were recovered
(A. Williams 1953: 24 ff.). The excavator thought that the rampart
was of Iron Age date because it overlay one of the Neolithic
house areas; but the evidence could equally well suggest that
there are multiple Neolithic phases present, in which case the site
is quite comparable with enclosures from south-west England
like Carn Brea and Helman Tor (Mercer 1981). The only identified
faunal remains were of cattle. The presence of the midden with
limpet shells indicates the continued importance of marine
resources in the Neolithic. Importantly, the site is located on the
summit of a rock outcrop, 1 km. from the coast, and commanding
panoramic views in all directions. It is located less than 3 km.
from the nearest burial chambers, situated on the coast to the
north of St David's Head and beneath the prominent rock out-
crop of Carn Llidi. The positions of these monuments are marked
by the rock outcrops below which they are situated. The rock out-
crops are prominent from the vantage point of Clegyr Boia,
although it is impossible to see the burial chambers themselves
(Fig. 3. 8). The major change occurring during the earlier Neolithic
would appear not to be of an 'economic' character - there is
virtually no evidence that plant or animal domesticates played
any prominent role in south-west Wales - but was primarily
ideological in nature; and a fundamental part of this changing
ideology involved a different relationship between groups and
the landscape.
    The architectural morphology of the monuments is particular-
ly diverse. This, taken together with the generally poor state of
preservation of both the chambers and surrounding cairns and
mounds, has defied attempts at classification. They do not fit into
any neatly recognizable groups. Rather than considering this as a
 'problem' (cf. Grimes 1936a; Lynch 1975), I want to take the line
that this is perhaps one of their most characteristic and important
features. There are no two identical sites - difference is being
asserted. It is important that the monuments make a contrasting
visual impact. Claims have been made for a significant presence
of 'classic' portal dolmens (Lynch 1972, 1975). Such monuments
are characterized by the provision of a rectangular chamber with
 a false high portal entrance fronted by two portal stones with a
high blocking slab at right-angles to them. The capstone slopes
 down to the rear of the chamber, where it is supported by a lower
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   91
92                                    A Phenomenology of Landscape


upright. As Barker points out (1992: 73-6), only one site, Pentre
Ifan, can be claimed to match such a description. Others possess
sloping capstones, but without convincing evidence of a portal
construction. No passage graves with a lengthy entrance passage
have been documented. Four monuments do, however, appear to
have been provided with very short passages leading to the
chamber space (Grimes 1936a: 130-1; Lynch 1976: 75).
   This study is based on a survey of 26 separate locations on
which one or more burial chambers have been recorded (Fig. 3.6).
The total number of monuments is 31, this being a complete sam-
ple of all securely documented chambered monuments in
Pembrokeshire and the western fringe of Carmarthenshire. All
the certain sites identified by Barker in his recent catalogue (1992)
are included, and two other monuments, Morfa Bychan C and
Treswig, considered by him to be 'probable' sites only. These
monuments are all relatively small in size and simple in construc-
tion, with the exception of the two largest and most impressive
sites, Pentre Ifan and Garn Turne, which possess elaborate
entrance facades (Grimes 1936a: 123, 1948). Two unique and
unusual sites, Cerrig y Gof and Bedd yr Afanc (Grimes 1939a;
Lynch 1972: 81-2), the former with five rectangular cists arranged
in a circle in a cairn and the latter a 9 m.-long wedge-shaped
gallery construction, are probably late Neolithic in date.
Maximum chamber length varies between 1.7 and 4 m. The
chambers are usually rectangular or polygonal in form. The cap-
stone, where it survives, is undoubtedly the most visually
impressive architectural component of these monuments, and in
all cases was almost certainly not originally covered by mound or
cairn material. All the monuments with the exception of two or
three sites originally possessed only one capstone covering the
chamber, and capstone length provides a fairly reliable guide to
relative monument size. At least seven of the monuments origi-
nally possessed two small chambers. These were originally set in
mounds or cairns; but for most sites their ruinous state makes the
original shape and size impossible to determine by field survey
alone. In three cases there is evidence for the construction of a
rectangular cairn; and in a further nine cases the cairn appears to
have been originally circular or oval in form. Two cemeteries at
Carn Wen and Morfa Bychan, consisting respectively of three
and four monuments separated by distances of 70 m. or less, are
known. The other monuments are situated at distances ranging
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales            93


between 0.6 and 18 km. from their nearest neighbours (mean:
4.1 km.); but the majority of them are located within a few kilo-
metres of each other.
   While the architectural morphology of the monuments seems
to involve a stress on difference, their location in relation to topo-
graphic features of the landscape is highly structured and repeti-
tive. The relationship to the coastline, especially in relation to
bays, inlets and peninsulas, of many of the monuments is obvi-
ous, and must have been as important a factor in monument
placement as it was for settlements during the Mesolithic. The
mean distance from the nearest coastline is only 3.6 km., and 14 of
them are situated within 1 km. of the sea, three of which, includ-
ing the cemeteries at Carn Wen and Morfa Bychan, occur direct-
ly in cliff-top locations recalling the exact positions of many
Mesolithic locales.
    But this relationship to the coast is more complex than a casual
glance at the distribution map might imply. Only eight of the
monument locations were chosen so that standing by the monu-
ment it is possible to overlook the sea directly. From 14 sites (54
per cent) the nearest coastline to the monument is visible at vari-
ous distances away; but there are some striking anomalies. Four
monuments are located in such a position that a distant rather
than the nearest section of coastline is visible. In the case of the
monument at St Elvies, it is located only 300 m. from the nearest
coast, yet the sea is completely invisible. Such sites might be
described as being coastal, but with an inland visual field. This
placement of some of the monuments so that they are hidden
from the coastline nearest to them suggests that landscape fea-
tures other than the coast itself began to play an increasingly
important role for monument location during the Neolithic.
    One possibility is that the monuments might be located so as
to be intervisible with each other, rather than with features of the
natural landscape; but, despite the closeness of the location of
 many of the monuments, intervisibility between them is restricted
 to a few sites in the northern area of their distribution. Only two
 of the monuments are sited on the highest points in their imme-
 diate vicinity, with extensive views in all cardinal directions. All
 the others have restricted visibility in one or two directions, with
 the land rising up immediately beyond the monument, which
 may be sited on the midpoint of a slope, at the bottom of a slope,
 or on a relatively high point, with rock outcrops or the land
94                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


surface rising above it. The monuments, then, were clearly not
sited for maximum visibility in the landscape. They were only
meant to be seen, or approached, from certain directions.
    One notable feature of the peninsulas of south-west Wales is
the presence not only of dramatic cliffs but of inland outcrops of
igneous and other rocks. Fourteen of the site locations (54 per
cent) were chosen in a close or direct relationship to these. A fur-
ther four sites in the Nevern valley, I will argue, are intimately
related to one of the highest and most dramatic craggy outcrops
of the Preseli mountains, Carn Ingli, providing a central symbolic
focal point for this group of monuments.
    Just to the west of Fishguard harbour a north-south row of
three stone chambers is located on a high point with originally
(the view is now blocked by houses) sweeping vistas over to the
east, with Carn Ingli visible in the distance. Immediately to the
west of the chambers a rock outcrop juts out and rises above
them. These chambers are much ruined; but the capstones and
their long axes seem to be orientated so that they face west-east,
i.e. towards the harbour below and the rock outcrop above them.
This location is duplicated in the only other case in south-west
Wales where a row of burial chambers occurs - Morfa Bychan on
the south coast. Here there is a north-south row of four burial
chambers set high up on a sloping headland next to a long, low
and linear rock outcrop blocking all views to the west, and over-
looking a small bay to the east (Fig. 3. 9). The chambers here are
surrounded by oval or circular cairn structures. These four mon-
uments are situated on a slope rising from south to north, below
the outcrop to the west. As one moves up the slope from south to
north, the chambers get progressively closer to the outcrop itself,
 so that the northern chamber is actually built up against it. This
monument has an entrance which faces east towards the bay
below. In entering the monument from the east one would be
 approaching and 'entering' the rock outcrop behind it to the
west. Moving up the slope from south to north, the third monu-
 ment is situated directly below a natural stack of rock eroded
 from the main escarpment, known as the 'Druid's Altar' (Figs.
 3.10 and 3.11). This sequence of monuments, progressively situat-
 ed so as to be closer and closer to the rocks beyond in the course
 of upward movement, must have been one which was integrated
 and 'made sense of through persons moving closer to the rock as
 they moved from monument to monument. Such a sequence
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   95
96                                     A Phenomenology of Landscape



                                                  North




                                       Druid's Altar




                                       Steep slope to bay

             Rock outcrop




Figure 3.10. Plan of the Morfa Bychan cemetery.

would act so as to connect the monuments systematically to the land
as they became increasingly integrated with the parent rock itself.
   Built of the same rock as the outcrop itself, and linearly aligned
so as to run parallel to it, these monuments are completely invisi-
ble from only a short distance away. The rock outcrop itself is
clearly visible from Gilman point on the other side of the bay to
the east at a distance of 500 m., but not the monuments them-
selves. The rock outcrops thus simultaneously make the monu-
ments visible and invisible. The natural rocks, such prominent
features of the landscape, help to locate the monuments in space;
but the monuments themselves cannot be seen.
   Such a situation of monument visibility and invisibility in rela-
tion to rock outcrops is duplicated elsewhere in relation to both
coastal and inland monument sites. Two types of rock outcrops
were chosen by which to site monuments: (i) 'linear' and (ii) 'cir-
cular'. In the first case the monuments, as at Fishguard and Morfa
Bychan, are built alongside and against the outcrop, so that the
monument entrances in some cases resemble caves in the rock
outcrop itself (Fig. 3.12), recalling the caves and rock shelters
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   97
98   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           99


occupied during the Mesolithic on Caldey island. These rock
outcrops may be in any cardinal direction in relation to the mon-
ument, which can be situated to the west, east, south or north of
them; and in one case on St David's Head the burial chamber is
located between two low outcrops. In the second case the monu-
ments are constructed at a short distance of no more than a few
hundred metres away from a nearby circular outcrop to the west,
east or north (Fig. 3.13). Those monuments situated next to the
circular outcrops are usually at a greater distance from the coast.
    These rock outcrops are clearly dominant focal points in the
landscape in a way in which the monuments themselves are not
(Fig. 3.14). I have already pointed out that intervisibility is very
restricted, even for monuments located at short distances apart.
Those located in or near the outcrops are completely invisible
until one is next to them. By contrast, the outcrops by which they
are located dominate vistas for considerable distances. They are
far more visually impressive than the monuments themselves. I
will refer to such rock outcrops as natural, non-cultural, or non-
domesticated 'megaliths'. The outcrops key the monuments into
the landscape, drawing attention to their location and making
them special places. At a distance the outcrops indicate where to
look for or expect to find a monument. They both mark out mon-
ument locations and hide them from the eye. They are all in
places up to which one has to climb from surrounding lower
areas, suggesting their ritual liminality and removal from day-to-
day existence (Fig. 3.15).
    These rock outcrops would have served as important land-
marks and orientation points, as they do today. Paths of move-
ment might be expected to run between them and the
monuments placed by or near to them (Fig. 3.16). For example,
the monument at Longhouse, Carreg Samson (Fig. 3.17), is locat-
 ed roughly equidistant between two low circular rock outcrops,
with which it is intervisible, one 300 m. to the east and the other
 to the west, with the coast a short distance away to the north. It is
 not hard to suggest that these linearly related natural and cultur-
 al locales served to act together as symbolically important places
 on a path of movement along the coast.
    None of the Nevern group of monuments (Fig. 3. 6) in the east
 of the study area are immediately next to or built into rock out-
 crops, although the largest and most visually impressive of them,
 Pentre Ifan, is situated about 700 m. to the north-west of an
A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   101
102   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   103
104   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales           105

unusual row of four prominent circular outcrops (Fig. 3.18). It is
interesting to note that, while none of the Nevern monuments are
intervisible, they are all deliberately sited so as to command vis-
tas of the landscape feature that completely dominates the visual
field in this area, the high crag of Carn Ingli. The specific choice to
locate some of these structures only a few hundred metres away
from their present positions would make this impossible. The
largest and most impressive monument in the group, Pentre Ifan,
is located directly below Carn Ingli, which is 3.5 km. to the west.
There are indications that the original entrance to the burial
chamber at Pentre Ifan was on the eastern side (Barker 1992: 24),
in which case one's vistas would be completely dominated by
Carn Ingli while approaching and before entering the monument
chamber. The rock outcrop of Carn Ingli dips roughly along a
south to north axis, with the higher end at the south. The dip of
the capstone of Pentre Ifan is also south to north, and the ritually
important forecourt area is at the higher end. The long axis of the
cairn which originally surrounded the chamber (probably built
later) also runs from south to north (Fig. 3.19). Here important
architectural features of the monument appear to duplicate the
incline of the mountain outcrop. From the two northernmost
monuments in the group, Llech y Dribedd (Fig. 3.20) and
Trellyffaint, there are sweeping views across the Nevern valley to
Carn Ingli; but the closest coastline immediately to the north of
these monuments, only just over 1 km. to the north, is invisible.
Only glimpses of sea, the Fishguard bay area to the west, are vis-
ible in the distance. Neither monument is visible from the other.
The location of these two monuments seems to have been delib-
erately chosen with reference to Carn Ingli rather than to the
coast, which is only about 1 km. to their north. The relationship of
 the monuments to Carn Ingli in the Nevern valley seems to be a
 generalized one, in so far as they are obviously preferentially
 sited in such a manner that it should be visible from them; and
 this contrasts with those other cases where monuments are very
 close to or actually built up against a prominent rock outcrop.
    There are only a few monuments whose placement cannot be
 accounted for in relation to coastal cliffs, crags or rock outcrops;
 and in these cases the symbolic geography influencing location
 seems to be highly individualized. Location on natural paths and
 trackways through the landscape appears to be an important fac-
 tor here, as might be expected. For example, the monument at
106   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales   107
108   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Affinity with the Coast: Places and Monuments, SW Wales         109

Mountain is on a saddle of a pass through the Preseli mountains.
Gwal y Filiast (Fig. 3.21) is located on a forested slope falling
steeply down to the river Taf. Isolated from other monuments
and the furthest from the coast (17 km. away), it is situated
towards the top of the steep slope running down to the river. The
large capstone dips from west to east down towards the river,
and the chamber entrance also faces east down the slope. Why
this location on the river course rather than any other? Standing
at the site, the roar of the water below may be heard. Just at the
point where the monument is located the river descends with
white water down a series of rapids. Upstream and downstream
the water is calm. I want to suggest that the monument is located
precisely here because of the presence of the rapids below. It is
interesting to note in this connection the importance of rapids in
rivers in many systems of mythological thought as constituting
doors or openings to the underworld.

Conclusion
The finds from excavations of the megaliths of south-west Wales
are meagre, even from recent and well-excavated examples
(Grimes 1948; Lynch 1975; Barker 1992: 19-21). The acid soils
have destroyed all but the remains of cremated human bones,
which have been recovered from the chambers of four monu-
ments. The only other finds are a few flint flakes and sherds of
between one to three early to middle Neolithic vessels. This does
not exactly suggest that the monuments were major foci for arte-
fact deposition. The generally small size of the monument cham-
bers indicates that these were very possibly places for the
deposition of a few dedicatory ancestral remains, and were not
used for successive interment. Their primary purpose, in fact,
seems to have been neither for burial nor deposition. It is difficult
to make out a case that they acted as central territorial markers.
There is no evidence to suggest that they were marking the cen-
tres of areas of land with a high arable component. They rather
seem to have acted primarily as symbolic reference and ritually
important ceremonial meeting-points on paths of movement,
drawing attention to the relationship between local groups and
the landscape - itself already a constructed symbolic form of
named places, pathways and significant locales from the
Mesolithic onwards. I argue in Chapter 6 that the nature of this
relationship with the landscape was essentially transformative.
110   A   Phenomenology   of   Landscape
