Chapter 4
Escarpments and Spurs: Places and
Monuments in the Black Mountains

Introduction
The Black Mountains constitute an upland area of Old Red
Sandstone dividing the ancient rocks of mid-Wales from areas of
Carboniferous limestone and Millstone Grit to the south. To the
north, west and south they rise up to around 700 m. in a series of
impressively steep, well-defined escarpments, with spurs jutting
into the flood plains through which flow the major rivers, the Usk
and the Wye. To the south-east they are irregularly split up by a
series of steep-sided valleys cut down by roughly parallel stream
systems. A series of chambered long cairns are found in a rough
semicircle along the Usk and Wye valleys, the only inland mega-
lithic monuments known in Wales. For south-east Wales as a
whole, including the Glamorgan lowlands and uplands, the
Brecon Beacons and the Black Mountains area, a series of earlier
and later Mesolithic sites have also been documented (Savory
1961; Jacobi 1980: 191 ff.; Berridge 1980; Stanton 1984; Britnell
1984: 136-8; Smith and Cloutman 1988; Wymer 1977). The main
concentration of these sites occurs at the head of the Rhondda
valleys, and relatively few locales are yet known from central
areas of the Brecon Beacons or Black Mountains (Figs. 4.1 and
4.2). This is almost certainly attributable to lack of field survey.
The majority of the sites in the Glamorgan uplands were located
by field-walking ploughed areas and tracks created by the
Forestry Commission from the 1960s onwards.


Mesolithic Locales
On the basis of visits to fifteen locales, from which there are major
flint scatters, the following general classes of places may be dis-
tinguished:

                                                                 111
112                                      A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 4.1. The distribution of Mesolithic locales in south-east Wales. For
inset see Fig. 4.2. Places mentioned in the text:
1. Ogmore                               5. Cefn Hill
2. Pant Sychbant                        6. Dorstone
3. Waun-Fingen-Felen                    7. Craig y Llyn
4. Gwernvale                            8. Mynydd Blaenrhondda.




Figure 4.2. Mesolithic locales at the head of the Rhondda valleys.
                                            Source: Stanton 1984: Fig. 12b.
                     By kind permission of the University of Wales Press
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments             113

    1. Places located in enclosed upland locations around what are
now peat bogs but may have been small lakes during the
Mesolithic. These occur at the head of small streams which drop
down into a major river valley, providing a natural axis for move-
ment through the landscape. Pant Sychbant (Fig. 4.3) and Waun-
Fingen-Felen are examples of this type of location. At least twelve
flint scatters with earlier and later Mesolithic material have been
recovered from the former lake margins at Waun-Fingen-Felen,
on the north-east side (Barton, pers. comm.). Just to the south of
these flint scatters is a spectacular swallow-hole, surrounded by
jagged rocks into which a stream draining the bog disappears.
    2. Places located at the bottom of major river valleys on river
terraces. There were possibly many such locations, now buried in
alluvial deposits. The early and late Mesolithic flint scatter found
underneath the chambered long cairn at Gwernvale represents
such a location.
    3. Places on flat ridge tops by major river valleys, such as Cefn
Hill and Dorstone Hill directly overlooking the Golden valley.
    4. Places located immediately above dramatic escarpment
edges commanding panoramic vistas over the heads of valleys
and across passes in the mountains. The extensive flint scatters at
Craig y Llyn and Mynydd Blaenrhonnda in the Glamorgan
uplands are representative of such locations (Figs. 4. 4 and 4. 5).
    Common features of most of these Mesolithic locales are their
repeated use from the earlier to the later Mesolithic, a situation
chosen to command extensive views in two or more cardinal
directions across river valleys, and their positioning on natural
routes, trackways or paths through the landscape that would
have been followed both by people and migrating animals. Craig
y Llyn, for example, is on the junction of natural trackways link-
ing the Glamorgan uplands with those of south Brecknock
 (Savory 1961: 164). The same general locations appear to have
been returned to repeatedly during the earlier and later
 Mesolithic. While the majority of the microliths from the flint
 scatters are later Mesolithic in date there is a consistent represen-
 tation of earlier Mesolithic forms at sites such as Cefn Hill and
 Waun-Fingen-Felen (Jacobi 1980: 193; Berridge 1980) and Cwm y
 Fforch in the Glamorgan uplands at the head of the Rhondda val-
 leys (Stanton 1984: 64). At Gwernvale a chambered cairn overlay
 pre-cairn Neolithic and earlier and later Mesolithic occupation
 scatters. Half of these Mesolithic sites are located directly below
114   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   115
116   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments              117

rock outcrops or on the tops of sheer escarpment edges -
effectively inland versions of the cliff-tops of the Pembrokeshire
coast.
    Jacobi and Stanton have proposed for south-east Wales as a
whole a model of seasonal movement from coastal locations
occupied during the winter to upland exploitation camps in the
summer similar to that postulated for the Pennines (Mellars
1976), with groups following the upwards migrations of red deer.
It is pertinent in this respect to note that the bulk of the flint and
chert material recovered from Craig y Llyn in the Glamorgan
uplands may be of coastal origin (Jacobi 1980:195). Recent envi-
ronmental evidence suggests perhaps the deliberate burning of
upland areas to stimulate browse (Cloutman 1983; Smith and
Cloutman 1988).

Flint Scatters and Occupational Continuity
Neolithic surface find material is frequently found in the same
localities as the Mesolithic flint scatters. There is no positive evi-
dence here of any direct continuity between the Mesolithic and
Neolithic; but the choice of precisely the same location for the
construction of the Gwernvale chambered monument as had
been occupied repeatedly during the Mesolithic suggests strong-
ly something more than mere chance, as Saville has pointed out
(1990: 262). One possibility here is that Mesolithic settlement
activity continued until the onset of Neolithic settlement beneath
the place where the long cairn was later built. The valleys of the
Usk and the Wye have long provided routes into and from mid-
Wales, providing links with the coastal lowlands of Glamorgan
and the Severn and forming a bridge between lowland and high-
land areas. The site of Gwernvale and its use was embedded in
social memory. The fact that this area had been previously settled
and cleared of woodland and obstacles, marked by the deposi-
tion of cultural debris, a focus for tracks and pathways, suggests
a strong symbolic element to the choice of the location, one that
could ritually link past and present.
   To give some other examples: at Cefn Glas Mesolithic flint and
chert artefacts were found just to the south of a Neolithic hut site
(Stanton 1984: 59). At Waun-Fingen-Felen activity appears to
have continued into the Neolithic, with a charcoal layer at the
base of the blanket peat at one site giving a date of 4370-80 BP
118                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


(Caseldine 1990: 36). Mixed Mesolithic and Neolithic flint assem-
blages were recovered from Pant Sychbant and Craig y Llyn in
the Black Mountains and the Glamorgan uplands respectively
(Savory 1961; Burke 1966; Webley 1976: 31). At the coastal site of
Ogmore late Mesolithic material is mixed with Neolithic occupa-
tion debris (Webley 1969: 289; Jacobi 1980). Microliths are record-
ed from the immediate vicinity of Arthur's Stone chambered
monument. The repeated utilization of these specific locales,
when considered together with a similar overall distribution of
chambered monuments and Mesolithic sites in south-east Wales,
repeating the pattern already noted for Pembrokeshire, prompts
one to infer long-term regularities linking peoples and places. It
is tempting to suggest in the light of these observations that
Gwernvale may not be an isolated instance, and that many other
chambered cairns may be covering locales already utilized dur-
ing the Mesolithic and embedded in social memory.

Chambered Cairns and the Landscape
The megalithic monuments of the Black Mountains are the only
substantial inland group in Wales. At present the location of four-
teen monuments is known, and there may originally have been
one or two additional sites which have now been totally
destroyed (Grimes 1936b; Corcoran 1969: 21-4; Britnell and
Savory 1984: 3-9). All these monuments appear to be stone-built
long cairns of 'Cotswold-Severn' type. There is considerable
diversity in monument morphology. Seven are long mounds
with terminal and/or lateral chambers. A few appear to possess
additional chambers sealed within the mound, but in the absence
of detailed investigation the precise position and nature of the
chambers is uncertain in the majority of cases. One site, Arthur's
Stone, differs from the rest in that a single elongated polygonal
chamber with an anteroom set in an oval mound is approached
by an acutely angled passage. All the other cairns possess or
would have possessed between two and four or more chambers.
Four well-excavated and documented monuments are trape-
zoidal horned cairns with false portal entrances and forecourts
(Grimes 1939b; Savory 1956; Britnell and Savory 1984). Cairn
length varies greatly from c.15 m. to c.60m. The lateral chambers
were normally provided with a short passage leading from the
edge of the cairn revetment walls. In some cases chambers are
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments               119


paired on opposite sides of the cairn (Fig. 4. 6). For some monu-
ments the chamber nearest to the forecourt was the most massive,
suggesting a tapering away of cairn height, which at Pen-y-
Wyrlod was at least 3 m. at the portal end (Britnell 1991: 14).
Evidence from three excavations suggests that the outer revet-
ment walls of the cairn/eontinued uninterrupted across the ends
of the chamber passages (Britnell and Savory 1984: 147), at least
in their lower courses. It seems likely that, except during brief
periods when access to them was required, the chambers would
have been completely concealed in the cairn. At Gwernvale
Britnell estimates that lateral chambers 2 and 3 were entered up
to at least three times, and chamber 1 at least once, by means of
the removal of the revetment wall concealing them (ibid.: 148).
The chambers, then, and their entrances were clearly not intended
to have a visual impact in contrast with the orientational long
axis of the cairn itself (see below).
   The cairns of the Black Mountains were built on light Old Red
Sandstone glacial drift deposits, with the exception of Gwernvale




Figure 4.6. Groundplans of selected 'Cotswold-Severn' long cairns in the
Black Mountains (not to scale). 1. Ty Isaf; 2: Pipton; 3: Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth; 4: Gwernvale; 5. Reconstruction diagram of Gwernvale.
120                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


and Garn Coch, which are situated on alluvial gravels and sands
(Webley 1959: 291). Heavy clay soils were avoided, and the prin-
cipal vegetation surrounding the sites was relatively open dry
climax oak forests, with local development of heathlands on the
uplands as indicated from pollen analysis from the ancient soil
surface beneath the Mynydd Troed cairn (Crampton and Webley
1966). Both Webley (1976) and Savory (1980) have called into
question whether there ever was any cultivation in an upland
area much better suited to grazing such as the Black Mountains in
Wales. Faunal evidence from the Black Mountains is exclusively
derived from excavations at the monuments. The presence of the
bones of cattle, deer, pig and sheep from the monument cham-
bers and forecourt areas suggests the ritual importance of feast-
ing cycles at the monuments, which were possibly far removed
from Neolithic settlement areas.
   Webley has argued that the soils, although free-draining, were
unsuited to cultivation with a Neolithic technology, and suggest-
ed a significant pastoral element in the economy based on cattle
and sheep, with perhaps longer- and shorter-distance seasonal
transhumance patterns developing between the highland and
lowland areas of southern Wales, and more locally between the
river valleys and upland areas within the Black Mountains them-
selves. The cairns are, according to Webley (1976: 30), located
within areas that would have been utilized as summer pastures
only, with winter settlement occupying the Usk valley and the
lowlands of the Welsh coast. The monuments located along the
river valleys effectively become markers along pathways from
the lowlands to the uplands.
   It does not seem necessary to invoke a fully-fledged pastoral
economy; but the suggestion that there was a substantial degree
of population mobility during the earlier Neolithic, seasonally
moving between different landscapes, is pertinent. The overall
pattern of social movement, in other words, repeats that already
established during the Mesolithic, involving winter-summer,
lowland to upland movements. The significant difference would
appear to be the substitution of some domesticates, primarily
cattle and sheep or goat, for total reliance on wild food resources.
   The monuments extend in an arc around the Black Mountains.
In the north and west they are located along the valley of the Wye
and its tributaries, the Dore and the Llynfi; in the south, along the
valley of the Usk and one major tributary, the Rhiangoll. No sites
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments                      121


have been documented to the east of the Black Mountains
(Fig. 4.7). The monuments are thus located along the major rivers,
where the escarpment edge is most regular and clearly defined.
From all the monuments except one vistas are dominated by the
Black Mountains rising up in the distance. The major rivers or
their tributaries are visible from all the sites. From seven of the
fourteen monuments the irregular outlines of the Brecon Beacons
to the south are also visible in the near or far distance.
   The locations of the monuments can be divided into three cat-
egories: (i) those situated in a lowland location along the river
valleys on or near to river terraces above the flood plain; (ii^ in
intermediate situations above the river valleys, commanding
extensive views but at a relatively low height; and (iii) sites situ-
ated high up on ridges and saddles and on undulating terrain
below the Black Mountains (Table 4.1). Roughly 50 per cent of the

Table 4.1. Altitudes, orientation and length of the long cairns in the Black
Mountains Group. Type refers to altitude - low (L), intermediate (I) and
                 high (H). Map numbers refer to Fig. 4.7.

Name                    Map     Height     Type         Ort.      Length
Cross Lodge Farm          1       180       I       W-E              18
Arthur's Stone            2       280       H       NNW-SSE          21
Court Farm, Clyro         3        90       L       NE-SW            32
Pen-yr-Wyrlod,
Llanigon                  4       251       H        ENE-WSW         15
Little Lodge              5       137       I        N-S             58
Pipton                    6       145       L        NE-SW           37
Ffostyll North            7       312       H        E-W             40
Ffostyll South            8       312       H        NE-SW           36
Ty Isaf                   9       312       H        N-S             35
Mynydd Troed             10       358       H        NNE-SSW         28
Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth                 11       260       H        NNW-ESE         60
Ty Illtyd                 12      215       I        N-S             22
Gwernvale                 13       79       L        NW-SE           45
Garn Coch                 14       19       L        N-S?            19
122                                 A Phenomenology of Landscape




Figure 4.7. The distribution of long cairns in the Black Mountains.
Monument names are given in Table 1. Land over 500 m. hatched.
Relief features mentioned in the text: MT: Mynydd Troed; YD: Y Das;
LHK: Lord Hereford's Knob; H.B. Hay Bluff; TM: Table Mountain; HH:
Hatterall Hill; ML: Mynydd Llangorse; YG: Y Grib.
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments            123

monuments are located in the first or second categories and 50
per cent in the third.
   Two of the monuments at Ffostyll are situated only about
50 m. apart, the others are situated at a distance of between
2.0 km. and 5.6 km. from their nearest neighbours (mean distance
2.6 km.), thus displaying some considerable regularity in their
spacing. Second nearest-neighbour distances range between 2
and 12 km. (mean distance 6 km.). Their location appears to be
strongly related to not only the major river valleys but also tribu-
tary streams, in such a way that hypothetical 'territorial' demar-
cation can be related to the flows of river courses (see Fig. 4.7).
One of the monuments, Ty Illtyd, is comparatively isolated; the
others occur in what may be associated pairs, located in relation
to specific landscape features on opposite sides of the major
rivers, apart from a small cluster of five monuments in the centre
of the distribution.


Orientation and Ritual Axis

The orientations of the long cairns display a complete lack of
regularity. All the eight major orientational axes of the compass
are represented between the two poles, north to south and west
to east. A maximum number of 3-4 monuments share the same
orientational axis for the cairn. Cairn orientation differs for all
first nearest-neighbours, while only three second nearest-neigh-
bours share the same orientational axis. The most dramatic case
of this is the two cairns at Ffostyll situated next to each other,
where the northern cairn is orientated W-E and the southern one
is almost diametrically opposed, NE-SW. Well-excavated or pre-
served examples of these cairns do show some regularity in the
placement of the broad forecourt area. In the two cases where the
cairn is orientated NW-SE the broad end faces SE. For the two
out of three documented cases of the cairn running NE-SW the
forecourt area faces NE. So, while the orientational axes of the
cairns display a complete lack of regularity, there appears to be
some uniformity in the siting of the forecourt area in the cases of
those cairns sharing the same orientational axis, irrespective of
their location in the landscape.
    When looked at in the abstract the lack of regularity in the
orientation of the cairn axes would seem to suggest that the
124                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


cairns were orientated at random, that there are no principles
regarding their precise directional siting. However, when we
begin to consider the relationship between the long axes of the
cairns and dominant landscape features an entirely different pic-
ture emerges. Two different principles relating to cairn axis ori-
entation may be distinguished:
(i) Cairns orientated with their axes running parallel with the
major rivers or their tributaries (five sites); and
(ii) Cairns with their axes orientated towards prominent spurs on
the Black Mountains (nine sites).
In the first group the long cairn axis appears to be clearly related
to the orientation of the rivers, with the long axis in each case
broadly duplicating that of the river valley. These cairns are, as
might be expected, all located at low or intermediate heights
above the river flood plain (Table 4.1). If one is standing on or at
the terminal ends of these cairns one's eye is drawn along the
river course, up and down the valley (Fig. 4. 8). The cairn's orien-
tation clearly duplicates that of the river valley. As the river val-
leys change direction so do the cairn orientations. The only
exception to this is the comparatively isolated site of Ty Illtyd,
whose cairn axis opposes valley orientation. This site is the only
one that could be argued to be symbolically more closely related
to the Brecon Beacons than the Black Mountains, and its isolation
from the other monuments has already been noted.
   In the second group, consisting of cairns in high locations,
with one possible exception, for which precise cairn orientation is
unknown (Garn Coch), but which is sited within clear view of the
spectacular platform of Table Mountain (Fig. 4. 9), the long axis
appears to be intimately directionally related to particularly
prominent points on the escarpment edges of the Black
Mountains-spurs or terminal points (Table 4. 2; Figs. 4. 10-4. 12).
Only two of the cairns, Ty Isaf and Mynydd Troed, have both
ends of their axes orientated so as to face, or point towards,
prominent mountain spurs. One terminal axis of the other cairns
faces undulating terrain that either rises up behind the end of the
cairn (five cases), thus restricting visibility to a few hundred
metres or less, or slopes gently away below the cairn (two cases).
The cairns are, in most cases, situated at a distance of between
1 and 6 km. from the spurs to which they are orientated, thus
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   125
126   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments                  127

Table 4.2. The directional orientation of the terminal ends of the
Black Mountain long cairns in relation to topographically dominant land-
scape features (spurs and terminal ends of mountain escarpments).
                            See also Fig. 4.7.

Name              Map      End     Points to    End       Points to
Arthur's Stone      2     NNW       -           SSE    Hatterall Hill
Pen-yr-Wyrlod,
Llanigon            4     wsw       _           ESE    Cussop Hill
Little Lodge        5     N         -           S      Y Das
Ffostyll North      7     w         -           E      Lord Hereford's
                                                       Knob
Ffostyll South      8     NE        -           SW     Mynydd Troed
Ty Isaf             9     N         Y Grib      s      Mynydd Troed
Mynydd Troed       10     NNE       Mynydd      ssw    Mynydd
                                    Troed              Llangorse
Pen-y-Wyrlod,
Talgarth           11     NW        _           SE     Mynydd Troed
Garn Coch          14     N?        Table
                                    Mountain?


maximizing the angle of view. In only one case (Mynydd Troed)
is the cairn situated directly below the spur, so that one must tilt
the head to look up at it (Figs. 4.13 and 4.14).
   The cairns on higher ground, then, located away from the
main river valleys, connect up with prominent topographic fea-
tures of the landscape in relation to at least one terminal axis.
Despite the fact that they point towards these landscape features,
the actual places chosen for cairn location were not themselves
particularly visibly dominant high points in the landscape. Only
Arthur's Stone, set on a ridge top, commands panoramic views in
all directions. Some of the cairns were deliberately sited so as not
to be intervisible.
    Five monuments in the centre of the distribution of the Black
Mountains Group taken as a whole are intervisible, and two
others at the south-eastern terminal end (Fig. 4.15). With the
exception of Ffostyll north and south, which stand next to each
other, intervisibility is restricted between pairs of monuments.
128   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   129
130
      A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   131
132   A Phenomenology of Landscape
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments              133




Figure 4.15. Patterns of intervisibility between the long cairns in the
Black Mountains.
134                                   A Phenomenology of Landscape


Clear evidence of siting to prevent intervisibility can be seen in
the locations of Court Farm Clyro and Pen-yr-Wyrlod, Llanigon
(Fig. 4.15: Nos. 3 and 4). These cairns are situated 3 km. apart on
opposite sides of the Wye river. The two sites would have been
intervisible had the latter been sited only a few hundred metres
to the east of its present location. The view between the monu-
ments is blocked by a spur immediately to the north-west of Pen-
yr-Wyrlod, Llanigon jutting out into the Wye valley. The location
of the monument seems to have been chosen with precisely this
in mind, as were those of others.
    The location of the monuments at Ffostyll (see Figs. 4.7 and
4.15: Nos. 7 and 8) in relation to other sites is of particular inter-
est, since this is the only pair of monuments to occur. It is of great
interest to note that they are situated exactly in the middle of the
Black Mountains Group. Although relatively close to the Pipton
and Little Lodge cairns, they are only intervisible with Pen-y-
Wyrlod, Talgarth, situated farther away to the south-west. The
southern monument has one long axis orientated towards
Mynydd Troed (Fig. 4.16), towards which the south-east end of
the Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth cairn also faces. The eastern axis of
the northern monument faces a prominent spur of the Black
Mountains known as Lord Hereford's Knob. The two monu-
ments at Ffostyll are located adjacent to another spur, Y Das,
where the line of direction of the escarpment edge of the Black
Mountains changes from running in a north-easterly to a south-
westerly direction. This change in the angle of direction of the
escarpment edge is particularly marked when viewed from the
 cairn location, but appears less accentuated when looking at a
topographic map. The land surface rises gently up to the north
 and west of the Ffostyll cairns, blocking intervisibility with the
 Pipton and Little Lodge cairns. However, the southern end of the
 latter is orientated so as to also face, or point, towards Y Das
 (Fig. 4.10). A common focal point, in this case, connects together
 these two monuments, which are not themselves intervisible.
    Taking together evidence for monument intervisibility and
 relationships between monuments and dominant focal points in
 the landscape to which the cairns are orientated, the Ffostyll
 cairns, Pen-y-Wyrlod, Pipton and Little Lodge can be argued to
 form a coherent interconnected sub-group of monuments,
 including highland and intermediate, spur-orientated and valley-
 orientated locations. The rest of the Black Mountains Group of
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   135
136                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


monuments form pairs, each of which includes one monument
with its cairn orientated along a river valley and the other with a
spur orientation (see Fig. 4.7). Thus within each of the five groups
monuments align one's vision both along the valleys and
towards important dominant focal points in the Black Mountains.
The orientation of the mound axes directed and focused attention
to the two features of the landscape of essential importance and
significance - the Black Mountains and the major valleys running
around them. The axes of the long cairns either duplicate those of
the natural topography, in the case of those in lowland situations
following the orientations of the river valleys, or point towards
striking focal points of sacred significance. That these points
would have been known and sedimented in social memory from
the Mesolithic onwards, and might be associated with ancestral
powers, seems very likely.
   From 7 (50 per cent) of the cairns, including all those centrally
located, the prominent elongated mountain of Mynydd Troed is
clearly visible. Two cairns, Ty Isaf and that named after the
mountain, flank it, and the largest and most impressive monu-
ment in the Black Mountains group, Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth, is
located just to the south of it, 1.5 km. away. The long axis of Pen-
y-Wyrlod is orientated towards Mynydd Troed, and its high fore-
court end is closest to the mountain. It is particularly fascinating
to note the similarity in visual form between Mynydd Troed and
the original shapes of the long cairns (Fig. 4.17). Could this be
why the largest monument in the Black Mountains is built just
beneath it, and why it is visible from so many of the monuments
clustering in this area?


Looking Out and Going In: Burials, Chambers and Topography

Burial deposits in the Black Mountains cairns have been relatively
well preserved. They exhibit features typical for the Neolithic of
southern Britain - the differential selection and arrangement of
human bones in the chambers, exploiting basic body symmetries
such as right and left and upper and lower body parts (Shanks
and Tilley 1982; Thomas 1991: Chapter 6). In the Pipton cairn a
deposit of bones was discovered under the floor slabs of the
south transept in Chamber I, consisting of the crushed skull
bones of a juvenile with some added fragments of long bones,
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   137
138                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


together with hazel-nut shell fragments and an unworked flint
flake. In the chamber entrance there were four other discrete
deposits lodged against the sidestones, consisting of a lower-jaw
bone, part of a humerus and part of a pelvis and a collection of
long bones. Chamber II had seven piles of bones placed against
the walls and a further deposit underneath the chamber floor.
Lower limb bones are more frequent than upper, and left bones
outnumber right in a ratio of roughly 3:1 (Savory 1956: 21-2, 26;
West 1956: 47). Chamber I at Ty Isaf contained the remains of at
least 17 individuals, with groups of bones positioned along the
side slabs and others stuffed into crevices (Grimes 1939b: 126).
Smaller quantities of disarticulated remains were discovered in
Chambers II and III. The lateral chambers NE II and NE III at Pen-
y-Wyrlod, Talgarth contained the disarticulated remains of,
respectively, six and seven individuals. Fragments of burnt bone
and part of a human temporal bone were also recovered from the
socket of a portal orthostat. A child burial in a cist in one of the
horns of the monument indicates its secondary use after the mon-
ument had been closed and blocked off (Britnell and Savory 1984:
19-23; Luff et al. 1984: 36-7).
    Apart from the human burial deposits finds from the monu-
ments are meagre. From Pipton the only artefacts recovered were
the flint flake from the burial deposit in Chamber I and a sherd of
Neolithic pottery from beneath the cairn (Savory 1956:14-15). Ty
Isaf yielded a little more material: two leaf-shaped arrowheads
and an axe, a bone pin and sherds from a single bowl in Chamber
I, fragments of seven bowls and a sandstone pendant from
Chamber II and further Neolithic potsherds from Chamber III
 (Grimes 1939b: 126 ff.) From Pen-y-Wyrlod, Talgarth only three
 flint artefacts were recovered, plus part of a bone flute made from
 a sheep's tibia from Chamber NE III and a few pot fragments,
 most of which were recovered in the vicinity of Chamber NE III.
 Of the large number of Neolithic finds recovered from
Gwernvale only a few are contemporary with the use of the
 monument, the rest dating to pre-cairn-construction occupation
 levels. Finds from the chambers are restricted to fragments of
 between four and five pots.
     Ground plans and the locations of internal monument cham-
 bers and passages from excavations or surface survey are known
 in more or less detail for a number of sites (Table 4.3). Those
 chambers orientated along the cairn axis obviously share the
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   139
140                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


same focal view in the landscape, and it is these that are orientat-
ed towards spurs. In other cases the middles of escarpment edges
are visible just before entering the chamber. This contrasts with
landscape orientation on leaving the chamber. A majority face
undulating terrain, others the middle of escarpments. In only one
case there is an obvious alignment with an escarpment spur, and
this is at Arthur's Stone. Here the passage leading to the chamber
bends round at an angle, so that its mouth faces Hay Bluff
(Fig. 4.18). This site contrasts with the other Black Mountains
monuments in the form and nature of the chamber and passage.
While at the other monuments there are good grounds for believ-
ing that the internal chambers were sealed and hidden within the
cairn, and the entrances to the passages to the lateral chambers
only periodically open and visible, Arthur's Stone more probably
represents a monument in which the passage may not have been
blocked and concealed. Its orientation to a mountain spur as
opposed to the lack of orientation of the entrances of the lateral
chambers in the other long cairns to visually dominant landscape
features then becomes explicable. For the other monuments the
orientation of the long axis of the cairn in relation to dramatic
landscape features appears to be of great importance, and the
chamber orientation of little or secondary significance in this
respect. However, what one would see on entering the chamber,
largely the middle sections of escarpment edges, appears more
crucial than the rather mundane view on exiting facing away
from the mountains. But this could also be explained in another
manner. Entering the chambers entails removal to a sacred ritual
space, which either shares the cairn axis orientation to dominant
focal points in the landscape - spurs - or duplicates the orienta-
tion of the escarpment edge, thus connecting the chambers with
the overall spatial orientation of the mountains themselves. This
is particularly important for those cairns whose long axes are
aligned along valleys for which we have evidence for chamber
orientation (Pipton; Gwernvale). Leaving the chamber entails a
return to the domain of everyday life, where an individual would
see undulating woodland or pasture. The placement of the bones
of the ancestral dead in the chambers in effect sedimented them
into the land, and with reference to the orientational axes of the
chambers and passages. In this manner the biographies of indi-
viduals became fixed in relation to particular places and axes of
symbolic significance.
Escarpments and Spurs: The Black Mountains Monuments   141
142                                  A Phenomenology of Landscape


Conclusion

These monuments were clearly not major sites for the deposition
of artefacts, as is the case for those in south-west Wales. The
successive deposition and subsequent rearrangement of ances-
tral remains in the chamber was of great significance. The nature
of the burial deposits was not purely dedicatory, as may have
been the case in the Pembrokeshire monuments. A significant
presence of domestic animal bones, sheep, pig and cattle, in the
chambers and forecourt areas suggests the use of the monuments
in feasting cycles. By contrast with many of the monuments in
south-west Wales those of the Black Mountains are monumental,
and, in some cases, quite massive constructions, designed to
make an indelible and permanent impact on the landscape; and
the orientation of the long axis was of the utmost significance. In
the Black Mountains there was a will to make the monument vis-
ible that is not manifested in the same form in many of the monu-
ments in south-west Wales. There the landscape (the rock
outcrops) makes the monument visible. In the Black Mountains
the reverse seems to be happening: the monuments draw out and
emphasize important features of the landscape: the axes of the
river valleys and prominent spurs, paths of movement and
prominent landmarks whose ancestral significance had already
been established during the Mesolithic, and whose meanings
were now being re-worked through the process of monument
construction, a point further discussed in Chapter 6.
