The Rise of Civilization 


. I 
This is a short, brilliant, lucid study of the origin and 
progress of man from earliest recorded history to 
modern times. Although the book's principal sphere 
is archaeology and .-.nthropology, it touches on all as- 
pects of the socia! sciences, pbHosophy, psychology 
and history. 
This provocative appraisal of man's development 
starts over 340,000 years ago, when man's ability to 
make a fire and fashion rude stone tools helped him 
survive among the wild beasts. It traces the devel- 
opment of man as a food producer, the emergence of 
cities and states, the rise of foreign trade and the 
urban revolution. Professor Childe discusses the nine- 
teen basic discoveries and applications of science: 
artificial irrigation, the plow, harnessing of animal 
power, sailing boats, wheeled vehicles, orchard hus- 
bandry, fermentation, production and use of copper, 
bricks, the arch, glazing, the seal, a solar calendar, 
writing, numeral notation, bronze, smelting iron, 
the alphabet, and aqueducts for urban water supply. 
Throughout this brilliant analysis, the author shows 
how man developed traditions which both aided and 
inhibited him in turn, such as the simultaneous growth 
of science and superstition. 
Here is a refreshing rediscovery of the long path 
man has come and the amazing strides he has made 
in a few short centuries. This unique book is now 
available for the first time in this country. 




Other MENTOR Books of Special Interest 


Man: His First Million Years by Ashley Montagu 
A vivid, lively account of the origin of man and 
the development of his races, cultures, customs and 
beliefs. (#MD239-50
) 


Patterns of Culture by Ruth Benedict 
A famous anthropologist analyzes our social struc- 
ture in relation to primitive cultures. 
(#MD89-50
) 


The Meaning of Evolution (revised, abridged) 
by George Gaylord Simpson 
Outlines the whole course of life on earth and its 
ethical implications for mankind. (#MD66-50
) 


Heredity, Race and Society (revised) 
by L. C. Dunn and T h. Dobzhansky 
Group differences, how they arise, the influences of 
heredity and environment. (#MD74-50
) 


To OUR READERS: We welcome your comments 
about any SIGNET, SIGNET KEY, or MENTOR Book. 
If your dealer does not have the books you want, 
you may order them by mail, enclosing the list price 
plus 5
 a copy to cover mailing. Send for our free 
catalog. The New American Library of World Litera- 
ture, Ine., 501 Madison Avenue, New York 22, N. Y. 




Man Makes Himself 
by 
V. Gordon Childe 
.1"0....... 
 
A MENTOR BOOK 
Published by THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY 

COPYRIGHT, 1951, BY THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY 
OF WORLD LITERATURE, INC. 
Published as a MENTOR BOOK 
By Arrangement with The Rationalist Press Association, 
Limited 
Originally pubJished in England in 1936, 
slightly revised in 1941 and 1951. 
FIRST PRINTING, AUGUST, 1951 
SECOND PRINTING, OCTOBER, 1952 
THIRD PRINTING, AUGUST, 1953 
FOURTH PRINTING, NOVEMBER, 1955 
FIFTH PRINTING, MARCH, 1957 
SIXTH PRINTING, DECEMBER, 1958 
MENTOR BOOKS are published by 
The New American Library of World Literature, Inc. 
501 Madison Avenue, New York 22, New York 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

Preface 


THIS book is not intended to be a manual of 
archaeology, still less of the history of science. 
It is meant to be readable to those who are 
not concerned with the detailed problems about 
which specialists argue heatedly. It must there- 
fore ignore such problems, and avoid, more- 
over, the technical terms and outlandish names 
that make textbooks on prehistory (including 
my own) scientific, but hard to follow. But to 
simplify the argument and the vocabulary I have 
had to sacrifice accuracy. Almost every state- 
ment in prehistory should be qualified by the 
phrase: "On the evidence available today the 
balance of probability favors the view that." 
The reader is hereby requested to insert this or 
some similar reservation in most of my state- 
ments. Not all my assertions would be generally 
accepted even with that qualification; but it has 
been impossible to cumber the text with detailed 
arguments irrelevant to the main thesis. I still 
contend that the facts are stated accurately 
enough for the purposes of this book, and that 
acceptable amendments would not affect the 
argument in any way. And finally I confess 
that, while Chapters IV to VII are based on 
first-hand study of the original objects, and re- 
ports, Chapter VIII uses exclusively translations 
and commentaries by competent authorities 
cited in the notes. 




Contents 


CHAPTER PAGE 
Preface v 
I. Human and Natural History 9 
II. Organic Evolution and Cultural 
Progress 20 
III. Time Scales J7 
IV. Food Gatherers 45 
v. The Neolithic Revolution 59 
VI. Prelude to the Second Revolution 87 
VII. The Urban Revolution 114 
VIII. The Revolution in Human 
Knowledge 143 
IX. The Acceleration and Retardation 
of Progress 180 
Note on Chronology 189 
Chronological Table for Egypt 
and Mesopotamia 190 
Index 191 




Illustrations 
FIGURE PAGE 
An Egyptian Sailing Ship of the 
Old Kingdom viii 
1. Graph of the Estimated Population 
of Great Britain, 1500-1800 18 
2. Engraving of a Mammoth by Con- 
temporary Artist in a French Cave 23 
3. Archers and Arrows in a Stone Age 
Painting from Southeast Spain 52 
4. Neolithic Hoes 62 
5. Plowing, Milking, and Hoeing in 
Ancient Egypt 101 
6. Early Sumerian War Chariot 102 
7. Sketch Map of the Cradles of 
Civilization 113 
8. Goldsmith's Workshop from an Old 
Kingdom Tomb Painting 133 
9. Diagram to Illustrate the Formula 
for "Batter" 162 
10. Babylonian Field Plan 163 
11. Exact Copy of Figure from Mosco\v 
Papyrus, Reversed and with Sym- 
bols Transliterated 165 

AN EGYPTIAN SAILING SHIP OF THE OLD KINGDOM. 

CHAPTER I 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
LAST century "progress" was accepted as a fact. Trade was ex- 
panding, the productivity of industry was increasing, wealth 
was accumulating. Scientific discoveries promised a boundless 
advance in man's control over Nature, and consequently un- 
limited possibilities of further production. Growing prosperity 
and deepening knowledge inspired an atmosphere of unprec- 
edented optimism throughout the Western world. Now that 
optimism has received a rude shock. World War I and subse- 
quent crises, producing even in the midst of horrible poverty 
an apparent surplus of goods, have undermined its economic 
foundations. Doubts as to the reality of "progress" are widely 
entertained. 
To settle their doubts men should turn to history. But his- 
torians themselves are not unaffected by the economic situa- 
tion of their day. As Professor Bury has shown, the idea of 
progress was itself a novelty, entirely foreign to medieval or 
ancient writers on history. Today in history, as in natural 
science, a pessimistic or mystical attitude is conspicuous in the 
writings of many popular authors. Some are inclined, like the 
Ancient Greeks and Romans, to look back wistfully to a 
"golden age" of primeval simplicity. The German "historical 
school" of Roman Catholic missionaries and their archaeologi- 
cal and anthropological instructors have revived and reclothed 
in scientific terms the medieval doctrine of the "Fall of Man" 
through tasting of the tree of knowledge. A similar outlook is 
implicit in some writings of the English diffusionists. On the 
other hand, the Fascist philosophy, expounded most openly by 
Herr Hitler and his academic supporters, but sometimes mas- 
querading as eugenics in Britain and America, identifies prog- 
ress with a biological evolution no less mystically conceived. 
One purpose of this book is to suggest that, viewed from an 
impersonal scientific standpoint, history may still justify a 
belief in progress in days of depression as well as in the hey- 
day of last century's prosperity. But to achieve the necessary 
scientific attitude we must be prepared to modify our concep- 
tions both of progress and of history. The essence of the 

]0 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
scientific attitude is, indeed, the abandonment of personal 
prejudices and the subordination of private likes and dislikes. 
"The function of science is the classification of facts, the 
recognition of their sequence and relative significance." The 
scientific attitude is shown in the habit of forming judgments 
on the facts unbiased by personal feeling. "The scientific man," 
says Karl Pearson, "has to strive at self-elimination in his 
judgments." Incidentally the importance attached by scien- 
tists to number and measurement is not unconnected with the 
obligation to adopt an impersonal attitude. "The results of 
measurement," as Professor Levy remarks, "will be entirely 
independent of any religious, ethical, or social bias. Whether 
you like or dislike the words on this page, you will agree that 
the number is 322." 
To approach history in this humble and objective spirit is 
not so easy. As scientists we cannot ask History: "Have we 
progressed? Does the multiplication of mechanical devices 
represented by airplanes, hydroelectric stations, poison gas, 
and submarines constitute progress?" A question so formulat- 
ed can have no scientific meaning. There is no hope of any 
agreement upon its answer. That would depend entirely upon 
the caprice of the inquirer, his economic situation at the time, 
and even on the state of his health. Very few people will come 
to the same conclusion. 
If you like rapid movement and the freedom from limita- 
tions on time and space provided by modern facilities for 
locomotion and illumination, you may answer in the affirma- 
tive. But not unless you are in an economic position to enjoy 
such facilities, not if your lungs have been filled with mustard 
gas, or your son has just been blown to pieces with a shell. If 
you have a romantic affection for the "unspoiled countryside" 
and no passion for roaming far abroad or turning night into 
day for study, you will query the reality of a progress thus 
attested, and look back regretfully upon the "more peaceful" 
days of a century or two ago. You will conveniently forget the 
drawbacks to the simple life-the vermin in the picturesque 
thatch, the disease-germs swarming in contaminated wells and 
open middens, the bandits and the press-gangs lurking in the 
woods and alleys. Dumped down in a village in Turkestan, 
you might revise your opinion. A pickpocket must regard 
from his professional standpoint electric light, the telephone, 
and automobiles (if used by the police) as signs of regression. 
He will sigh for the dark and narrow alleys of a previous 
century. Persons devoted to the grosser forms of cruelty will 
not accept the suppression of legal torture and the elimination 
of public executions as signs of progress, but of the reverse. 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
II 
It is unscientific to ask, "Have we progressed?," if only be- 
cause no two people need give the same answer; the personal 
equation can hardly be eliminated. But it may be legitimate to 
ask, "What is progress?," and the answer may even take on 
something of the numerical form that science so rightly prizes. 
But now progress becomes what has actually happened-the 
content of history. The business of the historian would be to 
bring out the essential and significant in the long and complex 
series of events with which he is confronted. But to distinguish 
and unpick the thread of progress, if such there be, running 
through history requires a view of history very different from 
that set out in the formal textbooks in my schooldays. In the 
first place, a long and wide view is essential. When short 
periods or confined regions alone are surveyed, the multiplicity 
of separate events is likely to obscure any underlying pattern. 
Before 1914, at least, history meant to most people "British 
history." It began with the Anglo-Saxons, or even with the 
Norman Conquest, and so embraced a period of at most 1500 
and often 800 years. Quite a number of people were acquaint- 
ed with another volume of history labeled "ancient history." 
It dealt with the fortunes of the Greeks (or more precisely of 
two Greek cities, Athens and Sparta) and of the Romans. It 
was generally presented and taught as if it had no vital con- 
nection with British history, from which it was separated by a 
mysterious gap. Many people are now aware that these two 
still popular volumes are not really self-contained and inde- 
penden t, but form a small part of a connected series. Such 
have at least heard of earlier volumes in which Minoans, Hit- 
tites, Egyptians, and Sumerians figure. The period covered by 
the whole series is now fully four times that of British history 
in the fullest sense. Quite recently prehistory has become 
familiar as an introductory volume. It traces the fortunes-or 
some aspects thereof-of peoples who kept no written records. 
In particular, it deals with the period before the earliest writ- 
ten documents begin in Egypt and Babylonia. By the inclusion 
of prehistory the purview of history is extended a hundredfold. 
\Ve survey a period of over 500,000 years, instead of a beggar- 
ly 5000. And at the same time human history joins on to 
natural history. Through prehistory history is seen growing 
out of the "natural sciences" of biology, paleontology, and 
geology. 
As long as history is restricted in its scope to comparatively 
brief periods like those of British history or ancient history, 
ups and downs seem much more conspicuous than any steady 
progress. In ancient history we learnt about the "Rise and Fall" 
of Athens and Sparta and Rome. I confess I was not quite sure 

12 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
what was a "rise" and what a "fall." The history of Athens 
from 600 to 450 B.C. was presented as a rise, the next century 
as a fall. The subsequent centuries, omitted altogether from 
schoolbooks, were presumably an age of darkness and death. 
It was disconcerting to notice that Aristotle flourished near 
325 B.C. and that some of the greatest Greek scientists-doc- 
tors, mathematicians, astronomers, and geographers-worked 
in the supposedly dead hinterland of "classical" Greek history. 
Greek civilization was not dead, though Athens had declined 
in political power; and Athens' contributions to a wider Hel- 
lenism survived. The "rise" of Rome was represented by the 
period during which, by ruthlessness and even fraud, a group 
of obscure villages on the Tiber became the capital of an em- 
pire embracing the whole Mediterranean basin, France, Eng- 
land, and a large slice of Central Europe. But eventually this 
vast domain was pacified, and Rome secured to her subjects 
two centuries of comparative peace, unprecedented in Europe. 
But these centuries, discreetly omitted from schoolbooks, we 
were left to imagine as an era of "decline." 
In British history the ups and downs are only slightly less 
glaring or more rational. The age of Elizabeth was "golden" 
because the English were successful as pirates against the 
Spaniards, burned chiefly Catholics at the stake, and patron- 
ized Shakespeare's plays. The seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies were comparatively inglorious, though Newton adorned 
the former and J ames Watt the latter. 
In fact, ancient history and British history tended to be 
presented exclusively as political history-a record of the 
maneuvers of kings, statesmen, soldiers, and religious teach- 
ers, of wars and persecutions, of the growth of political institu- 
tions and ecclesiastical systems. Incidental allusions were in- 
deed made to economic conditions, scientific discoveries, or 
artistic movements in each "period," but the "periods" were 
defined in political terms by the names of dynasts or party 
factions. That sort of history could hardly become scientific. 
No standard of comparison is manifest in it independent of 
the prejudices of the individual teacher. The age of Elizabeth 
is "golden" primarily to a member of the Church of England. 
To a Roman Catholic periods when Protestants were burned 
inevitably seem preferable. And such history restricts its own 
field hopelessly. Prehistory can find no place in it. For, since 
prehistory lacks all written evidence, it can never recover the 
names of its actors or discern the details of their p,rivate lives. 
It can seldom give names even to the peoples whose wander- 
ings some prehistorians try to trace. 
Fortunately the exclusive claim of political history to the 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
13 
title is no longer unchallenged. Marx insisted on the prime 
importance of economic conditions, of the social forces of 
production, and of applications of science as factors in histori- 
cal change. His realist conception of history is gaining accept- 
ance in academic circles remote from the party passions in- 
flamed by other aspects of Marxism. To the general public 
and to scholars alike, history is tending to become cultural 
history, greatly to the annoyance of fascists like Dr. Frick. 
This sort of history can naturally be linked up with what is 
termed prehistory. The archaeologist collects, classifies, and 
compares the tools and weapons of our ancestors and forerun- 
ners, examines the houses they built, the fields they tilled, the 
food they ate (or rather discarded). These are the tools and 
instruments of production, characteristic of economic systems 
that no written document describes. Like any modern machine 
or construction, these ancient relics and monuments are ap- 
plications of contemporary knowledge or science existing 
when they were fashioned. In a liner results of geology (oil, 
metal-ores), botany (timbers), chemistry (alloys, oil-refin- 
ing), and physics (electrical equipment, engines, etc.) are 
combined, applied, and crystallized. That is equally true of 
the dugout canoe fashioned by Stone Age man from a single 
treetrunk. 
Again, the ship and the tools employed in its production 
symbolize a whole economic and social system. The modern 
ship requires the assemblage at one centre of a variety of raw 
materials brought from many places, often distant; it presup- 
poses an extensive and efficient system of communications. Its 
production involves the co-operation of large bodies of work- 
ers, each specialized in distinct crafts, but all acting together 
in accordance with a common plan and under centralized 
direction. Moreover, none of these workers are producing 
their own food by hunting, fishing, or farming. They are 
nourished by the surplus produced by other specialists devoted 
exclusively to the production or collection of foodstuffs, and 
again often living far away. The canoe, the lineal ancestor of 
our liner, also implies an economy, a social organization, but 
a very different and far simpler one. The only tool required is 
a stone adze that can be made at home by the worker out of a 
pebble from the nearest brook. The ship's timbers are provided 
by a local tree. In felling the tree, hewing it out, and dragging 
the result to the water, the co-operation of several workers 
may be necessary. But the numbers required are quite small, 
and need not exceed the bounds of a family group. Finally, a 
canoe may perfectly wen be made by fishermen or peasants in 
the intervals of their primary avocation of getting food for 

14 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
themselves and their children. It does not presuppose imported 
foodstuffs, nor even an accumulated communal surplus, but 
is a symbol of an economy of self-sufficing communities or 
households. Such an economy can be seen at work today 
among barbarous tribes. Archaeologists can define a period 
when it was apparently the sole economy, the sole organiza- 
tion of production ruling anywhere on the earth's surface. 
History, extended backwards by prehistory, can thus compare 
the systems of production in vogue at widely separated points 
in the great space of time it surveys. 
Again, archaeology can observe changes in the economic 
system, improvements in the means of production, and exhibit 
them in a chronological sequence. The archaeologist's divi- 
sions of the prehistoric period into Stone, Bronze, and Iron 
Apes are not altogether arbitrary. They are based upon the 
materials used for cutting implements, especially axes, and 
snch implements are among the most important tools of pro- 
duction. Realistic history insists upon their significance in 
molding and determining social systems and economic organ- 
ization. Moreover, the stone axe, the tool distinctive of part 
at least of the Stone Age, is the homemade product that could 
be fashioned and used by anybody in a self-contained group 
of hunters or peasants. It implies neither specialization of 
labor nor trade beyond the group. The bronze axe which re- 
places it is not only a superior implement, it also presupposes 
a more complex economic and social structure. The casting of 
bronze is too difficult a process to be carried out by anyone 
in the intervals of growing or catching his food or minding 
her babies. It is a specialist's job, and these specialists must 
rely for such primary necessities as food upon a surplus pro- 
duced by other specialists. Again, the copper and tin of which 
the bronze axe is composed are comparatively rare, and very 
seldom occur together. One or both of the constituents will 
almost certainly have to be imported. Such importation is pos- 
sible only if some sort of communications and trade have been 
established and if there is a surplus of some local product to 
barter for the metals (for details see p. 35). 
To this extent the changes on which archaeologists are wont 
to insist do correspond to the changes in forces of production, 
in economic structure and social organization, which are 
recorded in written documents and appreciated as fundamen- 
tal by realist history. In fact, archaeology can and does trace 
out radical changes in human economy, in the social system 
of production. These changes are similar in kind to those upon 
which the realist conception of history insists as factors in 
historical change. In their effect upon humanity as a whole 

HUMAN A.ND NATURAL HISTORY 
15 
some prehistoric changes at least are comparable to that 
dramatic transformation which is familiarly known as the 
Industrial Revolution of eighteenth-century Britain. Their 
significance must be estimated by the same criteria, their re- 
sults judged by like standards. Indeed, an unbiased judgment 
may be easier in the case of prehistoric revolutions just be- 
cause their effects have ceased to oppress us individually. 
But not only does prehistory extend written history back- 
wards, it carries on natural history forwards. In reality, if one 
root of prehistoric archaeology is ancient history, the other is 
geology. Prehistory constitutes a bridge between human his- 
tory and the natural sciences of zoology, paleontology, and 
geology. Geology has traced the building up of the earth we 
inhabit; under the aspect of paleontology it follows the emer- 
gence of various forms of life through several vast periods of 
geological time. In the last era prehistory takes up the tale. 
Prehistoric anthropology, which is concerned with the bodily 
remains of early "men," is just a branch of paleontology or 
zoology. But prehistoric archaeology is concerned with what 
men made. It traces changes in human culture. Such changes, 
as will be shown in detail shortly, take the place of the physi- 
cal modifications and mutations by which new species arise 
among the animals and which are studied in paleontology. 
Hence the historian's "progress" may be the equivalent of 
the zoologist's evolution. It may be hoped that the standards 
applicable to the latter discipline may help the historian to 
attain the same impersonality and objectivity of judgment as 
characterize the zoologist or any other natural scientist. Now 
to a biologist progress, if he used the term, would mean suc- 
cess in the struggle for existence. Survival of the fittest is a 
good evolutionary principle. But fitness means just success in 
living. A provisional test of a species' fitness would be to count 
its members over several generations. If the total numbers turn 
out to be increasing, the species may be regarded as success- 
ful; if the total is dwindling, it is condemned as a failure. 
Biologists have divided the organic world into kingdoms 
and sub-kingdoms. The latter are subdivided into phyla, phyla 
into classes and families, families into genera, genera into 
species. Paleontology traces the order in which the several 
phyla, genera, etc., emerge upon our planet. They are arranged 
in a sort of evolutionary hierarchy. In the animal kingdom the 
phylum chordata is ranked above the phyla protozoa (includ- 
ing germs, certain shellfish, and so on) and annulata (earth- 
worms). Within the phylum, vertebrates occupy the highest 
place, and among the vertebrates mammals (warm-blooded 
animals that suckle their young) rank above fishes, birds, and 

16 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
reptiles. Rank here depends purely upon order of appearance. 
"Higher" means appearing later in the record of the rocks; in 
an ideal geological section the oldest forms of life would ap- 
pear in the deepest layers, the last to emerge would be nearest 
the surface. Any departure from this purely chronological 
ranking is liable to involve the biologist in metaphysical con- 
troversies upon which, as a scientist, he is loath to embark. 
The historian might do well to follow his example. 
Yet it may perhaps be permissible to suggest that values do 
in some cases attach to evolutionary rank and that these values 
are capable of numerical expression. They may help to an 
appreciation of the significance of cultural change, if not to a 
vindication of progress in any metaphysical sense. The idea of 
fitness can scarcely be excluded altogether from biological 
rank, even though such fitness means just success in surviving. 
Of course, many lower forms still survive-all too successfully 
in the case of germs, very fortunately in the case of earth- 
worms. On the other hand, the rocks reveal countless species, 
genera, and even families which have failed to survive, though 
in their day they would have ranked at the head of the evolu- 
tionary hierarchy. The gigantic reptiles like dinosaurs and 
ichthyosaurs, that swarmed during the Jurassic era, are now 
extinct. They flourished under particular geographical condi- 
tions. The Jurassic was an age of moist warm climate and wide 
expanses of sea and swamp; no more intelligent beasts existed 
to compete with the huge lizards. To these conditions, to this 
environment, the reptiles were successfully adapted. The same 
environment lasted for a time so long that estimates in years 
have no meaning. But eventually the areas under water be- 
came more restricted, the climate grew drier and colder, and 
new genera and species emerged. Comparatively few of the 
reptiles succeeded in surviving in the new environment. They 
could not adjust themselves to the changed conditions, and 
perished. When the old Jurassic environment passed, the very 
qualities which had ensured their success and constituted their 
"fitness" proved a handicap. They were too much specialized, 
too closely adapted for living under one limited set of condi- 
tions. With the passing of those conditions they succumbed. 
In the long run, too, excessive specialization is biologically 
disadvantageous. Its ultimate result is not survival, not in- 
crease in numbers, but extinction or stagnation. 
Very tentatively, too, we might draw attention to the idea 
of economy in the means whereby survival is secured. Many 
of the lower organisms only survive, only maintain their num.. 
bers, by a prodigious fecundity. Each individual or pair pro.. 
duces millions of offspring. Yet the species is so poorly fitted 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
17 
to survive that only one or two out of every batch live to 
maturity. Cod, ling, and some other fish, for instance, have 
succeeded in keeping their numbers fairly constant over a vast 
period of time. To that extent they are successful. But to pur. 
chase this precarious balance a pair of cod produces 6,000,000 
eggs, a pair of ling 28,000,000! If any substantial proportion 
of these eggs came to maturity, the sea would soon be a solid 
mass of ling. Actually only two or three Iing hatch out and 
come to maturity from each batch. The individual egg's chance 
of survival or prospect of life is about 1 in 14,000,000. Rabbits 
are much more economical. A doe rabbit may produce seventy 
offspring annually. As the total rabbit population keeps fairly 
constant in the long run, the individual's chance of survival is 
clearly of the order of 1 in 70. A human pair does not produce 
more than one child a year, and families exceeding 10 are un- 
common. Yet the human species is still increasing in numbers. 
The human child's chance of survival is incomparably greater 
than that of a young rabbit. 
Within certain limits, economy in reproduction, the indi- 
vidual's chance of surviving, increases as we ascend the evolu- 
tionary scale. And these concepts-fitness, chance of survival 
-are essentially numerical. In so far as they apply, they con- 
stitute criteria invested with a11 the objectivity of numbers for 
biological ranking. Unfortunately this argument must not be 
pressed. While some "lower organisms" secure survival by ex- 
travagant fecundity, others no less humble in the evolutionary 
scale exhibit as strict economy in reproduction as men or ele- 
phants, and yet maintain their numbers. 
It would be unwise to pursue such discussions further, for 
fear of introducing ideas of value foreign to pure science. They 
have at least indicated that the continuity between natural his- 
tory and human history may allow numerical concepts to be 
introduced into the latter. Historical changes can be judged by 
the extent to which they have helped our species to survive 
and multiply. That is a numerical criterion expressible in fig- 
ures of population. In history we encounter events to which 
this numerical criterion is directly applicable. The most ob- 
vious instance is the "Industrial Revolution" in Britain. Esti- 
mates of the island's population indicate a quite gradual 
growth in the population rom the Black Death in the four- 
teenth century. Reliable calculations put the population at 
4,160,221 in 1570,5,773,646 in 1670, and 6,517,035 in 1750. 
Then with the Industrial Revolution begins the dramatic in- 
crease to 16,345,646 in 1801 and 27,533,755 in 1851! 
The effect of these figures is still more impressive if they be 
plotted out on squared paper to give a graph or "population 

18 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
curve." The general direction of the line is almost straight 
down to 1750, and unaffected by the political revolutions 'and 
religious movements of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
that bulk so large in the old history books. Between 1750 and 
1800 the line has turned through an angle of about 30°! The 
sweeping changes in material culture and equipment, the new 
Millions 
....\ 
'.{..,. 
1500 
1600 
00 
1800 
FIG. I.-GRAPH OF THE ESTIMATED POPULATION OF 
GREAT BRITAIN J 1500-1800. 
social forces of production, the economic reorganization that 
is termed the Industrial Revolution, reacted upon the whole 
mass of the British people as no ,political or religious event had 
done. One effect obviously was to render possible a gigantic 
increase in their numbers. The people multiplied as never be- 
fore since the arrival of the Saxons. Judged by the biological 
standard suggested above, the Industrial Revolution was a suc- 
cess. It has facilitated the survival and muliiplication of the 
species concerned. 
The figures provide an objective criterion by which such an 
event may be judged. It is useless to insist either on the lustre 
of the intellectual achievements in science which the new sys- 
tem of production alone made possible, or on the horrors of 
child-labor, slums, and oppression which accompanied it. The 
former may be cancelled by the latter. But the evils cannot be 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
19 
seen in their true perspective for lack of standards of com- 
parison. \Ve happen to be wen informed about the misery, 
disease, and uglines imposed upon the proletariat by the 
factory system. \Ve know surprisingly little of the real position 
of the bulk of the peasantry, of miners, and of laborers in 
previous centuries. While we know a good deal about the guilds 
of urban artisans-really a relatively small and privileged 
class-we dare not picture faithfully the life of a serf in the 
Middle Ages, still less that of a slave in ancient Rome or 
Greece. When a gleam of the truth. shines from the page of a 
medieval charter or an ancient oration, the sentimentalists 
wisely close their eyes in utter horror. So on the whole we may 
rely upon our figures. 
And remembering the lesson of those figures and curves, we 
shall be able to discern in earlier ages of human history other 
"revolutions." They manifest then1selves in the same way as 
the "Industrial Revolution"-in an upward kink in the popu- 
lation curve. They must be judged by the same standard. The 
chief aim of this book is to examine prehistory and ancient 
history from this angle. It is hoped that a consideration of 
revolutions, so remote that it is impossible to get angry or en- 
thusiastic about them, may help to vindicate the idea of prog- 
ress against sentimentalists and mystics. 

CHAPTER II 
ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL 
PROGRESS 
IT HAS been suggested that prehistory is a continuation of 
natural history, that there is an analogy between organic evolu- 
tion and progress in culture. Natural history traces the 
emergence of new species each better adapted for survival, 
more fitted to obtain food and shelter, and so to multiply. 
Human history reveals man creating new industries and new 
economies that have furthered the increase of his species and 
thereby vindicated its enhanced fitness. 
The wild sheep is fitted for survival in a cold mountain 
climate by its heavy coat of hair and down. Men can adapt 
themselves to life in the same environment by making coats 
out of sheeps' skins or of wool. With claws and snouts rabbits 
can dig themselves burrows to provide shelter against cold and 
enemies. With picks and shovels men can excavate similar 
refuges, and even build better ones out of brick, stone, and 
timber. Lions have claws and teeth with which to secure the 
meat they need. Man makes arrows and spears for slaying his 
game. An innate instinct, an inherited adjustment of its rudi- 
mentary nervous system, enables even the lowly jellyfish to 
grasp prey that is actually within its reach. Men learn more 
efficient and discriminating methods of obtaining nourish- 
ment through the precept and example of their elders. 
In human history, clothing, tools, weapons, and traditions 
take the place of fur, claws, tusks, and instincts in the quest 
for food and shelter. Customs and prohibitions, embodying 
centuries of accumulated experience and handed on by social 
tradition, take the place of inherited instincts in facilitating 
the survival of our species. 
There certainly is an analogy. But it is essential not to lose 
sight of the significant distinctions between historical progress 
and organic evolution, between human culture and the animal's 
bodily equipment, between the social heritage and the biologi- 
cal inheritance. Figurative language, based on the admitted 
analogy, is liable to mislead the unwary. We read, for instance: 
20 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 21 
"In the Jurassic epoch the struggle for life must have been 
very severe. . . . Triceratops covered its head and neck with 
a kind of bony bonnet with two horns over the eyes." The 
passage suggests the sort of thing that happens conspicuously 
in wartime. Between 1915 and 1918, finding themselves 
threatened from the air, the belligerents devised shrapnel-hel- 
mets, anti-aircraft guns, bombproof shelters, and other pro- 
tective contrivances. Now that process of invention :3 not in 
the least like the evolution of Triceratops as conceived by the 
biologists. Its bony bonnet was part of its body; it was in- 
herited from its parents; it had been developed very slowly as 
a result of small spontaneous modifications in reptiles' body- 
covering that had been accumulating over hundreds of genera- 
tions. It survived not because Triceratops liked it, but because 
those of his ancestors who possessed its rudiments had in actual 
practice succeeded better in acquiring food and eluding 
dangers than those that lacked this bodily equipment and 
protection. Man's equipment and defenses are external to his 
body; he can lay them aside and don them at will. Their use 
is not inherited, but learned, rather slowly, from the social 
group to which each individual belongs. Man's social heritage 
in a tradition which he begins to acquire only after he has 
emerged from his mother's womb. Changes in culture and 
tradition can be initiated, controlled, or delayed by the con- 
scious and deliberate choice of their human authors and ex- 
ecutors. An invention is not an accidental mutation of the germ 
plasm, but a new synthesis of the accumulated experience 
to which the inventor is hei:-- by tradition only. It is well to be 
as clear as possible as to the sort of differences subsisting be- 
tween the processes here compared. 
The mechanism of evolution as conceived by biologists 
need not be described in detail. It has been outlined else- 
where in accessible and readable books by experts. The current 
view seems to be briefly something like this. The evolution of 
new forms of life and of new species among animals is sup- 
posed to result from the accumulation of hereditable changes 
in the germ plasm. (The exact nature of these changes is as 
obscure to scientists as are the words germ plasm to the 
ordinary reader.) Such changes as facilitated the life and 
reproduction of the creature would become established by 
what is termed "natural selection." The creatures not affected 
by the changes in question would simply die out or become 
confined to some corner, leaving the new species in possession 
of the field. A concrete and partly fictitious example will 

22 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
iIIustrate the meaning better than several pages more of ab- 
stract terms. 
About half a million years ago Europe and Asia were visited 
by periods of intense cold-the so-called Ice Ages-that lasted 
thousands of years. By that time there were in existence several 
species of elephant ancestral to modern African and Indian 
elephants. To meet the rigors of the Ice Age some elephants 
developed a shaggy coat of hair, becoming eventually what 
we term mammoths. This statement does not mean that an 
ordinary elephant said one day, "I fell horribly chilly; I will 
put on a shaggy coat," nor yet that by continually wishing for 
a coat it mysteriously made hairs to sprout out of its hide. 
What is supposed to hilYe happened would be more like this: 
The germ plasm is liable to change, and is constantly chang- 
ing. Among the elephant calves born as the Ice Age was be- 
coming severe were some that, as a result of such a change in 
the germ plasm, were born with a :endency to hairy skins, and 
as they grew up actually became hairy. In the cold latitudes 
the hairy elephants would thrive better and rear larger families, 
also hairy, than the more normal type. They would according- 
ly increase at the expense of the rest. Moreover, similar 
mysterious changes in the germ plasm might result in some of 
their offspring being still more hairy than their ancestors and 
other contemporaries. These in their turn, being the best 
fitted to endure the cold, would thrive better and multiply 
faster than any others. And so, after many generations, a 
breed of hairy elephants or mammoths would be established as 
the result of the accumulation of the successive hereditary 
variations described. And such alone would be able to with- 
stand the glacial conditions of northern Europe and Asia. The 
mammoth thus got his permanent shaggy coat, but as the 
result of a process extending over many generations and 
thousands of years-for elephants of all species are slow 
breeders. 
During the Ice Ages several species of man already existed, 
contemporary with the mammoth: they hunted the beasts and 
drew pictures of them in caves. But they did not inherit shaggy 
coats and did not develop such to meet the crisis; some of the 
human inhabitants of Europe during the Ice Age would pass 
unrecognized in a crowd today. Instead of undergoing the slow 
physical changes which eventually enabled the mammoths to 
endure the cold, our ancestors found out how to control fire 
and to make coats out of skins. And so they were able to face 
the cold as successful1y as the mammoths. 
Of course, while the mammoth-calf was born with a tend- 
ency to a hairy coat, which inevitably grew as the calf 

c- 
 
 
 
; 
, ' 
<'E-IrJ 
z> 
0E-4< 
uu 
o <  
N IX! u 
cifJ 
 
< 
<Z 
f-4H 

24 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
matured, the human infant was not born as a fire tender or 
coat maker. The parent mammoths transmitted their coats to 
their progeny by heredity. Each generation of human children 
had to be taught the whole art of keeping fires going and mak- 
ing coats from the very rudiments. The art was transmitted 
from parent to child only by precept and example. It was an 
"acquired characteristic," and acquired characteristics, zoolo- 
gists agree, are not hereditary. An infant by himself on his 
natal day is no more a fire tender than when, half a million 
years ago, man first began to cherish the flames instead of 
fleeing from them like other beasts. 
The foregoing narrative could be translated into technical 
terms as follows: certain members of the genus Elephas be- 
came adapted to the environment of the Ice Ages, and evolved 
into the species Elephas primigenius. The species Homo sapiens 
was enabled to survive in the same environment by improving 
his material culture. Both evolution and cultural change may 
be regarded as adaptations to the environment. Environment, 
of course, means the whole situation in which a creature has to 
live: it embraces not only climate (heat, cold, moisture, wind) 
and physiographical features like mountains, seas, rivers, and 
marshes, but also factors such as food suppEes, animal 
enemies, and, in the case of man, even social traditions, cus- 
toms, and laws, economic status, and religious beliefs. 
Both men and mammoths were successfully adjusted to the 
environment of the Ice Ages. Both flourished and multiplied 
under those peculiar climatic conditions. But their ultimate 
histories diverged. The last Ice Age passed, and with its passage 
the mammoth became extinct. Man has survived. The mam- 
moth was too well adapted to a particular set of conditions; it 
was overspecialized. When, with the onset of more temperate 
conditions, forests covered the wide tundras on which the 
mammoth had roamed and temperate vegetation replaced the 
Arctic scrub on which the mammoth browsed, the beast was 
helpless. The bodily characters-hairy coat, digestive system 
adjusted to consume dwarf willows or mosses, hoofs and trunk 
constructed for rooting in the snow-which had enabled him 
to thrive in the Ice Ages, all proved to be handicaps in tem- 
perate climates. Man, on the other hand, was free to leave off 
his coat if he was too hot, to invent other tools, and to choose 
beef instead of mammoth steaks. 
The last paragraph drives home a lesson already indicated. 
In the long run exclusive adaptation to a peculiar environ- 
ment does not pay. It imposes severe, and in the end perhaps 
fatal, restrictions on the possibilities of living and breeding. On 
a long view what is profitable is the capacity for adaptation to 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 25 
changing circumstances. Such adaptability is bound up with 
the growth of a nervous system, and ultimately of a brain. 
Even the lowest organism is equipped with a rudimentary 
nerve apparatus enabling it to make one or two simple move- 
ments in response to c anges in the surrounding world. The 
external changes excite or stimulate what serves the creature as 
an "organ of sense," and this stimulation sets going certain de- 
termined movements or changes in the creature's body. The 
approach of a predatory bIrd-or of any other object-when 
impinging on the sense organ of an oyster stimulates its nerve 
in such a way as to cause a contraction of the muscles closing 
its shell. The oyster's nervous system provides it with a sort of 
automatic device for self-protection, but it has no power to 
vary the movement in accordance with differences in the ex- 
ternal changes which promote it. The nervous system is ad- 
justed to make oe set of muscular movements whenever any 
external object affects its se:'1sory ends. All automatic responses 
that an organism is adjusted to make to any changes in its en- 
vironment may be termed instincts. 1 They are, of course, in- 
herited in precisely the same way as the creature's physical 
form. They are necessary and inevitable consequences of the 
structure of its nervous system, which is part of its bodily 
mechanism. 
The higher we go in the evolutionary scale, the more com- 
plicated the nervous system is found to be. Organs become 
specialized to detect different sorts of changes in the environ- 
ment-pressures upon the creature's body, vibrations in the 
air, rays of light, and so on. Thus arise the distinct senses of 
touch, hearing, vision, and the rest and appropriate bodily or- 
gans connected therewith. At the same time the number and 
variety of the movements that the creature can make are in- 
creased by the development and specialization of motor nerves 
controlling muscles or sets of muscles. In higher organisms a 
mechanism develops connecting, \\-ith increasing delicacy, the 
sensory nerves, affel.. '.ed by changes in the environment, and 
the motor nerves controlling movements of muscles. 
The result of such development is to enable a creature to 
vary its movements, its "behavior," in accordance with minute 
differences in the external changes which affect its nerves. It 
can adjust its reactions. The greater part of the mechanism for 
adjustment is located in the brain. Lower organisms possess 
mere nodes or knots where different sensory and motor nerves 
meet. Prom such rudiments a brain begins to develop higher up 
the scale. A complex web of paths grows up to connect the 
1 A distinction ought to be made between instincts and reflex actions; but 
that would involve subtleties irrelevant to our immediate argument. 

26 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
various sensory nerves and to transmit impulses affecting them 
to the appropriate motor nerves. Sensations, which must at 
first have been nothing but fleeting impressions, could thus be 
permanently connected with one another and with movements, 
and so "remembered." 
At last, instead of a couple of very simple movements, made 
indiscriminately to any change in its surroundings, the mam- 
mal can make different responses, appropriate to a very wide 
variety of external things and conditions affecting it. It is thus 
enabled to cope successfully with a greater diversity of circum- 
stances. It can obtain its food more regularly and certainly, 
avoid its enemies more successfully, and propagate its kind 
more economically. The development of a nervous system and 
a brain made life possible under more varied conditions. And 
as conditions are constantly changing, such adaptability mani- 
festly facilitated survival and multiplicc.tion. 
Man appears very late in the geological record. No fossil 
skeleton worthy of the name of "man" is older than the last 
volume but one of the earth's history, the volume labelled 
"Pleistocene." Even then fossil remains are exceptionally rare 
till the concluding chapters, and fossil "men" of lower pleisto- 
cene age can be counted on the fingers. Whereas today all men 
belong to one species, Homo sapiens, and can all interbreed 
freely, the earlier pleistocene "men" belong to several distinct 
species. Some, indeed, diverge in bodily structure so widely 
from ourselves that anthropologists are inclined to assign them 
to distinct genera. The early members of the human family in 
question, the fossil hominids that are often termed palean- 
thropic, were not our direct evolutionary ancestors; in the 
pedigree of Homo sapiens they represent side branches from 
the main stem. And yet their bodies were better equipped 
than ours for certain physical functions, such as fighting. The 
canine teeth of Eoanthropus or Piltdown man, for instance, 
would be formidable weapons. But for the moment the dis- 
tinctions within our family may be ignored. 
Man is now, and was apparently even at his first appearance 
in the pleistocene, inadequately adapted for survival in any 
particular environment. His bodily equipment for coping with 
any special set of conditions is inferior to that of most animals. 
He has not, and probably never had, a furry coat like the polar 
bear's for keeping in the body's heat under cold conditions. His 
body is not particularly well adapted for escape, self-defense, 
or hunting. He is not, for instance, exceptionally fleet of foot, 
and would be left behind in a race with a hare or an ostrich. He 
has no protective coloring like the tiger or the snow leopard, 
nor bodily armor like the tortoise or the crab. He has no wings 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 2' 
to offer escape and give him an advantage in spying out and 
pouncing upon prey. He Jacks the beak and talons of the hawk 
and its keenness of vision. For catching his prey and defend- 
ing himself, his muscular strength, teeth, and nails are incom- 
parably inferior to those of the tiger. 
In the comparatively short evolutionary history documented 
by fossil remains, man has not improved his inherited equip- 
ment by bodily changes detectable in his skeleton. Yet he has 
been able to adjust himself to a greater range of environments 
than almost any other creature, to multiply infinitely faster 
than any near relative among the higher mammals, and to 
beat the polar bear, the hare, the hawk, and the tiger at their 
special tricks. Through his control of fire and the skill to make 
clothes and houses, man can, and does, live and thrive from 
the Arctic Circle to the Equator. In the trains and cars he 
builds, man can outstrip the fleetest hare or ostrich. In air- 
planes he can mount higher than the eagle, and with telescopes 
see farther than tle hawk. With firearms he can lay low ani- 
mals that a tiger dare not tackle. 
But fire, clothes, houses, trains, airplanes, telescopes and 
guns are not, we must repeat, part of man's body. He can leave 
them and lay them aside at will. They are not inherited in the 
biological sense, but the skill needed for their production and 
use is part of our social heritage, the result of a tradition accu- 
mulated over many generations, and transmitted, not in the 
blood, but through speech and writing. 
Man's compensation for his relatively poor bodily en- 
dowment has been the possession of a large and complex brain, 
forming the center of an extensive and delicate nervous sys- 
tem. These permit a great variety of accurately controlled 
movements being adjusted exactly to the impulses received by 
keen organs of sense. It is only so that man has ben enabled 
to make himself protections against climate and weather, arms 
and weapons of attack and defense that, because they can be 
adapted and adjusted, are really superior to furs, or teeth, or 
claws. 
In a sense the possibility of making artificial substitutes for 
bodily defenses is a consequence of their absence. As long, for 
instance, as the bones of the brain-case have to support the 
powerful muscles needed to snap together a heavy jaw, like 
the chimpanzee's, and wield the fighting teeth it holds, the 
brain could get little room to expand; for the bone of the brain- 
case must be thick and solid. If the forelegs and forefeet have 
normally to carry the weight of the body, whether in walking 
or climbing, the fine and delicate movements of human fingers 
in grasping and making things would be inlpossible. At the 

28 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
same time, without hands to grasp food and handmade tools 
and weapons to secure food and repel attack, heavy jaws and 
fighting teeth such as are possessed by our ape relatives could 
scarcely be lightened or reduced in size. Thus the evolutionary 
changes which have contributed to the making of man are very 
intimately connected one with another and with the cultural 
changes which man himself has made. It is not surprising that 
in some early attempts at man they have progressed at different 
relative rates. Piltdown man (Eoanthropus), for example, 
possessed a brain-case comparable in size to our own, but pre- 
served the heavy lower jaw and the projecting canines proper 
to an ape. 
Man then is endowed by nature with a brain, big in com- 
parison with his body, but this endowment is the condition 
enabling man to make his own culture. Other natural endow- 
ments are associated therewith and contribute towards the 
same result. Elliot Smith has brilliantly expounded the signi- 
ficance of "binocular vision" inherited from very remote and 
humble primate ancestors. Dorothy Davidson has given such 
a handy summary of the argument that recapitulation here is 
unnecessary. It means roughly that we and our evolutionary 
ancestors see with our two eyes a single picture where other 
mammals see two. Unobserved muscular sensations of the 
focusing requisite to unify the imags received by the two eyes 
are an important factor in judging distance and seeing objects 
as solid (stereoscopically) instead of just fiat. In man and 
higher primates the association of stereoscopic images with 
sensations of touch and muscular activity renders possible the 
perfect estimation of distances and depths. Without the latter 
the delicacy of hands and fingers would not suffice for tool 
making. It is the perfectly adjusted, but subconscious, co- 
operation of hand and eye that allows man to make tools from 
the roughest eolith to the most sensitive seismograph. Such 
co-operation is possible owing to the delicacy of the nervous 
system and the complexity of association paths in the big brain. 
But the nervous mechanism has become so established now 
that it works without attracting our attention. 
Speech is made possible by similar endowments-a delicate 
and precise control by the motor nerves over the muscles of 
the tongue and the larynx, and an exact correlation of the mus- 
cular sensations due to movements of these organs with the 
sense of hearing. The establishmen of the necessary connec- 
tions between the several sensory and motor nerves concerned 
are effected in well-defir ed areas of the brain, especially those 
just above the ears. The impressions of rudimentary swellings 
of this part of the brain are visible on the brain-cases of very 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 29 
early attempts at men like Pithecanthropus (Java man), Sinan J 
thropus (Pekin man), and Eoanthropus (Piltdown man). 
Even these early members of our family could "speak." 
But in Homo sapiens these developments in the brain and 
nervous system go hand in hand with modifications in the 
arrangement for the attachment of the tongue muscles which 
are not found in other genera or species of "men" any more 
than in apes. As a result man is enabled to utter a much greater 
variety of sounds than any other animal. 
The mechanism whereby visual, muscular, auditory, and 
other sensations and movements are so smoothly co-ordinated 
that we are normally unconscious of the separate elements, 
grows in the brain mostly after birth. But it can only do so be- 
cause the bones of the infant's skull are comparatively soft and 
loosely knit, so that the brain can expand under them. But 
during this process the infant is quite helpless and easily in- 
jured. It is, in fact, wholly dependent upon its parents. The 
last statement would be true of the young of any mammal and 
of most birds. But in the case of human infants the condition 
of dependence lasts exceptionally long. The hardening and 
solidification of the human skull are retarded longer than in 
other animals, to allow of the greater expansion of the brain. 
At the same time, man is born with relatively few inherited 
instincts. There are, that is to say, comparatively few pre- 
cise movements and responses which our nervous system is ad- 
justed to promote automatically; man's instincts are for the 
most part very generalized tendencies. 
Like any other young animal, the human child has there- 
fore to "learn by experience" the appropriate response to a 
specific situation. It must find out the right movements to make 
in relation to any external event, and build up in its brain the 
appropriate connections between sensory and motor nerves. 
And, as in the case of youpg mammals, the process of learning 
is assisted by the example of the parents. Even a young rabbit 
will try to imitate its mother, and thus win learn how to choose 
its food and avoid dangers that actually threaten it. Such edu- 
cation is common to human and animal families. But in the 
case of man the process of education is transformed. The hu- 
man parent can teach not only by example, but also by precept. 
The faculty of speech-that is, the physiological constitution 
of the human tongue, larynx, and nervous system-endows 
prolonged infancy with a unique importance. 
On the one hand, prolonged infancy involves family life, the 
continued association of parents and children for several years. 
On the other hand, physiological conditions, as already indi- 
cated, allow man to emit a great variety of distinct articulate 

30 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
sounds. And a particular sound or group of sounds, a word, 
may be associated with a particular event or group of events in 
the external world. For instance, the sound or word "bear" 
may conjure up an image of a particular sort of dangerous but 
edible furry animal, together with readiness for the actions ap- 
propriate to an encounter with such. The first words may, of 
course, have in themselves to some extent suggested the ob- 
ject thus denoted. "Morepork" roughly resembles the cry of a 
certain Australian owl which is so named. But even in such a 
case there is a large element of convention in restricting the 
meaning and giving it precision. It is only the result of a tacit 
agreement, accepted by the early white settlers in Australia, 
that "morepork" has come to mean a sort of owl rather than, 
say, a gull. Generally, the conventional element is absolutely 
dominant. The extent to which sounds can of themselves sug- 
gest or imitate things is obviously very limited indeed. Really 
language is essentially a social product; words can have mean- 
ings and suggest things and events only in a society and by tacit 
agreement betwee:l its members. But the human family is a 
necessary social unit (not necessarily or probably the only 
original one). 
Now an integral part of human education consists in teach- 
ing the child to speak. That means teaching it to utter in the 
recognized way certain sounds or words and to connect them 
with objects or events to which, it is agreed, the sounds should 
refer. Once this has been done, parents can, with the aid of 
language, instruct their offspring how to deal with situations 
which cannot conveniently be iltustrated by actual concrete 
examples. The child need not wait till a bear attacks the family 
to learn how to avoid it. Instruction by example alone in such 
a case is liable to be fatal to some of the pupils. Language, 
however, enables the elders to forewarn the young of the 
danger while it is absent, and then demonstrate the appropriate 
course of action. 
And, of course, speech is not only a vehicle by which 
parents can convey their own experience to their children. It 
is also a means of communication between all members of a 
human group that speaks the same language, i.e., observes 
common conventions as to the pronunciation of sounds and the 
meanings attached to tl1 ...m. One member can tell his fellows 
what he has seen and done, and all can compare their actions 
and reactions. Thus the experien.ces of the whole group can be 
pooled. What parents impart to their offspring is not simply 
the lessons of their own personal experience, but something 
much wider: the collective experience of the group. This is the 
tradition which is handed on from generation to generation, 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 3 I 
and the method of its transmission with the aid of language 
seems a peculiarity of the human family. It constitutes the last 
vital difference between organic evolution and human progre.;s. 
A member of an animal species inherits, in the form of in- 
stincts, the collective experience of that species. Dispositions to 
particular reactions in particular situations are innate in it just 
because they have furthered the survival of the species. Ani- 
mals of its kind endowed with different instincts have been less 
successful, and so have been weeded out by natural selection. 
The establishment of hereditary instincts, beneficial to the 
species, may be regarded as a slow and rather wasteful process, 
comparable to that by which the mammoth acquired a hairy 
coat. The human child is taught rules and precepts for action 
that members of his group and their ancestors have found 
beneficial. 
Now, at least theoretically, the body of traditional rules is 
not fixed and immutable. Fresh experiences may suggest to 
individuals additions and modifications. These, if found use- 
ful, will be communicated to, discussed, and tested by, the 
community as a whole, and eventually incorporated in the 
collective traditi03. In reality, of course, the process is not 
nearly so simple as it sounds. Men cling passionately to old 
traditions and display intense reluctance to modify customary 
modes of behavior, as innovators at all times have found to 
their cost. The dead-\veight of conservatism, largely a lazy and 
cowardly distaste for the strenuous and painful activity of real 
thinking, has undoubtedly retarded human progress even more 
in the past than today. Nevertheless, for the human species 
progress has consisted essentially in the improvement and ad- 
justment of the social traditio:1, transmitted by precept and 
example. 
The discoveries and inventions .vhich to the archaeologist 
appear as the tangible proofs of progress are, after all, just 
concrete embodiments and expressions of innovations in social 
tradition. Each is rendered possible only by the accumulated 
experience handed on by tradition to the inventor; each means 
the addition to the tradition of new rules for action and be- 
havior. The inventor of the telegraph had already at his dis- 
posal a body of traditional knowledge accumulated from pre- 
historic times onwards as to the production and transmission of 
electricity. So, much earlier, the inventor of the sailboat had 
already learned to make anj navigate a dugout canoe and how 
to manufacture a mat or weave a cloth. At the same time, the 
new movements needed for working the telegraph and the sail- 
boat will have to be taught as soon as the device becomes es- 
tablished. The approriate rules will be added to the social 

32 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
tradition to be learned by subsequent generations. 
Another implication of language in general and speech in 
particular here calls for remark. But in parenthesis it should 
first be noted that language is not confined to articulate sounds 
or their written reproduction. It includes also gestures, and 
ultimately picture writing. Gestures, like words, to some ex- 
tent imitate and suggest the object intended, but they too are 
largely conventional; their meanings, like those of spoken 
sounds, have to be restricted by a tacit agreement between 
members of a society. You may indicate "bird" by flapping 
your arms, but only a convention could restrict the gesture to 
indicate a special sort of bird, or even "bird" as against say, 
"tree-shaken-by-wind." Gesture symbolism, probably very im- 
portant in the infancy of human intercourse, has not lent itself 
to fruitful developments as has spoken language. We shall see 
later that picture writing suffers from the S:::1me dis hi1 ities as 
ges ticula tion. 
The capacity for what is termed "abstract thinking" -prob- 
ably a prerogative of the human species-depends largely upon 
language. To name a thing at all is an act of abstraction. The 
bear, on getting its name, is thereby picked out and isolated 
from the complex of sensations-trees, caves, twittering birds, 
etc.-with which it may be accompanied when actua]]y con- 
fronting a man. And it is not only isolated, but also general- 
ized. Actual bears are always individual; they may be big or 
little, black or brown, sleeping or climbing a tree. In the word 
"bear," such qualities, some of which would apply to any 
actual bear, are ignored, and attention is drawn to one or two 
common elements, characteristics that have been found to be 
common to a number of distinct individual animals. The later 
are grouped together in an abstract class. In very primitive 
Janguages like those of the Australian aborigines, anything so 
abstract or general as bear or kangaroo would lack a name. 
There would be different and unrelated words for "male kan- 
garoo," "female kangaroo," "young kangaroo," "kangaroo 
jumping," and so on. 
Some degree of abstraction is, however, a feature of any 
language. But having thus abstracted the idea of bear from its 
concrete actual surroundings and stripped it of many particu- 
lar attributes, you may combine the idea with other similarly 
abstracted ideas or endow it with attributes, though you have 
never encountered a bear in such surroundings or with such 
attributes. You may, for example, endow your bear with 
speech, or describe him playing a musical instrument. You can 
play with your words, and that play may contribute to mythol- 
ogy and magic. It may also lead to inventions if the things 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGkESS 33 
you are talking or thinking about can be actually made and 
tried. Talk of winged men certainly preceded by a long time 
the invention of a workable flying machine. 
Combinations, such as those just described, can, of course, 
be made without the use of words, of sounds standing for 
things. Visual images (or mental pictures) will do instead. 
Such actually play a large part in the thinking of mechanical 
inventors. Still, in the beginnings of human thinking visual 
images may have played a less important part than might be 
expected. Thinking is a sort of action, and with many persons 
(including the writer) the power of forming mental pictures 
is limited by their capacity to draw or make models of the 
thing imagined. It was a long time before man learned to draw 
or model, but, as soon as he became man, he could make artic- 
ulate sounds. 
Be that as it may, words and mental images of sounds or of 
the muscular movements required for uttering them can be 
used for functions to which visual images are inapplicable. 
Words can stand for abstractions-electricity, force, justice- 
which cannot possibly be represented by any visual picture. 
For thinking of this high degree of abstraction spoken (or 
written) language would seen almost indispensable. Much of 
the thinking embodied in this book is of such a kind. Let the 
reader try to imagine this page translated into a series of pic- 
tures or imitative gestures. He will then grasp the part played 
by speech, one of man's physiological endowments, in the dis- 
tinctively human activity of abstract thinking. 
The evolution of man's body, o his physiological equip- 
ment, is studied by prehistoric anthropology, a branch of 
paleontology. Beyond the points already considered, its results 
have little bearing upon the subject of this book. Within our 
species improvements in the equipment which men make for 
themelves-i.e. in culture-have taken the place of bodily 
modifications. Prehistoric anthropology does not at present 
even dispose of concrete documer:ts that illustrate accurately 
the evolutionary processes that must be regarded as necessary 
preliminaries to the intelligent creation of culture. None of the 
rare fossil "men" whose skeletons have survived from the 
earlier (pleistocene) Ice Ages can be classed among our direct 
ancestors. They do not represent stages in Nature's process of 
man-making, but abortive experiments-genera and species- 
that have died out. 
The earliest skeletons of our own species belong to the 
closing phases of the last Ice Age and to the cultural periods 
termed, in France, Aurignacian, Solutren, and Magdalenian. 
They are already so like our own skeletons that differences can 

34 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
be demonstrated only to expert anatomists. These late pleisto- 
cene men are already differentiated into several distinct vari- 
eties or races. There must obviously be a 10n evolutionary 
history behind them, but no reliably dated fossil illustrates it. 
And since the time when skeletons of Homo sapiens first ap- 
pear in the geological record, perhaps 25,000 years ago, men's 
bodily evolution has come virtually to a standstill, though his 
cultural progress was just beginning. "The physical difference 
between men of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian cultures on 
the one hand, and present-day men on the other. is negligible, 
while the cultural difference is immeasurable." 1 Progress in 
culture has, indeed, taken the place of further organic evolu- 
tion in the human family. 
It is archaeology that studies this progress in culture. Its 
documents are the tools, weapons, and huts that men of the 
past made in order to secure food and shelter. They illustrate 
improving technical skill, accumulating knowledge, and ad- 
vancing organization for securing a livelihood. Obviously a 
finished tool, fashioned by human hands, is a good gauge of 
the manual dexterity of its maker. Rather less obviously is it 
the measure of the scientific knowledge of his period. Yet any 
tool does really reflect, albeit rathr imperfectly, the science at 
the disposal of its makers. That is really self-evident in the case 
of a wireless valve or an airplane. It is equally true of a bronze 
axe, but a word of explanation may be useful. 
Archaeologists have divided the cultures of the past into 
Stone Ages (Old and New), Bronze Age, and Iron Age, on the 
basis of the material generally and by preference employed for 
cutting implements. Bronze axes and knives are tools distinc- 
tive of a Bronze Age as contrasted with stone ones, indicating 
an earlier Stone Age, or iron ones, marking the subsequent 
Iron Age. Now a great deal more science has to be applied in 
the manufacture of a bronze axe than in making a sto one. 
The former implies a quite consider'lble working knowledge of 
geology (to locate and idt;ntify the ores) and chemistry (to 
reduce them), as well as the mastery of compJicated technical 
processes. A "Stone Age" folk, using exclusively stone imple- 
ments, presumably lacked that knowledge. So the criteria used 
by archaelogists to distinguish his several "ages" serve also as 
indexes to the state of science. 
But when the tools, hut-foundations, and other archaeologi- 
cal remains of a given age and locality are considered not in 
isolation, but in their totality, they may reveal much more. 
They disclose not only the level of technical skill and science 
1 Leakey, Adam's Ancestors, p. 224. 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 35 
attained, but also the manner in which their makers got their 
livelihood, their economy. And it is this economy which deter- 
mines the multiplication of our species, and so its biological 
success. Studied from this angle, the old archaeological divi- 
sions assume a new si.;nificance. The archaeologist's ages 
correspond roughly to economic stages. Each new "age" is 
ushered in by an economic revolution of the same kind and 
having the same effect as the "Industrial Revolution" of the 
eighteenth century. 
In the "Old Stone Age" (paleolithic period) men relied for 
a living entirely on hunting, fishing, and gathering wild berries, 
roots, slugs, and shellfish. Their numbers were restricted by 
the provsion of food made for them by Nature, and seem 
actually to have been "ery small. In the "New Stone Age" 
(neolithic times) men control their own food supply by culti- 
vating plants and breeding animals. Given favorable circum- 
stances, a community can now produce more food than it 
needs to consume, and can increase its production to meet the 
requirements of an expanding population. A comparison of 
the number of burials from the Old Stone Age with that from 
the New in Europe and the Near East shows that, as a result of 
the neolithic revolution, the population had increased enor- 
mously. From the biological standpoint the new economy was 
a success; it had made possible a multiplication of our species. 
The use of bronze always involves specialized industries, 
and generally organized trade. To secure bronze tools a com- 
munity must produce a surplus of foodstuffs to support bodies 
of specialist miners, smelters, arid smiths withdrawn from 
direct food production. Nearly always part of the surplus will 
have to be expended on the transportation of the ore from 
comparatively remote metalliferous mountains. Actually in the 
Near East the Bronze Age is characterized by populous cities 
wherein secondary industries and foreign trade are conducted 
on a considerable scale. A regular army of craftsmen, mer- 
chants, transport workers, and also officials, clerks, soldiers, 
and priests is supported by the surplus foodstuffs produced 
by cultivators, herdsmen, and hunters. The cities are incom- 
parably larger and more populous than neolithic villages. A 
second revoution has occurred, and once more it has resulted 
in a multiplication of our species. 
Particularly in Europe, probably also in tropical countries, 
the discovery of an economical pr 1cess for producing iron in 
quantity-that is the mark of the Iron Age-had a similar 
result. Bronze had always been an expensive material because 
its constituents, copper and tin, are comparatively rare. Iron 

36 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
ores are widely distributed. As soon as they could be smelted 
economically, anyone could afford iron tools. But cheap iron 
tools allowed men to open up for cultivation fresh lands by 
clearing forests and draining clay soils that stone tools were 
impotent, bronze tools too rare, to tackle effectively. Once 
more population could and did expand, as the prehistory of 
Scotland or the early history of Norway dramatically demon- 
strates. 
The cultural advances forming the basis of archaeological 
classification have then had the same sort of biological effect as 
mutations in organic evolution. In subsequent chapters the 
earlier advances will be considered in greater detail. It will be 
shown how economic revolutions reacted upon man's atti- 
tude to Nature and promoted the growth of institutions, 
science, and literature-in a word, of civilization as currently 
understood. 

CHAPTER III 
TIME SCALES 
BEFORE proceeding to describe the content of the "ages" just 
defined, it is desirable to attempt to give some indication as to 
their duration. Without some such attempt no fair estimate of 
the tempo of human progress nor even of its reality is obtain- 
able. But a very serious effort of the imagination is necessary. 
The drama of human history occupies a period measurable not 
in years so much as in centuries and even millennia. Geologists 
and archaeologists speak glibly of these great periods of time, 
as if t.hey did not realize that they are of the same kind as 
periods we have ourselves lived through. 
A year seems a long time to most of us; we took back upon 
it, crowded with more or less exciting events affecting our own 
lives, our town, our country, and the world at large. A decade, 
or ten years, can be visualized only slightly less vividly. We re- 
call the last decade, filled with outstanding events, be it the 
records in fly-catching, murders, rapes, and divorces which 
alone are "featured" in the popular press, or personal experi- 
ences of equal historical significance, or even really impor- 
tant events like the discovery of heavy hydrogen or of the 
Royal Tombs of Dr. Our picture of longer periods is more at- 
tenuated. It is thirty-four years since the Boer War, which 
many of us can remember. In the interval we shall have wit- 
nessed all sort of events that have left a permanent impression 
on our minds. We shall recall the first flying-machines, the 
multiplication of automobiles, the beginnings of wireless com- 
munication with ocean liners, suffraettes. a world war, the 
Russian revolution, a general strike, and so on. 
But thirty-four decades would take us right back to the 
spacious days of Queen Elizabeth. The period is ten times as 
long as that we have just been trying to remember. But we are 
not, as a rule, aware that it contained ten times as many events 
which to their witnesses were presumably just as important as 
those we have been recalling from our own lifetimes. Only a 
few, like the beheading of Charles I, America's declaration of 
independence, Waterloo, come at once to the mind of the 
average man. Some with an effort recall that during the period 
37 

38 
TIME SCALES 
Newton formulated his law of gravity, that electricity and 
chemistry were first scientifically studied and applied, that 
Linnaeus classified the kingdom of living matter, and Darwin 
enunciated the doctrine of natural selection. But to realize that 
each of those 340 years, each of those thirty-four decades, was 
actually just as crowded with events as the year or the decade 
we have just experienced ourselves is much harder. But the 
effort should be made. 
A greater strain is to follow; let us go back not thirty-four 
decades, but ten times as far-thirty-four centuries. In Britain 
we shall then have stepped back into a period when no written 
records were kept, when tools were made exclusively of stone, 
bone, and wood, iron or b-'onze being unknown or unobtain- 
able, and when men spent more time on building the gigantic 
tombs known as barrows than on necessities like houses and 
roads. Three thousand focr hundred years ago written records 
were being kept only in Crete, Egypt, Hither Asia, and per- 
haps India and China. It is particularly hard to realize that in 
those unstoried centuries events crowded upon the barbarian 
inhabitants of Britain as thick and fast as last year, though no 
rumor of those events reached the civilized Egyptians or 
Babylonians. Yet to the actors the unrecorded (but not un- 
remembered) events they assisted in or witnessed, such as the 
erection of a barrow or the laying out of Stonehenge, were just 
as exciting and memorable as those of the century now draw- 
ing to a close. For the beginning of humanity, however, we 
must go back much further-not 3400 years nor even ten times 
as long, but nearly 340,000. 
In fact, in dealing with the remote beginnings of progress, a 
year or even a century is too small a unit. We must be accus- 
tomed to count in millennia-thousands of years. Yet each 
millennium was ten centuries or a hundred decades. And each 
day, year, decade, or century was as crowded with events as the 
last to be recorded in the newspapers, yearbooks, or histories. 
To get accustomed to this method of reckoning, try putting 
recorded history in terms of millennia (fractions are now con- 
veniently disregarded). Half a millennium ago Columbus was 
discovering America. A millennium back the Normans had 
not yet landed in England, and Alfred sat upon the Saxon 
throne. Two millennia take us beyond the bounds of British 
history altogether. The British Isles were known to literate 
people only by the tales of travelers and merchants, but Cicero 
was making and writing speeches in Rome. Three millennia 
ago, and we have to go outside Europe to find any written 
records: Rome had not been founded, Greece was plunged in 
a dark age of barbarian invasion, literature flourished only in 

TIME SCALES 
39 
Egypt and Hither Asia. It is the time of Solomon in Palestine. 
Finally, five millennia take us back to the very beginnings of 
written history in Egypt and Babylonia. Beyond that there are 
no written historical records to lighten the darkness or to help 
us to realize the multiplicity of events happening every year. 
Yet civilization was already mature. 
To obtain some idea of archaeological time let us consider 
the ruins of cities in Mesopotamia. The dead level of the 
alluvial plain between the Tigris and Euphrates is broken by 
tells or mounds, rising 60 feet or more above the surrounding 
ground. They are not natural hillocks, but each marks the 
site of an ancient settlement, and is composed entirely of the 
debris of ruined houses, temples, and palaces. In Iraq houses 
are still built of mud-bricks, not baked in a kiln, but simply 
dried in the sun. Such a house may with luck stand for a 
century. But eventually the rain will penetrate under the 
eaves or reach the foundations and disintegrate the plastic 
mud. The whole edifice will then flop down, a shapeless mass 
of mud or crumbling dust. The owner will not bother to cart 
away the debris. He will just level it down and build on the old 
site a new house with its foundations a couple of feet higher 
than the floor of the previous dwelling. The repetition of this 
process over successive centuries is responsible for the tells 
that break the monotony of the Mesopotamian plain. 
At Warka, the biblical Erech, the Germans explored the 
center of such a tell by means of a deep shaft. The top of the 
shaft is the floor level of a temple that is itself prehistoric and 
about 5500 years old. From this level you may descend by a 
winding path cut in the walls of the shaft for a depth of over 
60 feet! At every stage of the dizzy descent you can pick from 
the shaft's sides bits of pottery, mud bricks, or stone imple- 
ments. The shaft is actually cutting through a mound, 60 feet 
high, composed entirely of the debris of successive settlements 
in which men had lived. The mound has grown up in the 
manner described above, but even the latest of the component 
settlements traversed in descending the shaft is more than 
five millennia old! 
At the bottom we reach virgin soil-the soil of a marsh 
that had just emerged from the Persian Gulf. The lowest settle- 
ment represents the remote beginnings of human life in South- 
ern Mesopotamia. But when we have descended to it, we are 
as far as ever from the beginning of human progress. To reach 
that we must plunge into geological time. But now figures 
become almost meaningless (and mainly guesswork). To 
grasp man's antiquity we must consider the vast changes in 

4° 
TIME SCALES 
the earth's surface that our species had witnessed before ever 
the first settlers reached the site of Erech. 
Large sheets of ice had spread over the greater part of 
Britain and Northern Europe, and glaciers from the Alps and 
the Pyrenees had filled the river valleys of France. In Britain 
the ice sheets had radiated from the Highlands and, sometimes 
joined with ice sheets from Scandinavia, had spread over the 
Lowlands and extended into Ireland and as far south as Cam- 
bridge. Round Edinburgh the ice is believed to have been 
over 1000 feet thick. It filled up the valleys and rode over the 
tops of the Pentland Hills. In France the Rhone glacier, that 
can be seen in the distance above the Lake of Geneva today, 
spread down the Rhone valley to Lyons. 
The formation and spread of these glaciers and ice sheets 
must have taken a stupendous time. A glacier is a river of ice, 
not a frozen river. The extension of the Rhone glacier to 
Lyons does not mean that the Rhone was suddenly frozen 
over, but that the glacier flowed down from the high Alps to 
the level of Lyons. But a glacier flows very slowly: its motion 
is scarcely perceptible to the naked eye. The fastest rate of flow 
observed is only 100 feet per day, and often the flow is much 
slower. The great sheets of ice that flowed over the plains of 
East Anglia and North Germany did not move at anything 
like the above rate. In Greenland such ice sheets are now mov- 
ing only a few inches a day; in Antarctica the rate of flow is 
about one-third of a mile per annum. How long must it have 
taken for the Rhone glacier to reach Lyons and the Scottish 
ice sheets to have spread to Suffolk! 
And then the melting of the vast ice sheets must have been 
equally slow. A really big mass of ice takes a lot of fusing. 
An iceberg in midsummer can float south of New York. But, 
huge though it be, such a detached island of ice is immeasur- 
ably smaller and more fusible than the vast ice sheets and 
glaciers under consideration. Their melting must have been so 
gradual that the difference in the position of the ice edge 
between one summer and the next can hardly have been per- 
ceptible to contemporary men. 
Yet humanity witnessed the advance and the disappearance 
of the ice sheets over Europe long before history began. Not 
only so. Many geologists believe that there were four distinct 
Ice Ages or glaciations during the pleistocene epoch. Four 
times glaciers and ice sheets would have spread slowly over 
Europe, and four times they would have imperceptibly melted 
away or dried up. And between each glacial episode there 
would have been a warm temperate interglacial epoch of un- 
crtain duration. "Men" were living in Europe and elsewhere 

TIME SCALES 
4 1 
throughout these gradual changes. A consideration of their 
gradualness and vastness is a better guide to the length of 
prehistoric time than any piling up of monstrous numbers. 
During the Ice Ages other equally slow changes were in 
progress, and a reference to these may reinforce the lesson 
provided by glaciations. Great Britain, for instance, became 
attached by land-bridges to the Continent, and then separated 
again while men were living on her territories. The movements 
involved were as slow as those which are occurring unnoticed 
before our eyes today. It is notorious that the coast of England 
is being devoured by the sea. Occasionally the spectacular 
collapse of a piece of cliff near Brighton or the destruction 
of a promenade calls attention to this erosion. But on the whole 
the process is imperceptible. Even in half a century its effects 
are too small to be reflected in a map even on a scale as large as 
one inch to the mile. Equally gradual is the building up of land 
by the discharge of rivers forming deltas or silting up estuaries. 
At the beginning of the pleistocene a great deal of East 
Anglia was under the sea. The so-called crags of Norfolk are 
sediments laid down in the shallow sea that covered the county 
at that time. Gradually the accumulation of such silts, coupled 
with equally gradual upheavals of the earth's crust, joined 
Britain to the Continent, and ultimately made dry land of the 
North Sea basin. The Thames then joined the Rhine as a 
tributary and flowed out over a vast plain into the Arctic Ocean 
north of the Dogger Bank. The re-submergence of this area 
had not been completed when the ice sheets disappeared. A 
land-bridge to England may have still existed when the 
pleistocene period ended, and the sinking that destroyed it is 
still in progress. Its progress is no more perceptible today than 
in the earlier stages and in the previous stages of elevation. 
That again should emphasize the stupendous duration of the 
pleistocene. 
The foregoing remarks are intended to help the reader to 
gauge the lengths of time which may be denoted by the 
archaeologists' "ages." But now a warning must be inserted a'S 
to the meaning of such "ages." The Old Stone Age, the New 
Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age must not be 
mistaken for absolute periods of time like the epochs of the 
geologist. In anyone locality-say Southern England or Egypt 
-each age does indeed really occupy a definite period of 
historical time. And in all regions the severa] ages follow one 
another in the same order. But they did not begin nor end 
simultaneously all over the world. It must not be imagined that 
at a given moment in the world's history a trumpet was blown 
in heaven, and every hunter from China to Peru thereupon 

42 
TIME SCALES 
flung aside his weapons and traps and started planting wheat 
or rice o.r maize and breeding pigs and sheep and turkeys. 
On the contrary, the Old Stone Age, at least in the economic 
sense given to the term on p. 35, lasts till today in Central 
Australia and in Arctic America. The neolithic revolution had 
initiated the New Stone Age in Egypt and Mesopotamia about 
7000 years ago. In Britain or Germany its effects are first per- 
ceptible three and a half millennia later, say about 2500 B.C. 
By the time the New Stone Age was established in Britain, 
Egypt and Mesopotamia had been in the Bronze Age for 
about a thousand years. The New Stone Age in Denmark 
did not end before 1500 B.C. In New Zealand it had not ended 
when Captain Cook landed; the Maori were still using polished 
stone tools and practicing a neolithic economy when England 
was in the throes of the Industrial Revolution. The Australians' 
economy was then still "paleolithic." 
It is just as important to remember the relative character 
of archaeological "ages" as it is to grasp the great lengths of 
time they may denote in certain areas. The Old Stone Age 
was indeed so enormously long that it may almost be treated 
as a universal period, equivalent to the geologists' pleistocene. 
But in considering its end the time lag between different areas 
is of crucial importance. The equivalence between pleistocene 
and paleolithic is preserved by many archaeologists through 
the insertion of a Mesolithic Age, to which are assigned some 
post-glacial archaeological remains from countries, like Britain 
and Northwestern Europe in general, which were only affected 
by the neolithic revolution long after the end of the Ice Age. 
To the mesolithic would then be assigned those remains that 
are later than the geological pleistocene but older than the 
beginnings of the New Stone Age locally. Since economically 
the Mesolithic Age was a mere continuance of the Old Stone 
Age mode of life, it has seemed needless in this book to 
complicate the picture with a Mesolithic. Provided the reader's 
mind is free of preconceptions, identifying "ages" with periods 
of universal time, the treatment in the subsequent chapters 
should not prove misleading. 
Perhaps one final warning is desirable. Contemporary 
savages have just been described as living in the Stone Age 
today. They have not, in fact, progressed beyond a Stone Age 
economy. That does not justify the assumption that Stone 
Age men, living in Europe or the Near East 6000 or 20,000 
years ago, observed the same sort of social and ritual rules, 
entertained the same beliefs, or organized their family rela- 
tionships along the same lines as modern peoples on a com- 
parable level of economic development. It is true that the 

TIME SCALES 
43 
Bushmen of South Africa, the Eskimos of Arctic America, 
and the Arunta in Central Australia get their food in the same 
sort of way as the men of the Ice Age in Europe. Their ma- 
terial equipment and even their art are sometimes strikingly 
like those left by A urignacians or Magdalenians in glacial 
Europe. A study of the processes by which these modern 
savages make tools and of how they use them is an illuminating 
and probably reliable guide to the techniques and skills of our 
remote ancestors. An examination of the habits of the Eskimos 
is the best way of seeing how men can live under conditions 
such as ruled in Europe in the Ice Ages. 
But we may be invited to go further and seek in savages' 
institutions, rituals, and beliefs the living counterpart of that 
aspect of prehistoric life and culture upon which archaeology 
is inevitably silent. The prospect is alluring, but the reader 
must not be misled by its enticements. Because the economic 
life and the material culture of these tribes have been 
"arrested" at a stage of development Europeans passed through 
some 10,000 years ago, does it follow that their mental 
development stopped dead at the same point? 
The Arunta are satisfied with a very simple equipment that 
does, however, suce to provide them with food and shelter 
in the Australian environment. Their material equipment is 
very much on the same technical level as, and in some points 
identical with, that of Old Stone Age hunters in Europe and 
North Africa. But the Arunta observe (to us) most com- 
plicated rules for the regulation of marriage and reckoning of 
kinship, they perform very elaborate and sometimes very pain- 
ful ceremonies for magico-religious ends, they profes3 a med- 
ley of puzzling and incoherent beliefs about totems, animals, 
ancestors, and spirits. It would surely be rash to regard such 
social rules, ceremonies, and beliefs as an uncontaminated 
heritage from a "primitive condition of man." 
Why should we attribute such ideas and practices to Stone 
Age men of 20,000 years ago? Why assume that, when the 
Arunta had created a material culture adapted to their en- 
vironment, they at once stopped thinking altogether? They 
may have gone on thinking just as much as our own cultural 
ancestors, although their thoughts followed different lines and 
did not lead them to the same practical results, applied 
sciences, and arithmetic, but alor..6 what we regard as blind 
alleys of superstition. Moreover, they may have been exposed 
to influences from the great civilizations the commerce of 
which has been percolating to the uttermost corners of the 
earth for the last 5000 years. Some ethnographers at least 
claim to recognize in the material culture, social organization, 

44 
TIME SCALES 
and religion of the Australians, elements and ideas taken over 
and adapted from more advanced peoples in the Old World. 
Other very primitive 1ribes seem to have lost elements of 
culture that they once enjoyed. The Bushmen of South Africa 
would be an unfortunate stock that has been driven into poor 
and arid wastes by stronger peoples, like the Bantu. In their 
new and unfavorable environment, arts once practiced may 
have been neglected and forgotten. Finds from old refuse 
heaps, for instance, suggest that th Bushmen's ancestors once 
manufactured pottery which is no longer made. Social institu- 
tions and religious beliefs may have been disintegrated and 
distorted at the same time. Such a group is impoverished, not 
primitive. 
The assumption that any savage tribe today is primitive in 
the sense that its culture faithfully reflects that of much more 
ancient men is gratuitous. We shall frequently invoke the 
ideas and practices of conten1porary savages to illustrate how 
ancient peoples, known only to archaeology, may have done 
things or interpreted them. But save in so far as such modern 
practice and beIief are used as a mere gloss or commentary on 
actually observed ancient objects, constructions, or operations, 
the usage is illegitimate. The thoughts and beliefs of prehistoric 
men have perished irrevocably save in so far as they were ex- 
pressed in actions the results of which were durable and can be 
recovered by the archaeologist's spade. 

CHAPTER TV 
FOOD GATHERERS 
MAN'S emergence 01... the earth is indicated to the archaeologist 
by the tools he made. Man needs tools to supplement the 
deficiencies of his physiological equipment for securing food 
and shelter (p. 20). He is enabled to make them by the 
delicate correlation of hand and eye rendered possible by the 
constitution of his brain and nervous system (p. 28). 
The first tools would presumably be bits of wood, bone, or 
stone, very slightly sharpened or accommodated to the hand 
by breaking or chipping. In so far as they were made of wood, 
they will have perished. The earliest stone tools will normally 
be indistinguishable from the products of natural fracture 
(stones splintered by frost or heat or shattered by jostling in 
a river gravel). However, even from times prior to the first 
Ice Age, archaeologists have recognized pieces of flint that 
appear to be intelligently chipped, as if to adapt them to serve 
as knives, choppers, and scrapers. The human workmanship 
of such "eoliths" is indeed still disputed, but is admitted by 
the majority of authorities. 
In quite early pleistocene times there were certainly "men" 
manufacturing unmistakable implements of stone and also 
controlling fire. Conclusive evidence has been obtained from 
the cave of Choukou-tien near Pekin (Pei-ping). There, to- 
gether with the fossilized remains of "Pekin man" and of ex- 
tinct animals, were found very crudely fashioned flakes of 
quartzite and other stones, and also bones that had indubitably 
been subjected to the action of fire. Superior tools have been 
found in geological deposits of the same age in East Anglia 
and elsewhere, but not definitely associated with "human" 
skeletons. Little is to be learned from tools of this sort; they 
reveal that some manlike creature was adapting stones to his 
rudimentary needs, but little more. What the tools were made 
for can only be guessed. Hides and skins take a lot of "dress- 
ing," and contemporary savages employ a variety of tools in 
preparing them for service as coats or shelters. Some of the 
implements thus employed for scraping hides are very like 
early flints, and so archaeologists are rather fond of labeling 
45 

4 6 
FOOD GATHERERS 
rude implements "scrapers." The term implies that men were 
not only fashioning tools, but also using them to dress hides 
for clothing, but the correctness of this tacit inference is, of 
course, unproven. 
Most probably the first tools served a multitude of purposes. 
Early man had graduall to learn by experience what stones 
were most suitable for the manufacture of tools and how to 
chip them correctly. Even flint-the best natural material- 
is very hard to manipulate successfully, as the reader may 
easily discover by hitting flint nodules against one another and 
trying to produce a "flake." In the course of making tools, the 
earliest communities had to build up a scientific tradition, 
noting and transmitting what were the best stones, where they 
were to be expected, and how they were to be handled. Only 
after he had mastered the technique of manufacture, could 
man successfully start making special tools for each individual 
operation. At first the best obtain'lble flake must serve in- 
discriminately as chopper, saw, borer, knife, or scraper. The 
demonstrated facts are the manufacture of tools and the con- 
trol of fire. 
The control of fire was presum,Jly the first great step in 
man's emancipation from the bondage to his environment. 
Warmed by the embers, man could endure cold nights, and 
could thus penetrate into temperate and even arctic regions. 
The flames would give him light at night and allow him to 
explore the recesses of sheltering caves. Pire would scare away 
other wild beasts. By cooking, substances became edible that 
would be indigestible if eaten raw. Man is no longer restricted 
in his movements to a limited range of climates, and his 
activities need not be entirely dete'mined by the sun's light. 
But in mastery of fire man was controlling a mighty physical 
force and a conspicuous chemical change. For the first time 
in history a creature of Nature was directing one of the great 
forces of Nature. And t e exercise of power must react upon 
the controller. The sight of the bright flame bursting forth 
when a dry bough was thrust into glowing embers, the tran- 
formation of the bough into fine ashes and smoke, must have 
stimulated man's rudimentary brain. What these phenomena 
suggested to him is unknowable. But in feeding and damping 
down the fire, in transporting and using it, man made a 
revolutionary departure from the behavior of other animals. 
He was asserting his humanity and making himself. 
At first, of course, man just tamed and kept alight fires that 
had been produced by lightning or other natural agency. Even 
that presupposes some science-observation and comparison 
of experiences. Man had to learn what the effects of fire were, 

FOOD GATHERERS 
47 
what it would "eat," and so on. And in tending and preserving 
the flames man kept adding to his store of knowledge. Sacred 
fires that must never be allowed to die out, like the fire of 
Vesta at Rome, were ritually tended by many ancient peoples 
and by modern savages. They are presumably survivals and 
reminiscences of a time when man had not yet learned to 
produce fire at will. 
When that discovery was made is uncertain. Savage peoples 
produce fire by the spark from flint struck against iron pyrites 
or hematite, by the friction of two pieces of wood, or by the 
heat generated on compressing air in a tube of bamboo. The 
first device was being employed in Europe as early as the last 
Ice Age. Several modifications of the friction method (fire 
plow, fire drill, and so on) are current among savages in 
different parts of the modern world, and are mentioned in 
ancient literatures. Perhaps the variety of methods used for 
kindling fire indicates that the trick was discovered only 
relatively late in human history, when our species had already 
been widely scattered into isolated groups. 
In any case, the discovery was one of first-class significance. 
Man could thereafter not only control but also initiate the 
puzzling process of burning, the mysterious power of heat. 
He became consciously a creator. The evocation of flame out 
of a pair of sticks or from flint, pyrites, and tinder looks very 
like making something out of nothing. When it was a less 
familiar event, it must have had a very exhilarating effect; you 
must have felt yourself a creator indeed. But of course man 
was a creator in shaping a piece of wood or stone into a tool. 
He was asserting a power over Nature and molding objects to 
his will. 
Such are the only certain facts that emerge from a study 
of the remains actually left by early pleistocene and pre- 
pleistocene "men." What they lived on is unknown. It is as- 
sumed that the earliest men snared and hunted wild animals 
and birds, caught fishes and lizards, collected wild fruits, 
shellfish, and eggs, and dug for roots and grubs. It is also 
assumed, but with less confidence, that they made coats of 
skins. Some certainly took refuge in caves, others may have 
erected rude shelters of :'oughs. Success in hunting could only 
be attained by prolonged and accurate observation of the 
habits of game; the results must have been built up into a 
collective tradition of anting lore. The distinction between 
nutritive and poisonous plants again had presumably to be 
learned by experience, and once more incorporated in a com- 
munal tradition. 
Man must learn the right seasons for hunting the different 

4 8 
FOOD GATHERERS 
species of game or collecting the several kinds of eggs and 
fruits. To do so successfully he must eventually decipher the 
calendar of the heavens; he must observe the phases of the 
moon and the risings of stars, and compare these observations 
with the botanical and zoological ones already mentioned. 
And, as noted, man had to discover by experiment the best 
stones for making tools and where such occurred. For even 
the earliest men success in life required a considerable body 
of astronomical, botanical, geological, and zoological knowl- 
edge. In acquiring and transmitting this our forerunners were 
laying the foundations of science. 
It may equally well be inferred that men learned to co- 
operate and act together in getting their livelihood. A creature 
so weak and poorly endowed as man could not in isolation 
successfully hunt the large or fierce animals that quite early 
provided an important item in his diet. Some form of social 
organization beyond the simple family (in the modern 
European sense of that word) has to be postulated, but the 
precise form is unknown. 
And nothing material can be added to the picture till the 
last Ice Age in Europe was approaching. In the interval we 
can, indeed, discern improvements in the manufacture of 
flint tools and regional divergences in the methods of working. 
In some areas the toolmakers concentrated upon detaching 
cOlivenient flakes from the parent lump (technically termed 
the core); the flakes were then trimmed up to serve as the 
actual tools. The procedure gives what archaeologists term a 
flake industry. Elsewhere attention was devoted rather to 
reducing the core itself to a handy shape by chipping bits off 
it; in this case the trimmed core becomes the actual tool, and 
an assemblage of such is termed a core industry. 
The distinction seems due to divergent traditions in flint- 
work followed by two different groups of "men." In a general 
way it seems that flake industries were confined to the northern 
part of the Old World-to the zone north of the great moun- 
tain spine marked by the Alps, Balkans, Caucasus, Hindu 
Kush, and Himalayas. Such skeletons as have been found as- 
sociated with flake industries belong to creatures specifically 
or even generically different from ourselves or from any pos- 
sible ancestor of ours. Core industries have been found in 
Southern India, in Syria and Palestine, all over Africa, in 
Spain, France, and England. Their makers may have belonged 
to the species Homo sapiens or to forms ancestral to him, but 
positive evidence is still lacking in 1941. During Ice Ages the 
flake people tended to spill over from their proper domain, 
which was getting frozen over, into En2land and France and 

FOOD GATHERERS 
49 
Syria, and ultimately even into Africa. Core industries during 
the same Ice Ages withdrew southward only to spread north 
again when genial conditions returned. As a result of these 
displacements of peoples, communities following different in- 
dustrial traditions came to live side by side. There are hints 
of a blending of the two traditions, though intercourse between 
creatures so different as, say, Sinanthropos and Homo sapiens 
is difficult to conceive. 
The last few pages summarize four-fifths of human history 
-say on a modest estimate 200,000 years! Prom that vast 
period survive nine or ten imperfect skeletons and innumerable 
tools. The cellars of English and Prench museums are cram- 
med with implements collected from the gravels of the Thames, 
the Seine, and other rivers, and in South Africa it is easy to 
pick up a cartload of tools on the surface at many sites. But 
the stupendous numbers of the earlier pleistocene tools need 
not betoken a large population. On the contrary, a single in- 
dividual might make and lose three or four tools every day, 
and 200,000 years were available for making those we now 
collect! In early to middle pleistocene times the human family 
was probably a numerically small group, comparable in size to 
that of contemporary manlike apes. 
First about 50,000 years ago does it become possible to 
add any significant details to the foregoing vague sketch. As 
the last Ice Age was approaching, groups of "men" who used 
to be termed Mousterians became prominent in Europe. As 
they habitually lived in caves to escape the intense cold, more 
details are known of their lives than of those of earlier groups. 
Industrially the Mousterians were adherents of the flake tradi.. 
tion, though some learned to make core implements too. 
Physically they belonged to the Neanderthal species, now ex- 
tinct. They walked with a shuffiing gait and could not hold 
their heads erect. Their jaws were chinless, and a huge bony 
ridge over the eyes and a retreating forehead gave their faces 
a bestial look. They could talk sufficiently to organize their co.. 
operative hunting expeditions, but, judging from the attach- 
ments for the tongue muscles, their speech must bave been 
very halting. 
Economically the Mousterians were hunters and had 
specialized in trapping huge arctic mammals-the mammoth 
and the woolly rhinoceros, whose carcasses they would drag 
to the mouth of their cave and there cut up. Naturally such 
big beasts cannot have been pursued by individuals or small 
families; mammoth hunting is a trade for some larger social 
unit co-operating for economic ends. 
Historically the most notable fact about the Mousterians 

50 
FOOD GATHERERS 
is the care they devoted to the disposal of the dead. More than 
a dozen Neanderthal skeletons have been found in France, 
ritually buried in the caves where their group lived. Generally 
attempts had been made to protect the body. At La Chapelle 
aux Saints several skeletons lay each in a shallow grave dug 
in the cave floor. The head sometimes rests on a stone pillow, 
with stones above and around it to relieve the pressure of the 
earth. In one instance the head had been severed from the 
trunk before interment and placed in the grave apart. Not only 
were the dead carefully interred: their graves were placed 
near the hearths, as if to warm their occupants. The departed 
was provided with tools and joints of meat. 
All this ceremonial bears witness to the activity of human 
thought in unexpected and uneconomic directions. Paced with 
the terrifying fact of death, their primitive emotions shocked 
by its ravages, the bestial-looking Mousterians had been roused 
to imaginative thinking. They would not believe in the com- 
plete cessation of earthly life, but dimly imagined some sort 
of continuance thereof in which the dead would still need 
material food and implements. The pathetic and futile 
tendance of the dead, thus early attested, is destined to become 
a rooted habit of human behavior which inspired such 
architectural wonders as the Pyramids and the Taj Mahal. 
Perhaps a further incrence may be hazarded from the dis- 
position of the graves near to hearths. Did the Mousterians 
somehow hope by the warmth of the fire to restore to the 
departed a quality the loss of which they recognized as symp- 
tomatic of death? If so they were already practicing magic 
and misapplying science. They would have correctly observed 
an association between life and warmth. They might infer that 
warmth was a cause of life: death would be due to a deficiency 
of warmth. In that case to remedy the deficiency might restore 
life. In this way good logical reasons could be assigned for the 
Mousterian and later buria: practices. Their error would be 
that, having made the experiment repeatedly, they refused to 
admit its failure: for Mousterians and their successors of our 
own species went on kindling fires in graves down to com- 
paratively recent times. 
It cannot be proved that the Mousterians were actuated by 
the motives here suggested, and it is certainly not pretended 
that they or any modern votary of magic formulated their 
reasons in the terms just mentioned. The argument here out- 
lined is that which would have led a modern scientist to do 
what the Mousterian did. But the scientist would have done it 
as an experiment once or twice to see if it had the desired 
result. The Mousterian did it as an act of faith, and that is 

FOOD GATHERERS 
51 
what distinguishes a magical operation from a scientific ex- 
periment. In judging its results, negative instances, i.e. failures, 
are simply ignored. Or rather objective judgment gives place 
to hope and fear. The fervor of man's faith in magic remedies 
is proportionate to his sense of helplessness in the face of a 
crisis like death. Peeling very helpless, he just dare not let 
that hope go. And just in so far as Nature seems alien and un- 
known is man afraid to omit anything that might help him in 
that menacing environment. 
At the same time, magic offers a short cut to power. The 
sort of argument I have quoted offers an apparently logical 
account of, say, life. But it has been reached without any 
penetrating and searching analysis. Hating thought, man 
accepts the explanation that lies nearest at hand and desperate- 
ly clings to it. 
A few millennia later the glacial climate of Europe improved 
slightly for a time. During this warmer interval men of our 
own species first appear positively in the archaeological record 
in Europe, North Africa, and Hither Asia. Neanderthal "man" 
abruptly disappears; his place is taken by modern men, whose 
bodies would hardly provoke comment in a mortuary today. 
Physically at least four distinct varieties or races can be 
recognized in Europe alone, while statuettes from Siberia 
show the peculiar forms of hair distinctive of the three major 
divisions of our species. Archaeologically the products of 
these modern men, termed Upper Paleolithic industries, fan 
into several cultural groups, each distinguished by its own 
peculiar traditions in flint-work, art, and so on. No exact cor- 
relation can, however, be established between the cu1tural 
and the racial groups. 
All Upper Paleolithic groups are far better equipped for 
dealing with the environment than any previously encountered. 
They have learnt to make a variety of distinct tools adapted 
to particular uses; they even make tools for making tools. 
They work bone and ivory as skilfully as flint; they have even 
invented simple mechanical devices like the bow and the spear- 
thrower to supplement human muscular power in hurling 
weapons. And, of course, such an array of new tools indicates 
not only increased technical skill, but also greater accumula- 
tions of knowledge and wider applications of science. A brief 
reference to the P ledmostians of East and Central Europe 
and to the Aurignacians and Magdalenians in Prance should 
suffice to illustrate these points. 
Despite the intense cold, the environment in Europe was 
eminently favorable for hunters equipped to meet it. The 
plains of Russia and Central Europe were open tundras or 

52 
FOOD GATHERERS 
steppes. Every summer bitter winds blowing off the glaciers 
and ice sheets covered these plains with a layer of fine dust 
(loss), through which young herbage sprouted each spring. 
Vast herds of mammoth, reindeer, bison, and wild horse 
ranged over the plains, browsing on the grass. Every year the 
herds migrated from summer pastures in Russia and Siberia 
'V 
FIG. 3.-ARCHERS AND ARROWS IN A STONE AGE 
PAINTING FROM SOUTHEAST SPAIN. 
to winter grazing in the Danube valley or on the Pontic steppe 
an d back a gain. 
The Predmostian hunters pitched their camps along passes 
between ice-capped mountains that such herds must traverse 
and where tongues projecting from the northern ice sheet re- 
stricted the beasts' movements. The camp sites are still marked 
by immense middens discovered under the loss at Mezine near 
Kiev, at pfedmost near Prerau in Moravia, at Willendorf in 
Lower Austria, and elsewhere. The size of the bone heaps- 
remains of over 1000 mammoths were recognized at Predmost 

FOOD GATHERERS 
53 
-attests the hunters' success in procuring mammoth meat. 
There was food enough for a vigorous population. But the 
meat could only be obtained by the effective co-operation of 
a substantial number of individuals and by detailed knowl- 
edge of the habits of the herds; the clever location of the 
camp sites proves the application of such knowledge. Russian 
excavators have shown that the hunters erected substantial 
half-subterranean houses to live in. 
Even more favorable conditions prevailed in Central Prance. 
The limestone plateaus were steppes on which browsed mam- 
moths, reindeer, bisons, musk oxen, horses, and other edible 
animals. Salmon ran every year in the waters of the Dordogne, 
the Vezere, and other rivers as abundantly as in British 
Columbia today. The walls of the valleys are honeycombed 
with caves offering converjenL habitations. By exploiting this 
environment intelligently, the Aurignacians and their suc- 
cessors, the Magdalenins, multiplied and created a rich 
culture. They were no more homeless nomads than were the 
K wakiutl of British Columbia who last century, despite a 
"paleolithic" economy, lived in substantial and even ornate 
wooden houses grouped in permanent villages. Such prosperity 
is a warning against underrating the possibilities of food- 
gathering as a livelihood. 
The deep Upper Paleolithic deposits in the caves, the masses 
of tools that can be collected, suggest an increased population. 
The number of Upper Paleolithic skeletons founJ in Prance 
alone exceeds that of al: earlier skeletons put together . Yet the 
period over which they must be distributed is not one- 
twentieth of that to which the latter belong. Nevertheless, the 
number of Upper Paleolithic skeletons is not one-hundredth 
of that attributed to the neolithic period in Prance, which did 
not Jast a fifth of the time assigned to the Aurignacian and 
Magdalenian phases. Intelligent exploitation of an eminently 
favorable environment enabled the Aurignacian hunters to 
multiply beyond all former inhabitants of Western Europe, 
but their numbers fell far short of those attained by their 
successors after the neolithic revolution. 
With game so abundant as to ensure security and even 
leisure, the Aurignacians 1 were enabled to build up on tradi- 
tions inherited from unknown ancestors a varied cultural life. 
On the material side its most striking traits are the possession 
of engines-the spear-thrower and the bow. The bow is, in- 
deed, not certainly attested among the Prench Aurignacians, 
1 It is now agreed that what used to be called the Aurignacian culture is 
reaJIy three distinct cultures. For the purposes of this book this newly 
rpcognized complexity may be conveniently ignored. 

S4 
EOOD GATHERERS 
but was used by contemporary but distinct people in East 
Spain. It is perhaps the first engine man devised. The motive 
power is, indeed, just human muscular energy, but in the ten- 
sion of the bow energy gradually expended in bending it is 
accumulated so as to be released all at once and concen- 
trated in dispatching the arrow. The spear-thrower ingeniously 
augments the energy man's arm can impart to a missile on the 
principle of the lever. It may have been invented first in the 
Magdalenian phase, and is still employed by the Australian 
aborigines and by the Eskimos. The Magdalenians had, more- 
over, learned to catch fish both with hook and line and with 
harpoons furnished with detachable heads. 
These peoples must have lived in communities large enough 
to hunt successfully big game like mammoth and Lison. How 
they were organized is, of course, unknown. Economically 
each group was self-sufficient. But self-sufficiency does not 
spell isolation; shells brought from the Mediterranean have 
been found in the caves of Central France. Presumably they 
were brought thither by some rudimentary form of trade. 
Still, shells, though valued for supposed magical virtues, are 
luxuries, not necessities. The trade they denote played no 
essential part in the group's economy. That was based upon 
hunting and collecting and, at lest by Magdalenian times, on 
fishing. No evidence for the production of food by the cultiva- 
tion of plants and breeding of animals has yet come to light 
in France or anywhere else at this period. Steps for the con- 
servation of game by the observance of close seasons may be 
inferred from the customs of contemporary savages. Neverthe- 
less, the woolly rhinoceros became extinct during Aurignacian 
times, the mammoth towards the close of the Magdalenian, 
perhaps through too-successful hunting. 
The most surprising and celebrated aspect of Upper Paleo- 
lithic cultures is the artistic activity of the hunters. They carved 
figures in the round in stone or ivory, modeled animals in clay, 
decorated weapons with representations and forrr...al designs, 
executed bas-reliefs on the rock walls of cave shelters, and en- 
graved or painted scenes on the ceilings of caverns. In many in- 
stances their products are in themselves of high artistic merit. 
Great modern artists, like the late Roger Fry, admire cave- 
paintings not as curiosities, but as masterpieces. The actual de- 
velopment of the power of drawing can be studied in the 
French caves. The oldest representations, assigned to the Au- 
rignacian phase, are just profile outlines, traced with the 
finger in mud, scratched with a flint on the rock, or sketched 
in charcoal; no attempt has been made at perspective or to 

FOOD GATHERERS 
55 
fill in details. In Magdalenian times the artist learned by 
shading to suggest depth, and even achieved a certain amount 
of perspective. Now remember we see things in three dimen- 
sions; it is difficult to represent them effectively in two. We 
have inherited a technique of doing this and of reinterpreting 
two-dimensional drawings. Prom childhood we become 
familiar with flat pictures, and learn to recognize in them 
solid objects. Some of us can be taught to reverse the process 
and to reproduce depth and distance on a sheet of paper. The 
Aurignacians or some earlier artistic ancestors had no picture- 
books. They had themselves to discover the technique of de- 
picting solids on a flat surface correctly and to establish the 
tradition. And incidentally drawing is as important to modern 
science as is writing. 
Yet the paleolithic sculptures and drawings are not merely 
expressions of a mysterious "artistic impulse." The artist, in- 
deed, sU1"ely enjoyed executing them, but he did not do it just 
to secure that joy, but for a serious economic motive. That is 
most obviously true in the case of the cave paintings and en- 
gravings. The pictures are generally situated in the deep re- 
cesses of limestone caves whither no daylight can penetrate. No 
families have ever lived in these fastnesses; they are often very 
difficult of access. And in executing the drawings the artist 
had often to adopt most uncomfortable attitudes, lying on his 
back or standing on a comrade's shoulders in a narrow crevice. 
Of course he had to work by a dim artificial light: the stone 
lamps have actuaIIy been found; fat may be assumed as the 
fuel, with moss for a wick. The pictures are almost exclu- 
sively very faithful portraits of individual animals. The artist 
has evidently been at great pains to make his representation 
lifelike; we even possess trial pieces, rough sketches on loose 
blocks of stone, made in preparation for the actual master- 
piece on the cave wall. 
All these considerations show that cave art had a magic pur- 
pose. An artistic production is, after all, an act of creation. 
The artist scratches upon the blank wall, and 10, there is a bison 
where formerly there had been none! To the logic of pre- 
scientific minds such a creation must have a counterpart in the 
outside world that could be tasted as well as seen. As surely 
as the artist drew a bison in the dark cavern, so surely would 
there be a living bison in the steppes outside for his fellows to 
kill and eat. To make sure of success, the artist occasionally 
(but rarely) drew his bison transfixed by a dart, as he desired 
to see it. 
Aurignacian and Magdalenian art was therefore practical in 

56 
FOOD GATHERERS 
its aim, and designed to ensure a supply of those animals on 
which the tribe depended for its food. So the Australian 
Arunta and other modern food-gatherers perform dances alld 
other ceremonies intended to promote the multiplication of 
emus and witchetty grubs and other edible animals or plants. 
If they could understand its implications, they would indig- 
nantly repudiate the title "food-gatherers" used to contrast 
them with the "food-producing" Papuan who cultivates yams. 
"Our magic rites," an Arunta would say, "are just as necessary 
and efficacious in keeping up the supply of emus and grubs, as 
the digging and weeding done by wretched cultivators." 
The pictures were doubtless connected with other magical 
ceremonies. In a scarcely accessible niche in the cave of 
Montespan the mud still preserves the marks left by the 
buttocks of youths who had squatted there before a magic pic- 
ture in Magdalenian times. That sounds quite like the initiation 
ceremonies practiced by savage tribes today. 
In any case, the artists must have been trained specialists. At 
Limeuil in the Dordogne a number of trial pieces executed on 
pebbles have been collected. They may be the copybooks of 
an art school; on some pieces corrections, as if by a master's 
hand, have been noticed. The artist-magicians were experts, 
specially trained for their task. As such they must have en- 
joyed respect, and even authority, in whatever social organi- 
zation then existed. But they can hardly have been specialists 
in the sense of being exempted from participation in the active 
food-quest of the group; the lifelike representation of animals 
in all sorts of natural attitudes could only be achieved by men 
who had closely studied the beasts in their native haunts as a 
hunter must. 
Other products of paleolithic art may be regarded as magic 
too, but in rather different ways. From Ptedmostian and more 
rarely from Aurignacian stations come small figurines of 
women, carved out of stone or ivory. Normally the bodies are 
excessively fat and the sexual features exaggerated, but the 
face is left almost blank. It is assumed that such were fertility 
charms. The generative powers of women would inhere in 
them, and through them be canalized to provide food for the 
tribe by ensuring the fertility of game and vegetation. 
Finally, Upper Paleolithic art is valuable as providing a 
rough index of the zoological knowledge possessed by men of 
that age. The faithfulness of their delineation illustrates the 
accuracy of their observations upon those animals that pro- 
vided their food. From the pictures it is stiJI possible to dis- 
tinguish the several species intended, even in the case of fishes 

FOOD GATHERERS 
57 
and deer. Magdalenians evidently recognized the same species 
as a modern zoologist. They understood something of animal 
physiology. At least they grasped the importance of the heart; 
a wounded bison is depicted with his heart exposed and trans. 
fixed by a dart. 
On the other hand, Magdalenian and Aurignacian art is.. 
excessively concrete. The drawings are portraits of individual 
animals in individual attitudes; there is nothing generalized 
about them. This need not mean that Magdalenians were in- 
capable of abstract thinking (as defined on p. 32). It does 
probably indicate that their thinking was habitually as con- 
crete as possible. In East Spain pictures, belonging to a rather 
later period but to a distinct social tradition, are much less 
lifelike and individual; they are impressionistic, and suggest 
deer and man much more than this deer or that man. In fact, 
after the Ice Age they lead on to a series of quite conventional 
representations. The artist no longer tries to portray, or even 
to suggest, an individual living stag; he is content with the 
fewest possible strokes to indicate the essential attributes by 
which a stag may be recognized. On the one hand, he has 
found out that a shorthand sketch is just as effective as a life 
portrait in multiplying edible stags in the real world. On the 
other hand, he has habituated himself to abstract thinking. 
He has grasped the idea of stag as contrasted with this or that 
stag, and has symbolized it in the most generalized form, 
omitting all the individual peculiarities that distinguish onc 
stag from another or the same stag at different times. 
The above account will indicate, however imperfectly, the 
extent of human progress during the Old Stone Age, the pleis- 
tocene period of geology. The Magdalenian culture of France 
is the most brilliant achievement of that long episode so far 
known to archaeology. The account here given should afford 
a glimpse of the prosperity, refinement, and density of popu- 
lation attainable by a hunting and collecting economy. It 
will indicate the wide variety of modes of life comprised 
under the general term "food-gathering," and serve as a warn- 
ing against attaching an unduly derogatory sense thereto. 
Nevertheless it was not among the Magdalenians of Europe 
that the neolithic revolution was initiated and the new econo- 
my created. The Magdalenians owed their prosperity to a 
successful adjustment to a special environment. When, with 
the passing of the last Ice Age, forest invaded the former 
steppes and tundra and ousted the herds of mammoth, bison, 
horse, and reindeer from France, the culture, based upon the 
hunting of these animals, decayed. Other peoples, who have 
left no such brilliant memorials behind them, created the new 

58 
FOOD GATHERERS 
feod-producing economy. It is, in fact, conceivable that, even 
in the days of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian hunters of 
Europe, tribes in other continents had begun cultivating plants 
and breeding animals. Professor Menghin and others have 
been led to infer this. But up to date no positive evidence has 
been adduced to confirm the inference. On the available evi- 
dence, during the Old Stone Age, i.e. the pleistocene era, 
gathering and hunting were the sole methods practiced by 
man in securing a livelihood. 

CHAPTER V 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
THROUGHOUT the vast eras of the Ice Ages man had made no 
fundamental change in his attitude to external Nature. He 
had remained content to take what he could get, though he 
had vastly improved his methods of getting and had learned 
discrimination in what he took. Soon after the end of the Ice 
Age man's attitude (or rather that of a few communities) to 
his environment underwent a radical change fraught with 
revolutionary consequences for the whole species. In absolute 
figures the era since the Ice Age is a trifling fraction of the 
total time during which men or manlike creatures have been 
active on the earth. Fifteen thousand years is a generous esti- 
mate of the post-glacial period, as against a conservative figure 
of 250,000 years for the preceding era. Yet in the last twen- 
tieth of his history man has begun to control Nature, or has 
at least succeeded in controlling her by co-operating with her. 
The steps by which man's control was made effective have 
been gradual, their effects cumulative. But among them we 
may distinguish some which, judged by the standards ex- 
plained in Chapter I, stand out as revolutions. The first revo- 
lution that transformed human economy gave man control 
over his own food supply. Man began to plant, cultivate, and 
improve by selection edible grasses, roots, and trees. And he 
succeeded in taming and firmly attaching to his person certain 
species of animal in return for the fodder he was able to offer, 
the protection he could afford, and the forethought he could 
exercise. The two steps are closely related. Many authorities 
now hold that cultivation is everywhere older than stock- 
breeding. Others, notably the German historical school, be- 
lieve that, while some human groups were beginning to 
cultivate plants, other groups were domesticating animals. 
Very few still contend that a stage of pastoralism universally 
preceded cultivation. For purposes of exposition we shall here 
adopt the first theory. Even today many tribes of cultivators 
survive who possess no domestic animals. In Central Europe 
and Western China, where mixed farming has been for cen- 
turies the prevailing economy, the oldest peasants revealed by 
59 

60 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
the archaeologist's spade relied very little, if at all, on domestic 
animals, but lived on agricultural produce and perhaps a little 
game. 
Quite a large variety of plants are capable of providing a 
staple diet under cultivation. Rice, wheat, barley, millet, maize, 
yams, sweet potatoes, respectively support considerable popu- 
lations even today. But in the civilizations which have con- 
tributed most directly and most generously to the building up 
of the cultural heritage we enjoy, wheat and barley lie at the 
foundations of the economy. These two cereals offer, in fact, 
exceptional advantages. The food they yield is highly nutri- 
tious, the grains can easily be stored, the return is relatively 
high, and, above all, the labor involved in cultivation is not 
too absorbing. The preparation of the fields and sowing cer- 
tainly demand a considerable effort; some weeding and watch- 
ing are requisite while the crop is ripening; harvest demands 
intensive exertion by the whole community. But these efforts 
are seasonal. Before and after sowing come intervals in which 
the fields need practically no attention. The grain grower en- 
joys substantial spells of leisure, during which he can devote 
himself to other occupations. The rice grower, on the other 
hand, enjoys no such respite. His toil need perhaps never be 
so intensive as that demanded by the grain harvest, but it is 
more continuous. 
As the historic civilizations of the Mediterranean basin, 
Hither Asia, and India were built upon cereals, we shall con- 
fine our attention to the economies based upon wheat and 
barley. The histories of these have been much more exten- 
sively studied than those of other cultivated plants, and may 
be briefly indicated. 
Both wheats and barleys are domesticated forms of wild 
grasses. But in each case cultivation, the deliberate selection 
for seed purposes of the best plants, and conscious or acci.. 
dental crossings of varieties have produced grains far larger 
an more nutritive than any wild grass-seeds. Two wild grasses 
ancestral to wheat are known-dinkel and wild emmer. Both 
grow wild in mountainous countries, the former in the Bal- 
kans, the Crimea, Asia Minor, and the Caucasus, emmer 
further south in Palestine and perhaps in Persia. 
The present distribution may, of course, be deceptive; 
climate has changed greatly since the time when cultivation 
began, and plant geography is dependent upon climate. In- 
deed, V avilov, arguing from different premises, has proposed 
Afghanistan and Northwestern China as the original centers 
of wheat-growing. In any case, wild dinkel is the parent of a 
small, unsatisfying wheat, extensively cultivated in Central 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
61 
Europe in prehistoric times and still grown in Asia Minor. A 
far superior grain may be got from the cultivation of emmer 
(Triticum dicoccum). Emmer seems to have been the oldest 
wheat cultivated in Egypt, in Asia Minor, and in Western 
Europe, and is often grown today. But the majority of the 
modern bread wheats belong to a third variety (Triticum v ul- 
gare), to which no wild ancestor is known. They may result 
from crosses between emmer and some unknown grass. The 
oldest wheat grains found in Mesopotamia, Turkestan, Persia, 
and India belong to this group. 
The wild ancestors of barley are also mountain grasses. 
They have been reported from Marmarica in North Africa, 
Palestine, Asia Minor, Transcaucasia, Persia, Afghanistan, 
and Turkestan. Vavilov's methods would point to primary 
centers of barley cultivation in Abyssinia and Southeastern 
Asia. The questions where cultivation started and whether in 
one center or in several are still undecided. Because sickles 
have recently been found in cave dwellings in Palestine, ac- 
companied by a set of tools appropriate to a food-gathering 
economy rather than to the culture normally associated with 
the first revolution, it is argued that cereal cultivation started 
in or near Palestine. But it is not impossible that these cave 
dwellers (termed N atufians) were just a backward tribe who 
had adopted some elements of culture from more progressive 
cultivators elsewhere, but had not yet thoroughly reorganized 
their economy. 
As a revolution the introduction of a food-producing econo- 
my should affect the lives of all concerned, so as to be reflect- 
ed in the population curve. Of course, no "vital statistics" 
have been recorded to prove that the expected increase of 
population did occur. But it is easy to see that it should. The 
community of food-gatherers had been restricted in size by 
the food supplies available-the actual number of game ani- 
mals, fish, edible roots, and berries growing in its territory. No 
human effort could augment these supplies, whatever magi- 
cians might say. Indeed, improvements in the technique or 
intensification of hunting and collecting beyond a certain 
point would result in the progressive extermination of the 
game and an absolute diminution of supplies. And, in practice, 
hunting populations appear to be nicely adjusted to the re- 
sources at their disposal. Cultivation at once breaks down the 
limits thus imposed. To increase the food supply it is only 
necessary to sow more seed, to bring more land under tillage. 
If there are more mouths to feed, there will also be more 
hands to till the fields. 
Again, children become economically useful. To hunters 

62 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
children are liable to be a burden. They have to be nourished 
for years before they can begin to contribute to the family 
larder effectively. But quite young toddlers can help in weed- 
ing fields and scaring off birds or trespassing beasts. If there 
are sheep and cattle, boys and girls can mind them. A priori, 
then, the probability that the new economy was accompanied 
c 
FIG. 4.-NEOLITHIC HOES. a 
by an increase of population is very high. That population did 
really expand quite fast seems to be established by archae- 
ology. Only so can we explain the apparent suddenness with 
which peasant communities sprang up in regions previously 
deserted or tenanted only by very sparse groups of collectors. 
Round the lake that once filled the Fayum depression the 
number of Old Stone Age tools is certainly imposing. But 
they have to be spread over so many thousand years that the 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
63 
population they attest may be exiguous. Then quite abruptly 
the shore of a somewhat shrunken lake is found to be fringed 
with a chain of populous hamlets, all seemingly contemporary 
and devoted to farming. The Nile valley from the First Cata- 
ract down to Cairo is quickly lined with a chain of flourishing 
peasant villages, all seeming to start about the same time and 
all deve10ping steadily down to 3000 B.C. Or take the forest 
plains of Northern Europe. After the Ice Age we find therc 
scattered settlements of hunters and fishers along the coasts, 
on the shores of lagoons, and on sandy patches in the forest. 
The relics collected rom such sites should probably be spread 
over a couple of thousand years, and so are only compatible 
with a tiny population. But then, within the space of a few cen- 
turies, Denmark first, and thereafter Southern Sweden, North 
Germany, and Holland, become dotted with tombs built of 
gigantic stones. It must have taken a considerable force to 
build such burial-places, and in fact some contain as many 
as 200 skeletons. The growth of the population must then have 
been rapid. It is true that in this case the first farmers, who 
were also the architects of the big stone graves, are supposed to 
have been immigrants. But as they are supposed to have come 
by boat from Spain round Orkney and across the North Sea, 
the actual immigrant population cannot have been very large. 
The multitude implied by the tomb.> must have resulted from 
the fecundity of a few immigrnt families and that of the older 
hunters who had joined with these in exploiting the agricul- 
tural resources of the virgin north. Finally, the human skele- 
tons assigned to the New Stone Age in Europe alone are 
several hundred times more numerous than those from the 
whole of the Old Stone Age. Yet the New Stone Age in Europe 
lasted at the outside 2000 years-less than one hundredth of 
the time assigned to the Old! 
It would be tedious to pile up evidence; its implication are 
clear. It was only after the first revolution-but immediately 
thereafter-that our species really began to multiply at all fast. 
Certain other implications and consequences of this first or 
"neolithic" revolution can be considered later. It is desirable 
at this point to enter a caveat. 
The adoption of cultivation must not be confused with the 
adoption of a sedentary life. It has been customary to con- 
trast the settled life of the cultivator with the nomadic exis- 
tence of the "homeless hunter." The contrast is quite fictitious. 
Last century the hunting and fishing tribes of the Pacific coasts 
of Canada possessed permanent villages of substantial, ornate, 
and almost luxurious wooden houses. The Magdalenians of 
France during the Ice Age certainly occupied the same cave 

64 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
over several generations. On the other hand, certain methods 
of cultivation impose a sort of nomadism upon their practition- 
ers. To many peasants in Asia, Africa, and South America, 
even today, cultivation means simply clearing a patch of scrub 
or jungle, digging it up with a hoe or just a stick, sowing it, and 
then reaping the crop. The plot is not fallowed, still less 
manured, but just re-sown next year. Of course, under such 
conditions the yield declines conspicuously after a coup Ie of 
seasons. Thereupon another plot is cleared, and the process 
repeated till that too is exhausted. Quite soon all the available 
land close to the settlement has been cropped to exhaustion. 
When that has happened, the people move away and start 
afresh elsewhere. Their household goods are simple enough to 
be easily transported. The houses themselves are flimsy hovels, 
probably grown foul by prolonged occupation, and can readily 
be replaced. 
What has just been described is the most primitive form of 
cultivation, often termed hoe-culture or garden-culture. Nature 
soon posed a question to the first cultivators-the problem of 
soil exhaustion. The easiest way of dealing with the issue was 
to dodge it and move away. Actually that solution is perfectly 
satisfactory so long as there is plenty of cultivable land and the 
cultivator is content to do without such luxuries and refine- 
ments as impede migration. It was, of course, a nuisance to 
have to clear a new bit of forest every few years, but that was 
surely less trouble than thinking out a new solution. In any case 
this sort of cultivation prevailed throughout Europe north of 
the Alps in prehistoric times. It may have survived among 
some German tribes down to the beginning of our era; for the 
geographer Strabo remarks upon their readiness to shift their 
settlements. It is still practiced today, for example, among the 
rice-growing Nagas in Assam, among the Boro in the Amazon 
basin, and even by grain growers in the Sudan. Yet it is a 
wasteful method, and ultimately limits the population, since 
suitable land is nowhere unrestricted. 
If nomadic garden-culture is the most primitive type of cul- 
tivation, it is not quite the simplest nor certainly the oldest. 
Throughout the great belt of countries now arid or desert, be- 
tween the temperate forests of the north and the jungles of the 
tropics, the most suitable land for cultivation is often found on 
the alluvial soils deposited where intermittent torrents flow out 
from the hills on to the plains, and in the valleys of rivers that 
periodically overflow their banks. In that arid zone ttJ.e muddy 
flood plains beside the great rivers and the silts, spreading out 
like a fan at the mouth of a torrent's gorge, form a welcome 
contrast to the un fertile sands or sterile rocks of the desert. 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
65 
And on them the waters remaining from the floods take the 
place of the uncertain rains in providing the moisture needed 
for the germination and ripening of crops. And so in the 
Eastern Sudan the Hadendoa scattered millet seeds on the wet 
mud left by the Nile flood every autumn and just waited for 
the crop to sprout. Whenever a thunderstorm on Mount Sinai 
has brought down the Wady el Arish in flood, the desert Arabs 
hasten to sow barley grains in the freshly deposited silt and 
gather a welcome crop. 
Now under such conditions the floods, thus utilized, not only 
water the crop, they create fresh soil. The flood waters are 
yellow and muddy from the sediments which they have col- 
lected in their impetuous passage through the hills. As they 
spread out and flow more gent1y, the suspended mud is de- 
posited as a deep silt on the inundated lands. The silt contains 
the chemical constituents that last year's crop had taken from 
the soil, which is thus renewed and refertilized. Under condi- 
tions of natural irrigation, the cultivator need not be nomadic. 
He can go on cultivating the same patches year after year pro- 
vided they are flooded between each harvest. 
Now the method of cultivation just described is possible 
precisely in the regions where wild ancestors of wheat and 
barley are probably native. Perry has cogently argued that irri- 
gation is the oldest method of grain-growing. In particular, 
conditions in the Nile Valley would have been exceptionally 
favorable to the deliberate cultivation of cereals. The Nile, 
swollen by the monsoon rains on the Abyssinian plateau, over- 
flows its banks with remarkable regularity every autumn. The 
flood arrives at a convenient season when the heat is no longer 
so intense as to scorch up young shoots. And so, Perry sug- 
gests, the reliable and timely Nile flood first prompted men to 
plant seeds deliberately and let them grow. Food-gatherers 
must have utilized grains of wild wheat and barley for food 
long before they started cultivating them. Handfuls of such 
seeds, scattered on the wet silt of the Nile's flood, v:ould be 
the direct ancestors of all cultivated cereals. And natural irri- 
gation would be the prototype of all systems of cultivation. 
Perry's plausible and consistent account of the Egyptian 
origin of agriculture is, of course, just a theory supported by 
even less direct evidence than the Palestinian origin mentioned 
on p. 61. At the time of the oldest agricultural settlements in the 
Nile Valley the rainfall in Hither Asia and North Africa was 
more generous than today, so that irrigation was by no means 
the sole method of getting crops to grow. The idea of cultivat- 
ing cereals undoubtedly spread very rapidly; North Syria, Iraq, 
and the Persian plateau are studded with the ruins of agricul- 

66 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
tural villages going back nearly, if not quite, as far as the oldest 
of such villages in Egypt. Migratory garden-culture would ex- 
plain this rapid diffusion quite simply. It is not so easy to see 
how a system, developed under the exceptional conditions of 
the Nile Valley, should have been transplanted to Persia and 
Mesopotamia, with their very different and less favorable 
circumstances. As to Europe, it is highly probable that the idea 
of cultivation and the cereals cultivated were first introduced 
by hoe-cultivators spreading from North Africa over Western 
Europe and by others expanding from the Danube basin into 
Belgium and Germany; for the wild ancestors of wheat and 
barley are not to be expected north of the Balkans. 
On the other hand, cultivation in Egypt was not so simple. In 
its natural state the Nile Valley must have been a chain of 
swamps, choked with reedy jungle that sheltered hippopotami 
and other troublesome beasts. To make it cultivable the 
swamps must be drained and cleared and their dangerous deni- 
zens driven out. Such an undertaking was possible to a well- 
organized community of some size and equipped with efficient 
tools. On the whole it looks as if cultivation dependent on the 
Nile flood would be later than simple hoe-cultivation and de- 
rived therefrom. It is really unprofitable to speculate how, 
where, and when the cultivation of cereals began. It is perhaps 
slightly less futile to inquire how the primary form of food- 
production was completed and transformed into mixed farm- 
ing, assuming the theory enunciated on p. 59. 
In practically all the oldest food-producing settlements ex- 
amined by archaeologists in Europe, Hither Asia, and North 
Africa, the basic industry is mixed farming; in addition to the 
cultivation of cereals, animals are bred for food. This economy 
is characteristic of the "neolithic" stage wherever such exist. 
The food animals kept were not very varied: horned cattle, 
sheep, goats, and swine. Comparatively few species-fowls are 
the most important-have been added to the farmyards in sub- 
sequent periods or other countries. Horned cattle require 
rather rich grass, but can live on well-watered steppes, in 
naturally irrigated valleys, and even in forests that are not too 
dense. Pigs like swamps or woodlands; sheep and goats can 
thrive under dry, though not absolutely desert, conditions, and 
both are at home in hilly and mountainous country. Wild 
goats probably once ranged all along the mountains that divide 
Eurasia lengthwise, perhaps from the Pyrenees, or at least 
from the Balkans eastwards to the Himalaya. Wild sheep lived 
along the same chains, but in three distinct varieties. The 
mouflon survives in the Mediterranean islands and the hill 
country of Hither Asia from Turkey to Western Persia; east 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
67 
of the mouflon, in Turkestan, Afghanistan, and the Punjab, is 
the home of the uria1; still farther east, in the mountains of 
Central Asia, lives the argal. In Africa no wild sheep is known. 
The oldest Egyptian sheep belong to the urial stock, as do the 
oldest European flocks; but the mouflon is represented side by 
side with the urial on early monuments froD Mesopotamia. 
The reader will note that ancestors of our farmyard animals 
lived wild in most of the regions that seem likely to have com- 
prised the cradle of grain-growing. But the absence of wild 
sheep from Africa makes Egypt unlikely as a starting point of 
mixing farming. 
As already remarked, the period when the food-producing 
economy became established WdS one of climatic crises ad- 
versely affecting precisely that zone of arid sub-tropical coun- 
tries where the earliest farmers appear, and where the wild 
ancestors of cultivated cereals and domestic animals actually 
lived. The 111Cltiug of the European ice sheets and the contrac- 
tion of the high pressures or anticyclones over thenl involved 
a northward shift in the normal path of the rain-bearing de- 
pressions from the Atlantic. The showers that had watered 
North Africa and Arabia were deflected over Europe. Desicca- 
tion set in. Of course the process was not sudden or cata- 
strophic. At first and for long, the sole harbinger would be the 
greater severity and longer duration of periodical droughts. 
But quite a small reduction in the rainfall would work a devas- 
tating change in countries that were always relatively dry. It 
would mean the diffe;eLce between continuous grasslands and 
sandy deserts interrupted by occasional oases. 
A number of animals that could live comfortably with a 
twelve-inch annual rainfall would become a surplus popula- 
tion if the precipitation diminished by a couple of inches for 
two or three years on end. To get food and water, the grass- 
eaters would have to congregate round a diminishing number 
of springs and streams-in oases. There they would be more 
exposed than ever to the attacks of beasts of prey-lions, 
leopards, and wolves-that would also gravitate to the oases 
for water. And they would be brought up against man too; for 
the same causes would force even hunters to frequent the 
springs and valleys. The huntsman and his prey thus find them- 
selves united in an effort to circumvent the dreadful power of 
drought. But if the hunter is also a cultivator, he will have 
something to offer the famished beasts: the stubble of his 
freshly reaped fields will afford the best grazing in the oasis. 
Once the grains are garnered, the cultivator can tolerate half- 
starved mouflons or wild oxen trespassing upon his garden 
plots. Such will be too weak to run away, too thin to be worth 

68 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
kilIing for food. Instead, man can study their habits, drive off 
the lions and wolves that would prey upon them, and perhaps 
even offer them some surplus grain from his stores. The beasts, 
for their part, will grow tame and accustomed to man's proxi- 
mity. 
Hunters today, and doubtless in prehistoric times, have been 
accustomed to make pets of young wild animals for ritual ends 
or just for fun. Man has allowed the dog to frequent his camp 
in return for the offal of his prey and refuse from his feasts. 
Under the conditions of incipient desiccation the cultivator has 
the chance of attaching to his menage not only isolated young 
beasts, but the remnants of complete flocks or herds, compris- 
ing animals of both sexes and all ages. If he lust realizes the 
advantage of having a group of such half-tamed beasts hanging 
round the fringes of his settlement as a reserve of game easily 
caught, he will be on the way to domestication. 
Next he must exercise restraint and discrimination in using 
this reserve of meat. He must refrain from frightening the 
beasts unnecessarily or killing the youngest and tamest. Once 
he begins to kill only the shyest and least amenable bulls or 
rams, he will have started selective breeding, eliminating un- 
tractable brutes, and consequently favoring the more docile. 
But he must also use his new opportunities of studying the life 
of the beasts at close range. He will thus learn about the 
processes of reproduction, the animals' needs of food and 
water. He must act upon his knowledge. Instead of merely 
driving the herd away when the time comes round for sowing 
his plots again, he must follow the beasts, guide them to suit- 
able pastures and water, and contillue to ward off predatory 
carnivora. It can thus be imagined how with lapse of time a 
flock or a herd should have been bred that was not only tame, 
but actually dependent upon man. 
That result could happen only provided the peculiar cli- 
matic conditions continued long e:lough, and suitable animals 
were haunting human settlements. No doubt experiments were 
tried with various species; herds of antelopes and gazelles were 
kept by the Egyptians about 3000 B.C. These and other un- 
known experiments were fruitless. Luckily, cattle, sheep, goats, 
and pigs were included in the wild fauna of the desiccated 
regions in Asia. These did become firmly attached to man and 
ready to follow him. 
At first the tame or domesticated beast would presumably be 
regarded only as a potenial source of meat, an easily accessible 
sort of game. Other uses would be discovered later. It might 
be noticed that crops flourished best on plots that had been 
grazed over. Ultimately the value of dung as a fertilizer would 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
69 
be reaJized. The proces3 of milking can only have been dis- 
covered when men had had ample opportunity of studying 
at close quarters the suckling of calves and lambs and kids. 
But once the trick was grasped, milk would become a second 
staple. It could be obtained without killing the beast, without 
touching your capital. Selection would again be applied. The 
best milkers would be spared, and their young reared in 
preference to other calves, lambs, or kids. Still later the hair 
of sheep or goats would win appreciation. It could be treated 
by processes, perhaps originally applied to plant fibers, and 
woven into cloth or else beaten into felt. Wool is entirely the 
artificial product of selective breeding. On wild sheep it is 
merely a down between the hairs. It was still unknown to the 
Egyptians even after 3000 B.C. But in Mesopotamia sheep 
were being bred for their wool before that date. The harnessing 
of animals to bear burdens or draw plows and vehicles is a late 
adaptation, and will be considered among the steps leading up 
to the second revolution in human economy (p. 99). 
The minimal characteristics of simple cultivation have al- 
ready been considered. But these must now be pictured as com- 
bined with stock-breeding if we are to understand the basic 
economy revealed in neolithic settlements in North Africa, 
Hither Asia, and Europe. If the number of animals kept re- 
mains quite small, the account already given will hold good: 
the animals will be put to graze on the stubble after the harvest 
and at other seasons on natural pastures round the settlement. 
Beyond telling off a few youths to look after the herd, the com- 
munal economy can be left as already described. But as soon 
as the flocks exceed a low limit, special provision may have to 
be made for them. Trees and scrub may be burned off to make 
room for grass. In a river valley it may be thought worth-while 
to clear or irrigate special meadows to serve as pasture for 
cattle. Crops may be deliberately grown, harvested, and con- 
served to serve exclusively as fodder. Or the animals may be 
driven far afield to find pastures in the dry season. In Mediter- 
ranean lands, Persia, and Asia Minor there is good summer 
grazing on the hills which in winter are snow-clad. And so 
sheep and cattle are driven up to hill pastures in the spring. 
And now a regular company of the village's inhabitants must 
accompany the herds to ward off wild beasts, to milk the cows 
and ewes. The herders must generally take with them supplies 
of grain and other equipment. In some cases the fraction of the 
community that migrate with their gear to the summer pastures 
is quite small. But in hot and dry countries, like Persia, parts 
of the Eastern Sudan, and in the northwestern Himalayas, the 
bulk of the community abandons its village in the stifling 

70 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
valley and accompanies the herds to the cooler hills. Only a 
few stay behind to look after the fields and dwellings. 
From this it is no far cry to a purely pastoral economy in 
which cultivation plays a negligible role. Pure pastoral no- 
madism is familiar, and is illustrated by several peoples in the 
Old World; the Bedouin of Arabia and Mongolian tribes of 
Central Asia are the best-known examples. How old such a 
mode of life may be is uncertain. Pastoralists are not likely to 
leave many vestiges by which the archaeologist could recognize 
their presence. They tend to use vessels of leather and basketry 
instead of pots, to live in tents instead of in excavated shelters 
or huts supported by stout timber posts or walls of stone or 
brick. Leather vessels and baskets have as a rule no chance of 
surviving; tents need not even leave deep post holes to mark 
where they once stood. (Though wood decays, modern archae- 
ology can recognize the hole made by a post five thousand 
years ago.) 
The failure to recognize prehistoric settlement sites or 
groups of relics belonging to pure pastoralists is not in itself 
any proof that such did not exist. To that extent the postulate 
of the "historical school," that pure pastoralism and pure hoe- 
culture were originally practiced independently by separate 
peoples and that mixed farming resulted from their subsequent 
fusion, is irrefutable. Yet Forde has recently emphasized the 
instability of pure pastoralism. Many typical pastoral tribes 
today, like the patriarchs in Genesis, actually cultivate grain, 
though in an incidental and rather casual manner. If they grow 
no grain themselves, pastoral nomads are almost always eco- 
nomically dependent upon settled peasant villages. The cultiva- 
tors may be tributaries or serfs to the pastoralists, but they are 
essential to their subsistence. 
Whatever its origin, stock-breeding gave man control over 
his own food supply in the same way as cultivation did. In 
mixed farming it becomes an equal partner in the food-pro- 
ducing economy. But just as the term "cultivation" covers 
many distinct modes of gaining a livelihood, so the single 
phrase "mixed farming" marks an equal disparity and diver- 
sity. The several different modes of cultivation may be com- 
bined in varying degrees with distinct attitudes to the livestock. 
The diversity of the permutations and combinations has just 
been suggested. The multiplicity of concrete applications of 
the food-producing economy must never be forgotten. 
It must be remembered, too, that food-production does not 
at once supersede food-gathering. If today hunting is only a 
ritual sport and game is a luxury for the rich, fishing is stiIl a 
great industry, contributing directly to everybody's diet. At first 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
71 
hunting, fowling, fishing, the collection of fruits, snails, and 
grubs continued to be essential activities in the food-quest of 
any food-producing group. Grain and milk began as mere 
supplements to a diet of game, fish, berries, nuts, and ants' 
eggs. Probably at first cultivation was an incidental activity of 
the women while their lords were engaged in the really serious 
business of the chase. Only slowly did it win the status of an 
independent and ultimately predominant industry. When the 
archaeological record first reveals neolithic communities in 
Egypt and Iran, survivals from the food-gathering regime 
clearly stand on an equal footing with grain-growing and stock- 
breeding. Only subsequently does their economic importance 
decline. After the second revolution, hunting and fowling have 
become, as with us, ritual sports, or else, like fishing, special- 
ized industries practiced by groups within the community or by 
independent societies, economically dependent upon an agri- 
cultural civilization. 
Two other aspects of the simple food-producing economy 
deserve attention. In the first place, food-production, even in 
its simplest form, provides an opportunity and a motive for 
the accumulation of a surplus. A crop must not be consumed 
as soon as it is reaped. The grains must be conserved and eked 
out so as to last till the next harvest, for a whole year. And a 
proportion of every crop must be set aside for seed. The con- 
servation is easy. But it means on the one hand forethought and 
thrift, on the other receptacles for storage. These are quite as 
essential as, and may actually be more elaborate than, dwell- 
ings. In the neolithic villages of the Fayum, perhaps the oldest 
of their kind, excavated silos, lined with straw basketry or mat- 
ting, are the most substantial constructions that have survived. 
Again, livestock that has been laboriously carried over the 
dry season must not be indiscriminately slaughtered and de- 
voured. The young cows and ewes at least must be spared and 
reared to provide milk and to augment the herd or flock. Once 
these ideas have been driven home, the production and ac- 
cumulation of a surplus are much easier for food-producers 
than for food gatherers. The yield of crops and of herds soon 
outstrips the immediate needs of the community. The storage 
of grain, the conservation of live meat "on the hoof" is much 
simpler, especially in a warm climate, than the preservation 
of stocks of slaughtered game. The surplus thus gathered will 
help to tide the community over bad seasons; it will form a re- 
serve against droughts and crop failures. It will serve to sup- 
port a growing population. Ultimately it may constitute a basis 
for rudimentary trade, and so pave the way to a second revo- 
lution. 

72 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
Secondly, the economy is entirely self-sufficing. The simple 
food-producing community is not dependent for any necessity 
of life on imports obtained by barter or exchange from another 
group. It produces and collects all the food it needs. It relies 
on raw materials available in its immediate vicinity for the sim- 
ple equipment it demands. Its constituent members or house- 
holds manufacture the requisite implements, utensils, and 
weapons. 
This economic self-sufficiency does not necessarily spell iso- 
lation. The variations in the simple food-producing economy 
already indicated, the simultaneous pursuit of several methods 
of obtaining nourishment by different groups, are liable to 
bring the several communities concerned into mutual contact. 
Driving their flocks to summer pastures, the herdsmen from 
one village are likely to meet their counterparts from another. 
On hunting expeditions across the desert, huntsmen from one 
oasis may cross parties from another. In such ways the isola- 
tion of each community is liable to be broken down. Far from 
being a scattering of discrete units, the neolithic world should 
be viewed as a continuous chain of communities. Each would 
be linked to its neighbors on either side by recurrent, if infre- 
quent and irregular, contacts. 
The simple food-producing economy just described is an 
abstraction. Our picture is based on a selection of supposedly 
distinctive traits from materials afforded by ethnographers' 
observations on modern "savages" and inferences from par- 
ticular archaeological sites. The precise stage of economic 
development here adumbrated may never have been fully 
realized in precisely this concrete form. Archaeology alone 
could justify the presentation of a "neolithic" economy as a 
universal historical stage in the progress towards modern civili- 
zation. But all archaeology can do at present is to isolate tem- 
porary phases in what was really a continuous process. We 
have tacitly assumed that similar phases were realizeJ nearly 
simultaneously in several areas. But in prehistoric times such 
simultaneity cannot be proved, even in the cases of regions so 
close together as Tasa in Middle Egypt, the Fayum, and the 
Delta. Strict parallelism in time between Egypt and, say, North 
Syria would be hard to establish. To claim it as between Egypt 
and North Europe would be almost certainly false; our best 
examples of a simple food-producing economy in Britain or 
Belgium are to be dated in terms of solar years perhaps thirty 
centuries later than their counterparts in Egypt. And we have 
deliberately cited contemporary savage groups as illustrating 
the same economic stage. 
Archaeology has disclosed communities whose basic econ- 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
73 
omy approximates to that just described in the Nile Valley 
at Tasa, on the western edge of the Delta, and on the shore 
of an old Jake in the Fayum, in the rain belt of North Syria 
between Aleppo and Mosul, and on the slopes of the Iranian 
plateau perhaps 7000 years ago. Rather later we find the same 
economy established in Crete, on the plateau of Asia Minor  
and in Thessaly and other parts of Mainland Greece. Still later 
it becomes traceable in Spain, on the Black Earth belt of the 
Ukraine and Bessarabia, around the Lower Danube valley, in 
the Hungarian plain, and then throughout Central Europe 
wherever patches of so-called loss offered fertile sons not too 
heavily wooded. The same economy spread widely over West- 
ern Europe from Spain to Southern England and Belgium. It 
emerges later still in Denmark, North Germany, and Sweden 
-perhaps not before 2000 B.C. Similar communities, recently 
identified in Western China, need not be much older. The 
Maoris of New Zealand were still on this economic plane when 
Captain Cook landed near the end of the eighteenth century 
A.D. ! 
All the groups of simple food-producers recognized by ar- 
chaeology are distinguished from one another by very marked 
differences. Archaeologists divide them into a bewildering 
variety of "cultures." Each has its own distinctive types of 
tools, vessels, weapons, and ornaments, its own peculiar art and 
burial rites. Even the applications of the basic economy differ 
from group to group. Nomadic garden-culture was, for in- 
stance, the rule in Western Europe, on the loss lands of Central 
Europe, in the Ukraine, and in Western China-all temperate 
regions. In Crete or Thessaly even the oldest settlements seem 
relatively permanent. Again, in Western Europe the breeding 
of cattle, sheep, and swine, and hunting were at least on an 
equal footing with grain-growing. On the Central European 
Joss domestic animals seem to have played at first a minor role 
in the food supply, and game an altogether negligible one. The 
neolithic Chinese kept only pigs. 
Among the neolithic Egyptians at Tasa cattle and sheep 
bones were found in plenty, but no remains of pig. That ani- 
mal was, however, plentiful in the contemporary settlements 
in the Fayum and on the Delta's edge. Again, the grains grown 
differ-emmer wheat in Egypt, Assyria, Western and North- 
ern Europe, dinkel in the Danube basin, bread-wheat perhaps 
in Syria and Turkestan. Thus there is no such thing as a 
neolithic civilization. Various human groups of different racial 
composition, living under diverse conditions of climate and 
soil, have adopted the same ground ideas and adapted then1 
differently to their several environments. 

74 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
The differences which so clearly separate neolithic cultures 
are not surprising in view of the distinctive character of the 
economy, the self-sufficiency of each community. Because 
each group was economically independent of any neighbors, 
it could remain isolated from them. And in such isolation each 
group could work out its own arts and crafts, its own styles 
and institutions independent of the rest. Only the most bigoted 
evolutionist will contend that these independent developments 
would converge everywhere to like results. The reverse may be 
actually observed. If one studies in detail several closely allied 
neolithic groups-on the Central European loss, for exam- 
ple-one notices a continual divergence, the multiplication of 
individualized groups each differing from one another ever 
more pronouncedly in the fashionable shape for vases, the 
style of their decoration, and so on. 
Nevertheless, the possible isolation was never actually real- 
ized-perhaps, indeed, complete economic self-sufficiency was 
nowhere attained. Everywhere intercourse between adjacent 
groups is attested to the archaeologist by an interchange of 
objects. Such might result from accidental contacts between 
herdsmen and hunters, such as we have anticipated, from 
formal visits, from the practice of seeking a wife outside one's 
own village (exogamy), and so on. It might lead up to a sort 
of irregular trade through which objects might travel great 
distances. So to neolithic settlements on the Fayum lake shells 
were brought both from the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. 
Bracelets made from the shell of a Mediterranean mussel, 
Spondylus gaederopi, have been found in neolithic graves even 
in Bohemia and South Germany. 
The point is that such trade was not an integral part of the 
community's economic life; the articles it brought were in 
some sense luxuries, non-essentials. Yet the intercourse thus 
attested was of vital importance to human progress; it provided 
channels whereby ideas from one society might reach another, 
whereby foreign materials might be compared, whereby, in 
fact, culture itself might be diffused. Indeed, "neolithic civil- 
ization" in part owes its expansion to the prior existence 
amongst still sparser hunting communities of a rudimentary 
web of intercourse. 
In exceptional cases communication between separate 
groups of the kind here envisaged might lead to more regular 
'trade" and to intercommunal specialization even within the 
framework of the neolithic economy. In England, Belgium, 
and France archaeologists have discovered neolithic flint 
mines. The miners probably cultivated plants and bred cattle 
in the intervals of mining. But it is quite certain that they were 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
75 
not producing for themselves alone, but exporting their flints 
to a wider market. Nevertheless, where seas, forests, or 
wooded mountains intervened, intercourse in neolithic times 
must generally have been very infrequent and the percolation 
of ideas exceedingly slow. Only in the arid zone round the 
Mediterranean and east thereof was intercourse at all rapid 
or extensive. 
Thus "neolithic times" may mean anything between 6000 
B.C. and A.D. 1800. "Neolithic civilization" is a dangerous term 
applicable to a huge variety of cultural groups, all more or less 
on the same economic plane. Still, at sites like Tasa, the Fayum 
lake, and the lowest levels at Arpachiyah in Assyria the econ- 
omy just outlined does seem actually to represent the higbest 
form of organization attained anywhere at that precise mo- 
ment. Elsewhere and later we still find communities exhibiting 
the same fundamental economic structure. And all have more 
than mere abstractions of economics in common. It is true that 
the other agreements are only slightly Jess abstract. Stil1, it is 
worth-while ignoring the differences of their concrete appJ ica- 
tions and considering some of these general traits common 
to many "neolithic" societies. The outstanding common fea- 
tures are wood-working, pottery manufacture, and a textile 
industry. 
At the time when the neolithic revolution makes itself mani- 
fest, when cultivation first becomes perceptible, North Africa 
and Hither Asia were still enjoying a higher rainfall than 
today; trees still grew in regions now treeless. At the same 
time, in Europe, forests had replaced the tundras and steppes 
of the Ice Age. Man was obliged to deal with timber. The re- 
sponse to this stimulus was the creation of the "polished stone 
celt" (axe or adze), which to the older archaeologists was the 
distinctive mark of "neolithic times." The implement is a large 
slice or pebble of fine-grained stone, one end of which has 
been ground down to form a sharp cutting edge. It was bafted 
into the end of a stick or an antler to form an axe or an adze. 
In the later part of the Old Stone Age axe-like tools seent 
to have been unknown. The ground stone celt does not seem 
to derive directly from the "hand axe" of flaked stone or flint 
current earlier in the Old Stone Age. The essence of the 
neolithic tool is that its edge is sharpened by grinding. The new 
technique might be suggested by effects observed on stone 
rubbers used for grinding grains on other stones. Or perhaps 
for digging up the garden plots a split pebble was lashed on 
to the end of a stick to make a sort of hoe; then the end of the 
pebble might be rubbed sharp by friction with sandy soil. But 
though neolithic celts are almost invariably found in the oldest 

76 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
settlements of simple food-producers, it is not certain that the 
implement is really a result of the new economy. Axe-like 
tools are found, for instance, on the Baltic, long before there 
are any indications of farming. The models there seem to be 
provided by implements of bone and antler, also skarpened 
by polishing. Ground stone axes and adzes were certainly used 
by some denizens of the North European forest who still bred 
no animals for food and cultivated no plants. And outside 
Europe many typical food-gatherers, including even the ab- 
origines of Australia, used ground stone axes. On the other 
hand, the N atufians of Palestine, who certainly reaped some- 
thing, presumably a cereal, with sickles, possessed no axes. The 
ground stone celt is not therefore an infallible sign of the 
neolithic economy in the sense here used of self-sufficing food 
production. 
Still, wherever it arose, the ground stone celt provided a 
tough iIllplement and a resistant edge that would not be 
chipped or blunted by a few blows. It enabled man to hew 
and to shape timber. Carpentry could begin. Plows, wheels, 
plank-boats, wooden houses all require axes and adzes for 
their manufacture. The invention of the ground stone celt was 
an essential pre-condition for these later achievements. 
The preparation and storage of cereal foods may be sup- 
posed to have put a premium upon vessels which would at 
once stand heat and hold liquids. A universal feature of 
neolithic communities seems to have been the manufacture 
of pots. (Such were not, hovv'ever, used by the N atufians of 
Palestine.) Pottery may, indeed, have been discovered before 
the rise of the food-producing economy. It might have orig- 
inated in the accidental burning of a basket plastered with clay 
to make it water-tight. A couple of small fragments allegedly 
found in an Old Stone Age layer in Kenya suggest this possibil- 
ity. But it is only in neolithic times that pot-making is attested 
on a large scale; a neolithic site is generally strewn with frag- 
ments of broken pottery. 
The new industry has great significance for human thought 
and for the beginning of science. Pot-making is perhaps the 
earliest conscious utilization by man of a chemical change. 
The essence of the process is the explusion by heat of some 
molecules of water (termed the "water of constitution") from 
the hydrated silicate of aluminum which is the chemist's name 
for potter's clay. A lump of clay when wet is completely plas- 
tic; it will disintegrate in excess of water and crumble to pow- 
der if dried. When the "water of constitution," chemically 
combined in it, is expelled rather above 600 0 C. the material 
loses its plasticity altogether; the whole lump solidifies, and 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
77 
will keep its shape wet or dry unless deliberately and labori- 
ously broken up by crushing or pounding. The essence of the- 
potter's craft is that she can mold a piece of clay into any- 
shape she desire and then give that shape permanence by "fir- 
ing" (i.e. heating to over 600 0 C.). 
To early man this change in the quality of the material must 
have seemed a sort of magic transubstantiation-the conver- 
sion of mud or dust into stone. It may have prompted some- 
philosophical questions as to the meaning of substance and 
sameness. How is the plastic clay the same substance as the- 
hard but brittle earthenware? The pot you put into the fire has 
much the same shape as what you draw out, but tbe color 
has changed and the texture is quite different. 
The discovery of pottery consisted essentially in finding out 
how to control and utilize the chemical change just mentioned. 
But, like all other discoveries, its practical application involves. 
others. To be able to mold your clay you must wet it; but if 
you put your damp plastic pot straight into the fire, it will 
crack. The water, added to the clay to make it plastic, must be- 
dried out gently in the sun or near the fire, before the vessel 
can be baked. Again, the clay has to be selected and prepared.. 
If it contains too large grits, it will not model easily nor yield 
a handsome or serviceable pot; some process of washing must 
be devised to eliminate coarse material. On the other hand, if 
the clay contains no grit, it will stick to the fingers in molding. 
and crack in firing. To avoid this danger some gritty material 
-sand, powdered stone or shell, chopped straw, what is 
termed a "temper"-must be added. 
In the process of firing, the clay changes not only its physical 
consistency, but also its color. The latter change is determined 
partly by chemical impurities in the material, partly by the 
process of firing. Most clays contain some iron oxide. If the- 
air has free access to the pot while it is hot, the vessel will 
come out with a reddish hue because the iron will be oxidized 
to form the red ferric oxide. But if the pot be surrounded dur- 
ing firing with glowing charcoal and the gases given off during. 
imperfect combustion, the iron salts will be reduced, and the 
product will be gray, because ferroso-ferric oxide is black. A 
dark color may also be produced by free carbon in the clay. 
That may be derived from the charring of vegetable or organic 
impurities in the raw material, or from soot from the fire soak-- 
ing into the pores of the red-hot earthenware, or from fats or 
dung deliberately applied to the vase surface while it is stiU 
hot. Man had to learn to control such changes as these and to 
utilize them to enhance the beauty of the vessel. 
At first, local conditions, the sort of clay and fuel available. 

78 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
on the spot, would be allowed to determine the color of the 
pot. Average clays, burned in the smoky brushwood fires of 
well-watered regions, yield black or dirty gray vessels. Under 
rather drier climates reds and brown can be produced. The hot 
fires made from thorny Mediterranean or desert plants easily 
yield pale buff, pinkish, or greenish wares. Subsequently the 
potter learns how to produce such effects at will or to enhance 
them for the embellishment of the vessel. She might, for in- 
stance, cover the vase's surface with a thin layer-a "slip" or 
wash-of selected clay, rich in iron oxides, in order to pro- 
duce a good fed ware. She might even apply such specially pre- 
pared clays with a brush so as to outline painted patterns. It 
must be remembered that the effect of color painted on an 
unfired vessel is quite different from that of the final product. 
Vase-painting is no simple art; the artist has to forecast in ad- 
vance what the fired pot is going to look like. The feat was 
early achieved in Hither Asia. It was a long time before 
painted pottery could be manufactured in temperate regions 
where the natural fuel gave a smoky flame. 
There the light ground needed to show up painted decora- 
tion could only be achieved with the aid of a further invention 
-a built oven or kiln in which the vases can be raised to 900 0 
or 1000 0 C., and yet kept out of contact with the flames. Such 
a device is not attested for the earliest neolithic communities; it 
does not reach Central or Western Europe till the Iron Age. 
Thus the potter's craft, even in its crudest and most general- 
ized form, was already complex. It involved an appreciation of 
a number of distinct processes, the application of a whole con- 
stellation of discoveries. Only a fe\v of these have been even 
mentioned. At the risk of boring the reader, we must note one 
more. The shaping of the pot itself is not so easy as it sounds. 
Quite small vessels can, of course, be kneaded and molded, 
mud-pie fashion, out of a lump of clay. Or a coating of clay 
can be spread over an open basket or a half-gourd; when it has 
dried, the form can be removed, and you have an open dish 
or platter ready for firing. 
But if anything larger is desired, or a vessel with a narrow 
neck like a bottle or jug, such elementary processes no longer 
suffice: the vessel must be built up. In neolithic Europe and 
Asia this was generally done by the ring method; after the base 
had been molded, rings of clay of the desired diameter were 
prepared. One was attached to the base and then another set 
on the top edge of this, and so on. It is a slow process. The 
rings must be fairly wet and plastic when they are put on. But 
as soon as one ring is in place, you must pause and let it dry 
and harden-but not too much-before adding the next story. 

THE NEOLITEIC REVOLUTION 
79 
The mere construction of a large pot may take several days. 
The constructive character of the potter's craft reacted on 
human thought. Building up a pot was a supreme instance of 
creation by man. The lump of clay was perfectly plastic; man 
could mold it as he would. In making a tool of stone or bone 
he was always limited by the shape and size of the original 
material; he could only take bits away from it. No such limi- 
tations restrict the activity of the potter. She can form her lump 
as she wishes; she can go on adding to it without any doubts as 
to the solidity of the joins. In thinking of "creation," the free 
activity of the potter in "making form where there was no 
form" constantly recurs to man's mind; the similes in the Bible 
taken from the potter's craft illustrate the point. 
In practice the potter's freedom to create was not at first 
fully utilized. Fancy cannot work in a vacuum. What it creates 
must be like something already known. Moreover, pots were 
generally made by women and for women, and women are par- 
ticularly suspicious of radical innovations. So the earliest pots 
are obvious imitations of familiar vessels made from other 
materials-from gourds, from bladders, membranes, and skins, 
from basketry and wickerwork, or even from human skulls. 
To enhance the resemblance, the grass sling in which a gourd, 
like a modern Chianti flask, was carried, the stitching of the 
"wine-skin," or the interlacing fibres of the basket were often 
imitated by patterns incised or painted on the pot. Thus the 
vessel in the fresh material came to look less new-fangled and 
outlandish to the prudent housewife! 
Among the remains of the earliest neolithic villages of Egypt 
and Hither Asia we find the first indications of a textile in- 
dustry. Manufactured garments, woven out of linen, or later 
wool, begin to compete with dressed skins or skirts of leaves 
as protection against cold and sun. For this to be possible an- 
other complex of discoveries and inventions is requisite, a fur- 
ther body of scientific knowledge must be practically applied. 
In the first place, a suitable material was needed, a fibrous sub- 
stance that would yield long threads. The neolithic villagers on 
the Fayum lake were already using flax. They must have 
selected this from all other plants and begun to cultivate it de- 
liberately in addition to growing cereals. Another variety of 
flax n1ay have been discovered and grown in Asia. A local 
European flax was cultivated and utilized in Switzerland in 
neolithic times. 
Other materials must have been tried. Cotton was certainly 
being grown in the Indus valley soon after 3000 B.C. Wool, as 
already noted, was used in Mesopotamia about the same time. 
Before wool-bearing sheep had been produced by selective 

80 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
breeding, the hairs of sheep and goats may have served for the 
production of a sort of cloth, since hair can be woven. A textile 
industry thus not only requires the knowledge of special sub- 
stances like flax, cotton, and wool, but also the breeding of 
special animals and the cultivation of particular plants. 
Among the prereq Jisite inventions a device for spinning is 
important. The little discs of stone or pottery, termed whorls, 
that served to weight the end of a spindle, like miniature fly- 
wheels, generally constitute the sole tangible proof of the exis- 
tence of a textile industry that an archaeologist can hope to 
find. Only very exceptional conditions can preserve actual 
textile products or the vvooden implements used in their pro- 
duction. 
Of these the most essential is a loom. It is, indeed, possible 
to produce a sort of cloth with the aid of a frame by a sort of 
glorified plaiting process similar to that employed in making 
mats. Blankets of dogs' hair were actually produced in this way 
by food-gathering tribes on the northwest coast of Canada 
last century. But in the Old World a true 100m goes back to 
neolithic times. Now a loom is quite an elaborate piece of 
machinery-much too elaborate to be described here. Its use 
is no less complicated. The invention of the loom was one of 
the great triumphs of human ingenuity. Its inventors are name- 
less, but they made an essential contribution to the capital 
stock of human knowledge, an application of science that only 
to the unthinking seems too trivial to deserve the name. 
All the foregoing industries require for their exercise a 
technical skill that can only be acquired by training and prac- 
tice. Yet all were household crafts. In our hypothetical neo- 
lithic stage there would be no specialization of labor-at most 
a division of work between the sexes. And that system can still 
be seen at work today. Among hoe-cultivators the women gen- 
erally till the fields, build up and fire the pots, spin, and weave; 
men look after animals, hunt and fish, clear the plots for cul- 
tivation, and act as carpenters, preparing their own tools and 
weapons. But, of course, to such a generalization there are 
many exceptions: among the Y oruba, for instance, weaving is 
in the hands of men. 
All the industries named, from garden culture to weaving, 
have been rendered possible only by the accumulation of ex- 
perience and the application of deductions therefrom. Each 
and all repose on practical science. Moreover, the exercise of 
each craft is throughout regulated and directed by a constantly 
expanding body of practical science. The appropriate lore is 
handed on from parent to child for generation after generation. 
The cultivator, for instance, must know in practice what soil 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOL"0TION 
81 
it is most profitable to till, when to break up the ground, how 
to distinguish young grain shoots from sprouting weeds, and a 
host of other details. The young potter must learn to find and 
choose proper clay, how to clean it, with what proportion of 
water and grit it should be mixed, and so on. 
Thus there grows up to be handed on a great body of craft 
lore-snippets of botany, geology, and chemistry, one might 
say. If we may judge from the procedure of modern bar- 
barians, the legitimate deductions from experience are inex- 
tricably mixed up with what we should call useless magic. Each 
operation of every craft must be accompanied by the proper 
spells and the prescribed ritual acts. All this body of rules, 
practical and magical, forms part of the craft tradition. It is 
handed on from parent to child by example and by precept. 
The daughter helps her mother at making pots, watches her 
closely, imitates her, an receives from her lips oral directions, 
warnings, and advice. The applied sciences of neolithic times 
were handed on by what today we should call a system of ap- 
prenticeship. 
The neolithic crafts have been presented as household in.. 
dustries. Yet the craft traditions are not individual, but col- 
lective traditions. The experience and wisdom of all the com- 
munity's members are constantly being pooled. In a modem 
African village the housewife does not retire into seclusion in 
order to build up and fire her pots. All the women of the village 
work together, chatting and comparing notes; they even help 
one another. The occupation is public; its rules are the result 
of communal experience. And so in prehistoric times all the 
pots from a given neolithic village exhibit a monotonous uni.. 
formity. They bear the stamp of a strong collective tradition 
rather than of individuality. 1 
And the neolithic economy as a whole cannot exist without 
co-operative effort. The heavier labor of clearing patches in a 
forest or draining a marsh must be a collective undertaking. 
The digging of drains, the defense of the settlement against 
wild beasts or floods, must again be communal responsibilities. 
The dwellings in neolithic villages both in Egypt and in West- 
ern Europe have been proved to be arranged in a regular order, 
not scattered about indiscriminately. All this implies some 
social organization to co-ordinate and control the communal 
activities. What that organization was we can never know ex- 
actly. One assertion seems plausible. 
The effective unit of social organization in pure neolithic 
times was generally very small. A typical Thessalian village, 
] Yet certain "neolithic" communities today recognize the proprietary rights 
of individuals or families to particular patterns, ceremonies, or processes. 

82 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
rather advanced in the period, covered an area of 100 by 45 
metres, or just over one acre! Several neolithic cemeteries have 
been fully explored in Central Europe. None contained more 
than twenty graves. (Of course, we do not know how long the 
settlement was occupied nor how many generations are repre- 
sented in each cemetery.) Amon3 :nodern representatives of 
garden-cultivation a tendency for the village to break up has 
been noted by ethnographers. Som; of the young men hive off 
with their wives and start a new village of their own. They like 
the freedom of their new settlement, in which they are exempt 
from the authority and oversight of their elders. Then, found- 
ing a new village with plots of virgin jungle close to the dwell- 
ings saves long walks to the gardens, such as become necessary 
when the original village is populous and the nearest land has 
already been used up. On the whole the separation would be 
convenient-provided, of course, there was land available. In 
neolithic times there was as yet no shortage. 
Undoubtedly the co-operative activities involved :n "neo- 
lithic" life found outward expression in social and political 
institutions. Undoubtedly such in.stitutions were consolidated 
and reinforced by magico-religious sanctions, by a more or less 
coherent system of beliefs and superstitions, by what Marxists 
would call an ideology. The new forces controlled by man as 
the result of the neolithic revolution and the knowledge gained 
and applied in the exercise of the new crafts must have reacted 
upon man's outlook. They must ha"e modified his institutions 
and his religion. But precisely what form neolithic institutions 
and beliefs assumed is unknowable. 
Deductions of what ought to be appropriate to the neo- 
lithic economy need not correspond to historical reality: the 
precise forms of the English constitution and of English 
protestantism in the nineteenth century cannot be deduced 
from the capitalist system. Generalizations from observations 
made on a few ancient sites can claim no universal validity. In- 
ferences from institutions and rites, observed among barbarous 
tribes today, do not certainly, or even probably, give clues to 
the political and mental life of other barbarous tribes who, 
6000 years earlier, had reached a similar stage of economic 
development. Institutions, beliefs, and theories notoriously 
tend to lag behind actual practice. There was, as has already 
been insisted, no "neolithic" civilization, only a multitude of 
different concrete applications of a few very general principles 
and notions. 
If barbarous tribes today are still content to secure a liveli- 
hood by the same "neolithic" method as 6000 years ago, there 
is no guarantee that their political and religious life has been 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
83 
equally stagnant. On the contrary, subsequent revolutions have 
had worldwide effects, for reasons indicated on p. 136. Five 
thousand years give ample time for some results of the 
second revolution to percolate even to Australia. There is posi- 
tive evidence that some of the material achievements due to 
the second revolution were adopted by peoples whose economic 
organization remained unaffected as a whole. All typical hoe- 
cultivators in Africa, for instance, have been using iron for 
centuries. The second revolution, we shall see, evoked vigorous 
systems of magico-religious beliefs. The spread of great stone 
graves among neolithic peoples in Western and Northern Eu- 
rope is most plausibly explained by repercussions of the beliefs 
then formulated in the Ancient East. Some authorities would 
find traces of such beliefs even among food-gathering abo- 
rigines in Australia and America. To use contemporary bar- 
barians' religions as evidence for the religion of Egypt or 
Hither Asia in 5000 B. c. would be possible only if the diffusion 
of ideas were entirely eliminated. 
We shall not therefore attempt a description of "the neo- 
lithic polity" and "the neolithic religion." It is really unlikely 
that any such existed. The "neolithic revolution" was not a 
catastrophe, but a process. Its several stages were doubtless 
modifying the social institutions and magico-religious ideas of 
food-gatherers and hunters. But it would be long before any 
new system or systems, more appropriate to the nascent econ- 
omy, became firmly established. Ere then the second revolution 
may already have been beginning. It was perhaps the very 
absence of rigid ideologies and deeply-rooted institutions that 
permitted the rapid progress from self-sufficing villages to in- 
dustrial and commercial cities in less than 2000 years. 
Firmly entrenched institutions, passionately held supersti- 
tions, are notoriously inimical to social change and the scie:t- 
tific advances that make it necessary. And the force of such 
reaction in a community seems to be inversely proportional to 
the community's economic security. A group always on the 
brink of starvation dare not risk change. The least deviation 
from the traditional procedures tha' have been found to yield 
the essential modicum of subsistence may imperil the whole 
group. It would be just as dangerous to antagonize the mys- 
terious magic powers that control the weather by omitting a 
rite or a sacrifice as to omit poisoning the arrowhead that is to 
slay an elephant. 
Now, even after the first revolution, life remained very pre- 
carious for the little group of self-sufficing peasants. A 
drought, a hailstorm, a blight might mean famine. Such peas- 
ants had no world market to draw upon, so that deficiencies of 

84 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
crops in one area could be compensated by a surplus in an- 
other. They had still only a limited variety of sources of food. 
All their several crops, their herds, and their game might easily 
be affected by the same catastrophe. The reserves in store were 
never large. A self-sufficing peasant community is inevitably 
fully conscious of its immediate dependence on the powers 
that bring rain and sunshine, thunder and hurricane. But these 
act capriciously and terribly. At all costs they must be com- 
pelled, cajoled, or conciliated. 
Now, once you can make yourself believe that you have 
found a system of magic to achieve that compulsion, or a 
ritual to ensure that conciliation, the belief becomes a solace 
in the terrors of life that one dare not surrender. Had such 
magics and rituals been firmly established, they would surely 
have retarded the spread of the second revolution. After it, 
firmly rooted beliefs-for instance, in the efficacy of astrology 
and tbe potency of divine kings and ancestral spirits-did 
impede the growth of true science and the establishment of an 
inter-urban international economy. But perhaps the first revo- 
lution was still just sapping confidence in the necessity of 
hunters' magic and its political consequences when the disturb- 
ing ideas and discoveries heralding the second revolution were 
emerging. Perhaps any new system of organization and belief, 
adapted to the neolithic economy, had not become established 
and rooted when the economy itself began to disolve in the 
Orient. 
Nevertheless, certain hints are available as to institutions 
that did or did not subsist in neolithic times. Sometimes they 
seem to have reacted upon the form taken by the second revo- 
lution. That many institutions were taken over from the older 
order is only natural. In the Nile Valley there is indirect evi- 
dence of the survival of a system of totemic clans. The later 
neolithic villages seem to have been the settlements belonging 
to such clans. When in historical times the villages became the 
capitals of parishes (nomes), they bore names like Elephantine 
and Palcontown (Hierakonpolis), taken apparently from the 
totem of the localized clan, the elephant and the falcon. The 
standards of the parishes were clan emblems, and even in pre- 
historic times such emblems figure upon the vases. Such a clan 
system is not uncommon among simple food-producers today, 
and may be a genuine survival from neolithic times. But that 
all neolithic communities were organized as totemic clans can- 
not be asserted. 
Of chieftainship there is no definite evidence in early neo- 
lithic cemeteries or villages. There are, that is to say, no out- 
standingly wealthy graves, evidently belonging to a person of 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
85 
rank, and no dwellings that could pass for palaces. The great 
stone graves of Western and Northern Europe which do look 
princely belong to a time when ideas proper to the second revo- 
lution were being diffused, and they are probably inspired 
thereby. Houses larger than the normal have been noted in 
some neolithic villages in Europe, but they may be communal 
lodges of clubs, like the bachelors' houses of the Pacific 
Islanders, rather than princely residences. Nor is there unam- 
biguous evidence of warfare. Weapons are certainly often 
found in neolithic graves and settlements. But were they arms 
of war or merely implements of the chase? Woman's increasing 
share in the provision of food for the community may have 
raised also the social status of the sex. But that too is uncer- 
tain. 
As to the magico-religious notions that held neolithic com- 
munities together, a few guesses may be hazarded. The 
tendance of the dead, going far back into the Old Stone Age, 
may have assumed a deeper significance in the new. In the case 
of several neolithic groups, indeed, no burials have been dis- 
covered. But generally the dead were carefully interred in built 
or excavated graves, either grouped in cemeteries near the 
settlement or dug close to the individual dwellings. The dead 
are normally provided Y/ith utensils or weapons, vases of food 
and drink, and toilet articles. In prehistoric Egypt pictures of 
animals and objects are painted on the funerary vases. They 
presumably had the same magic significance as the cave paint- 
ing and rock-carvings of Old Stone Age hunters. In historical 
times they were transferred to the walls of the tomb, and then 
attached texts show that they were really designed to ensure to 
the dead the continued enjoyment of the services they depict. 
Such tendance denotes an attitude to the ancestral spirits 
that goes back to far older periods. But now the earth in which 
the ancestors' remains lie buried is seen as the soil from which 
the community's food supply magically springs each year. The 
ancestral spirits must surely be regarded as assisting in the 
crops' germination. 
Fertility cults, magic rites to assist or compel the forces of 
reproduction, may have become more prominent than ever in 
neolithic times. Small figurines of women, carved in stone or 
ivory, with the sexual characters well marked, have been noted 
in camps of the Old Stone Age. But similar figures, now gen- 
erally modeled in clay, are very common in neolithic settle- 
ments and graves. They are often termed "mother goddesses." 
Was the earth from whose womb the young grain sprouts really 
conceived in the likeness of a woman with whose generative 
functions man is certainly familiar? 

86 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
The early Oriental civilizations periodically celebrated with 
great pomp a "sacred marriage," the nuptial union of a "king" 
and a "queen," who on this occasion represented divinities. 
Their union not only symbolized, but also magically ensured 
and compelled, the fertilization of the earth, that she might 
bring forth her fruits in due season. But the seed must die and 
be buried before it can sprout and multiply. A human repre- 
sentative of the grain, a "corn king," was once slain and buried. 
His place was taken by a young successor who should stand 
for the growing crops till he too must lie like the seed in the 
ground. These magical rites, these dramatic representations of 
the death and rebirth of the grain, were often mitigated in prac- 
tice by historical times. But they can be discerned behind many 
early myths, and in neolithic times may have been observed 
literally. Yet they might pave the way to political power. The 
"corn king" may claim by magic to have attained immortality. 
Then he is a secular king, too, entitled to the dignity of a god. 
Finally, cultivation may have required a closer observation 
of the seasons, a more accurate division of time, the year. Agri- 
cultural operations are essentially seasonal, and their success 
is largely dependent upon the time of their performance. But 
the proper season is determined by the sun, not by the moon's 
phases, which provide a calendar for hunters. In northerly 
latitudes the changes in the sun's path between the solstices are 
conspicuous enough to provide clues as to the seasons. The 
observation of such clues would emphasize the sun's role as 
ruler of the seasons and guarantee his divinity. 
But near the tropics the sun's movement is less striking. 
There the stars, always visible in those cloudless skies, provide 
a more obvious means of determining and dividing the solar 
year . You note that certain stars of constellations take up a sig- 
nificant position in the sky at the time when experience sug- 
gests you should plant your crops, others when you may ex- 
pect rain to ripen them. By so using the stars as guides, men 
may have come to the belief that they actually influenced ter- 
restrial affairs. You confuse connection in time with causal 
connection. Because the star Sirius is seen on the horizon at 
dawn when the Nile flood arrives, it is inferred that Sirius 
causes the Nile flood. Astrology is based on this sort of confu- 
sion. In Mesopotamia the sign for deity was a star. Cults of the 
sun and of the stars may have been growing up in this sort of 
way in neolithic times. But really we do not know to what 
extent man had yet formulated any idea of divinity. It is diffi- 
cult to distinguish ideas elaborated and diffused after the 
second revolution from those developed by the first. 

CHAPTER VI 
PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
THE neolithic revolution, just described, was the climax of a 
long process. It has to be presented as a single event because 
archaeology can only recognize the result; the several steps 
leading up thereto are beyond the range of direct observation. 
A second revolution transformed some tiny villages of self- 
sufficing farmers into populous cities, nourished by secondary 
industries and foreign trade, and regularly organized as States. 
Some of the episodes which ushered in this transformation can 
be discerned, if dimly, !Jy prehistory. The scene of the drama 
lies in the belt of semi-arid countries between the Nile and the 
Ganges. Here epoch-making inventions seem to have followed 
one anothef with breathless speed, when we recall the slow 
pace of progress in the millennia before the first revolution or 
even in the four millennia between the second and the Indus- 
trial Revolution of modern times. 
Between 6000 and 3000 B.C. man has learnt to harness the 
force of oxen and of winds, he invents the plow, the wheeled 
cart, and the sailboat, he discovers the chemical processes 
involved in smelting copper ores and the physical properties of 
metals, and he begins to work out an accurate solar calendar. 
He has thereby equipped himself fOf urban life, and prepares 
the way for a civilization which shall require writing, processes 
of reckoning, and standards of measurement-instruments of 
a new way of transmitting knowledge and of exact sciences. In 
no period of history till the days of Galileo was progress in 
knowledge so rapid or far-reaching discoveries so frequent. 
The neolithic revolution left the whole area from the Nile 
and the East Mediterranean across Syria and Iraq to the 
Iranian plateau and to the Indus valley beyond sprinkled with 
neolithic communities. It may be assumed that great diversity 
in culture reigned throughout this vast zone, just as it does to- 
day. We may suspect many scattered groups of hunters and 
fishers, survivals of the pre-neolithic economy, migratory horti- 
culturists, and still more nomadic pastoralists. But none of 
these communities is as yet direcdy known; archaeologists have 
concentrated their attention upon more settled communities, 
87 

88 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
upon the sites of villages which have often grown into cities. 
Even these exhibit great diversity in crafts, in art, and in gen- 
eral economy, but a few abstract traits are common to all. 
The populations are essentiaily sedentary. The favored sites 
remain continuously occupied right into historical times. 
Daughter colonies may be planted as the community grows, 
but as far as possible the village itself expanded till it became 
a town. The geographical and economic factors favoring 
permanent settlement can easily be guessed. 
In the first place, really desirable sites are limited in a zone 
of countries which were becoming increasingly arid and 
afflicted with ever worse droughts. Permanent water supplies- 
perennial springs and streams that would supply the needs of 
large assemblages of men and livestock, and supplement the 
scanty rainfall by irrigating fields and gardens-were diminish- 
ing. As the human race multiplied under the stimulus of the 
first revolution, such became rare and valuable possessions. 
Then the profitable exploitation of these natural oases was a 
particularly laborious task requiring the collective effort of a 
large body of workers. Precisely as the ultimate yield in food- 
stuffs was to be abundant, so the preliminary exertions in pre- 
paring the land were heavy and irksome. The Nile, whose 
annual flood provides both water and soil, offered a certain 
and abundant livelihood. But the valley bottom that is reached 
by the flood was originally a series of swamps and reedy 
jungles. Its reclamation was a stupendous task: the swamps 
had to be drained by channels, the violence of floodwaters to 
be restrained by banks, the thicket to be cleared away, the wild 
beasts lurking in them to be exterminated. No small group 
could hope to make headway against such obstacles. It needed 
a strong force capable of acting together to cope with recurrent 
crises that threatened drainage channels and banks. The few 
original patches of habitable and cultivable land had to be 
extended with sweat and blood. The soil, thus hardly con- 
quered, was a sacred heritage; no one would willingly abandon 
fields so laboriously created. And there was no need to aban- 
don them, since the river itself renewed their fertility every 
year. 
Lower Mesopotamia, the region termed Sumer at the dawn 
of history, presented a like task. Beween the main channels of 
the Tigris and the Euphrates was a vast tract of swamps, only 
recently raised by the river silt above the waters of the Persian 
Gulf. The swamps were covered with a tangle of gigantic reed- 
brakes interspersed with groves of date-palms. They were inter- 
rupted only by low ridges of rocky outcrop or banks of sandy 
silt. But they swarmed perpetually with animal life while on 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 89 
either side the steppes above flood level were parched and 
barren throughout the long blazing summer and the bitter 
winter. Attracted perhaps by the game, wild fowl, and fish, and 
by the groves of date-palms, the proto-Sumerians tackled the 
stupendous task of taming the Tigris-Euphrates delta and 
making it fit for habitation. 
The land on which the great cities of Babylonia were to rise 
had literaIJy to be created; the prehistoric forerunner of the 
bibHcal Erech was built on a sort of platform of reeds, laid 
crisscross upon the al1uvial mud. The Hebrew book of Genesis 
has familiarized us with much older traditions of the pristine 
condition of Sumer-a "chaos" in which the boundaries be- 
tween water and dry land were still fluid. An essential incident 
in "The Creation" is the separation of these elements. Yet 
it was no god, but the proto-Sumerians themselves who created 
the land; they dug channels to water the fields and drain the 
marsh; they built dykes and mounded platforms to protect 
men and cattle from the waters and raise them above the 
flood; they made the first clearings in the reed brakes and ex- 
plored the channels between them. The tenacity with which 
the memory of this struggle persisted in tradition is some 
measure of the exertion imposed upon the ancient Sumerians. 
Their reward was an assured supply of nourishing dates, a 
bounteous harvest from the fields they had drained, and per- 
manent pastures for flocks and herds. 
But they would naturally be attached to fields so laboriously 
won and to settlements so carefully protected: they would not 
willingly desert them to find new dwellings. And it was easier 
from the original mound and the nuclear clearing to extend the 
area of habitable land and cultivate mud than to found fresh 
settlements in the heart of the undrained swamp. Additional in- 
habitants were a positive advantage to a marsh village. With 
their labor, drainage channels could be extended and em- 
bankments enlarged to provide more land for cultivation and 
more room for settlement. Even more than in Upper Egypt, 
natural conditions in Sumer favored a large community and 
required organized social co-operation on an ever-increasing 
scale. But the same conditions must have prevailed also in the 
Nile Delta (as contrasted with the narrow valley above Cairo). 
In adjacent regions-in the valleys of Syrian or Iranian 
torrents, for instance-conditions were rather Jess exacting. 
But even there permanent improvements had to be effected in 
the way of irrigation canals and drainage channels, and such 
would enhance the attraction of the site affected. 
So aU through the Near East the best sites were reclaimed 
with toil. Capital in the form of human labor was being sunk 

90 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
in the land. Its expenditure bound men to the soH; they would 
not lightly forgo the interest brought in by their reproductive 
works. And all the works in question were collective under- 
takings, they benefited the community as a whole, and were 
beyond the power of any individual. And generally their ex- 
ecution required capital in the form of a stock of surplus 
foodstuffs, accumulated by and at the disposal of the com- 
munity. The workers engaged in draining and embanking 
must be fed; but while so employed they were not directly 
producing the food they consumed. As the reproductive works 
of a community became more ambitious, so the need for an 
accumulated stock of surplus foodstuffs would increase. Such 
an accumulation was a pre-condition of the growth of the 
village into a city, by conquering ever more of the territory 
surrounding it from marsh and desert. 
Incidentally, conditions of life in a river vaHey or other 
oasis place in the hanus uf society an exceptional power for 
coercing its members; the community can refuse a recalcitrant 
access to water and can close the channels that irrigate his 
fields. Rain falleth upon the just and the unjust alike, but 
irrigating waters reach the fields by channels that the com- 
munity has constructed. And what society has provided, 
society can also withdraw from the unjust and confine to the 
just alone. The social solidarity needed by irrigators can thus 
be imposed owing to the very circumstances that demand it. 
And young men cannot escape the restraint of their elders by 
founding fresh villages when all beyond the oasis is waterless 
desert. So when the social will comes to be expressed through 
a chief or a king, he is invested not merely with moral 
authority, but with coercive force too; he can apply sanctions 
against the disobedient. 
A third stabilizing factor in the Near East was the enlarge- 
ment of the farmer's diet: dates, figs, olives, and other fruits 
were added to barley and wheat-flour. Such fruits are nourish- 
ing and easy to preserve and transport. At first they would be 
gathered from wild trees. A grove of wild date-paln1s in 
Sumer or of fig-trees in Syria would enhance the value, and 
even determine the choice, of a site for settlement. Now fruit- 
trees go on bearing year after year, but are unmovable. 'ro 
enjoy their fruits you must abide in their vicinity, or at least 
return to them every year. 
And soon fruit trees and vines were being cultivated. That, 
of course, involved an entirely new technique of husbandry. 
Men had to learn by experience the secrets of pruning for 
wood or for fruit, of grafting, and of artificial fertilization. 
The stages of this education are unknown, the beginnings 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 91 
of fruit-growing and viticulture have still to be elucidated. 
They certainly go back to prehistoric times. Their conse- 
quences are obvious. A palm grove or an orchard is a per- 
manent possession in a different sense from a wheatfield. 
Your sown grain returns you a yield after a few months, but 
only one crop for each sowing. A date-palm, an olive tree, 
or a vine returns no fruit for five or more years, but will then 
go on bearing for perhaps a century. Such permanent planta- 
tions inevitably attach their owners to the land far more firmly 
than fields of wheat or barley. The orchardist is as deeply 
rooted in the soil as his own precious trees. 
Sedentary life gave opportunities for improved housing 
accommodation and paved the way for architecture. The 
earliest Egyptian farmers had been content with simple wind- 
screens of reeds plastered with mud. The proto-Sumerians dwelt 
in tunnel-like houses of growing reeds or of mats hung upon 
bundles of reeds. But soon houses built of mud or terre pisee 
were being erected both in Egypt and in Asia. And long before 
3000 B.C. the brick was invented in Syria or Mesopotamia. It 
is essentially just a lump of mud mixed with straw, that has 
been shaped by pressing into a wooden mold and then dried in 
the sun. But its invention made free construction and monu- 
mental architecture possible. 
Like pottery, brick put into men's hands a medium of free 
expression, scarcely restricted as to form or size by the 
material itself. You have a free choice as to how you shall 
put your bricks together, just as you have in building up a 
pot. But the product may now be on a monumental scale. And 
as such it is no longer an individual creation, but essentially 
the collective product of many hands. 
As in the case of pottery, the first brick buildings kept close 
to the form of structures in older materials. But even so, in 
copying in brick the tunnel-like roof of the reed hut, some 
people in Sumer or Assyria stumbled upon the principle of 
the true arch; they were applying complicated mechanical 
laws of thrusts and strains many millennia before these laws 
had been formulated. 
Incidentally, brick architecture quite soon made a contribu- 
tion to applied mathematics. A brick-stack admirably 
illustrates the formula for the volume of a parallelepiped. Even 
though ancient bricks wer hardly ever cubes, it was easy to 
see that the number of bricks in a stack could be found by 
counting the numbers in three adjacent sides and multiplying 
these quantities together. 
The prosperous farmers settled in the oases and rive:- val- 
leys of the Near East appear to have been much more prone 

92 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
to surrender their economic self-sufficiency than the poor 
communities that in Europe are styled neolithic. Their read- 
iness to make the sacrifice is a corollary of the variety of 
economies practiced in the area. As already remarked, besides 
the prosperous villages of settled farmers, communities of 
fishers, hunters, and seminomadic pastoralists must be as- 
sumed in the intervening spaces. Now the farming com- 
munities could easily produce more grain than was needed for 
home consumption. Very likely they would be glad to part 
with the surplus in exchange for fish, game, or pastoral 
products. And the poorer nomads, for their part, would be 
glad to barter their takings for corn. A certain interdependence 
between farming villages on the one hand and groups of 
fishers, hunters, or herdsmen on the other could very easily 
arise. Such interdependence exists today in a marked degree. 
The nomad Arab camel-breeders, for instance, depend for 
grain and manufactures upon settled cultivators. How early 
the economic specialization of different groups developed 
into that sort of interdependence is uncertain. It is presupposed 
in the earliest historical narratives; it may be inferred much 
earlier. The earliest Egyptian farmers had also been huntsmen, 
and their weapons were buried with them. In later graves, 
belonging to the same village, hunting implements are missing. 
One explanation for their absence would be that the later 
villagers found it more convenient to barter surplus farm 
produce for game than to hunt it themselves, as their fore- 
fathers had done. 
Positive evidence for the gradual breakdown of isolation 
is afforded by the increasing abundance of imported materials 
in prehistoric cemeteries and vil1ages. Red Sea and Mediter- 
ranean shells have already been recorded in neolithic villages 
in Egypt. Rather later Egyptian graves contain in addition 
first malachite and resin, then also lapis lazuli and obsidian; 
later still amethysts and turquoise appear, and appear in in- 
creasing quantities. Now malachite must have been brought 
from Sinai or the Eastern Desert of Nubia, resin from the for- 
ested mountains of Syria or Southern Arabia, obsidian from 
Melos in the Aegean, Arabia, Armenia, or possibly Abyssinia; 
lapis lazuli probably from the Iranian plateau. 
In Sumer obsidian is found in the oldest settlements, to- 
gether with beads of amazonite that may have been brought 
from India or at least Armenia. In North Syria and Assyria 
obsidian was being imported as early as in Sumer, and lapis 
lazuli and turquoise soon appear. Foreign substances are found 
as imports very early also at Anau in Russian Turkestan and 
at Susa in Elam. east of the Tigris. 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION' 93 
The transmission of foreign substances over such great 
distances in the Orient is best explained by the assumption 
of more mobile populations living alongside the permanent 
agricultural villages; it v'ould indicate contact between the 
nomads and the farmers. In any case, it is the beginning of 
trade, the prerequisite of metallurgy. 
The gums and semi-precious stones imported into Sumer 
and Egypt might be thought to be just luxuries, unessential 
adjuncts to the toilet. But that would probably be an incorrect 
judgment; very soon, in any case, these substances came to be 
regarded as necessities. The Egyptians used malachite for 
painting their eyelids, and a whole complex of devices grew up 
around it, as round tobacco-smoking with us. It was carried in 
richly ornamented leather pouches and ground up on palettes 
carved into the likeness of animals. The green color coun- 
teracted the sun's glare, and copper carbonate acted as a 
disinfectant against the eye diseases carried by flies in hot 
countries. But to the Egyptians these effects seemed magical; 
they valued malachite for the mystic property or mana 
resident in it. That is why its preparation was a ritual, why 
the pouches were decorated with amulets and the palettes 
carved into the shape of animals. It was the same with other 
"imports"-all were regarded as possessing some magic virtue. 
The cowrie shell resembles the vulva. To wear a cowrie there- 
fore ensured fertility. The shell became a charm. The sanctiy 
thus earned for it has made cowrie shells substitutes for money 
in parts of Africa and Asia. Native gold and the bright pebbles 
of the desert-carnelian, opal, and agate-as well as rarer 
stones, like turquoise and lapis, were again valued not only 
because they were pretty, but also because magic potencies 
reside in them. The magic virtues of jewels are frequently 
mentioned in ancient literatures, and tee old ideas persisted 
throughout the Middle Ages even in Europe. Jewels were 
thus desired not as mere ornaments, but as practical means to 
the attainment of success, wealth, long life, offspring. From 
this standpoint they were not luxuries, but necessaries. 
The magic virtue inherent in the substance would be en- 
hanced if it were carved into the likeness of something itself 
possessing mana. If a piec of lapis lazuli were carved in the 
Iikeness of a bull, its wearer communicated to himself not 
only the clarity of the blue sky, but also the potency of a bull. 
Thus arose the practice of making amulets. It inspired the 
development of the new and difficult craft of the gem-cutter; 
the perforation and carving of hard stones for beads and 
amulets are conspicuous traits common to nearly all the 
ancient cultures of the Orient, from Crete to Turkestan. It 

94 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
led to the exploitation of glazes. Blue fayence was apparently 
discovered before the dawn of history. It was not regarded as 
a substitute for turquoise, but as the result of a magic trans- 
mutation of sand and alkali into turquoise-as we might say, 
synthetic turquoise. It possessed the practical advantage that 
it could be molded. 
Instead of carving the gem into an amulet, its virtue could 
be enhanced by scratching upon it the representation of some 
object, or just a magic symbol, like the swastika. Such en- 
graved beads had one peculiar merit: if they were pressed on 
soft clay, the designs engraved on them would be transferred 
to the plastic material. This procedure was, of course, a magic 
operation. Some of the mana inherent in the stone was im- 
parted with the symbol. You put your magic on the stamped 
object. That had the effect of what ethnographers term putting 
a tabu on it; whoever violated it, would be in peril from your 
magic. And so the engraved stone became a seal. The wad of 
clay over the mouth of a jar, when stamped with the seal, be- 
came a magic guardian of the jar's content. It warned anyone 
that in breaking the seal he would break a tabu and incur 
magic penalties. Sealing became thereby a means of securing 
property and asserting ownership. \Vhen writing was invented, 
it would take the place of a signature. 
The use of engraved stones as seals is attested from the 
very earliest neolithic settlements in Assyria. In early times 
seals were current from the Euphrates eastwards across Iran, 
while amulets were used instead in Egypt and the Mediter- 
ranean coasts. But the two devices quite early began to inter- 
penetrate one another, and a rigid frontier scarcely separated 
them. 
The desire for gold, stones, and shells on account of magic 
properties supposedly resident in them had important practical 
consequences. It was a potent factor in breaking down the 
economic isolation of peasant communities. To obtain magic 
substances, needed to ensure the fertility of his fields and his 
own good luck, the thrifty peasant would be ready to part 
with grains and fruit to the nomads of the desert. To the 
latter, gems and malachite offered portable articles to barter 
for agricultural produce. Beads must have formed a staple of 
the earliest regular trade. 
The high estimation of magic substances may wen have 
led to an active search for them. For a later date W. J. Perry 
has envisaged a worldwide quest for gold, precious stones, 
amber, and other supposedly magical substances to have been 
undertaken by the Ancient Egyptians. It would have been a 
principal factor in the diffusion of civilization. Even though 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 95 
his contention must be regarded as exaggerated, the desire for 
such substances may well have prompted a sort of geological 
exploration of regions otherwise uninviting. And one fact is 
outstanding: malachite is a carbonate of copper, turquoise a 
phosphate of aluminum tinged with copper; and both occur 
in connection with copper ores; many of these ores are them- 
selves brightly colored and presumably magical. The collection 
of malachite, turquoise, and other colored stones accordingly 
caused men to frequent metalliferous regions and put copper 
ores into their hands. To this extent the rise of metallurgy 
that was a dominant factor in the second revolution would be 
an indirect result of the magical ideas just considered. 
Metal working involved two groups or complexes of dis- 
coveries: (1) that copper, when hot, melts and can be cast 
into any desired shape, but on cooling becomes as hard, and 
will take on as good an edge, as stone, and (2) that the tough, 
trenchant, reddish metal can be produced by heating certain 
crystalline stones or earths in contact with charcoal. Copper, 
indeed, occurs naturally, though only rarely, in the metallic 
state as native copper. The pre-Columbian Indians of the 
Great Lakes region in U.S.A. utilized extensive local deposits 
of native copper for industrial ends. They treated the metal 
as a superior sort of stone, and even discovered its mal- 
leability, producing objects of beaten copper. But they never 
tried melting and casting it. Their procedures did not lead 
on to intelligent metallurgy, and it is unlikely that native 
copper played any significant part in the rise of the industry 
in the Old World. That depended from the outset on the 
reduction of copper ores. 
The discovery involved might easily be made. A prehistoric 
Egyptian may have dropped some malachite on the glowing 
ashes of his hearth and seen the gleaming globules of metallic 
copper run out. A campfire, lit by some jewel-seeker in a met- 
alliferous district against the outcrop of a surface lode, might 
reduce some of the ore. In the Katanga district prospectors 
have noticed beads of copper, thus accidentally smelted, among 
the ashes of Negroes' campfires. The reduction of copper 
might be discovered more than once, but its significance need 
not have been immediately appreciated. Small objects of 
copper-pins and even harpoon-heads-turn up sporadically 
in very early Egyptian graves. But they disclose no intelligent 
realization of the potentialities of metal. The copper has been 
hammered into thin rods, and bent or beaten into strips, and 
cut; it has, in fact, been subjected to the processes familiarly 
pplied to bone, stone, and fibers-cutting, hammering, bend- 
Ing. 

96 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The real superiority of metal is that it is fusible and can be 
cast. Fusibility confers upon copper some of the merits of 
potter's clay. In working it the intelligent artificer is freed 
from the restrictions of size and shape imposed by bone or 
stone. A stone axe-head, a flint spear-point, or a bone harpoon 
can only be made by grinding, chipping, or cutting bits off the 
original piece. Molten copper is completely plastic, and ,\fill 
adapt itself to fill any desired form; it can be run into a mold 
of any shape and will assume, and on cooling retain, precisely 
the form outlined by the mold. The only limit to size is the 
capacity of the mold; you can run into it as much copper as 
you like. And the molds themselves can be made of potter's 
clay, the potentialities of which were considered on p. 76. 
On the other hand, though so plastic when hot, the metai 
on cooling possesses the essential virtues of stone and bone; 
it is as solid, and will take as sharp an edge or as fine a point. 
Yet it has the additional advantage of being malleable. And 
finally, it is more permanent than stone or bone. A stone axe 
may easily be splintered by hard usage, and is then done for; 
at best its edge will often need regrinding, and it will soon be 
reduced to a useless size. But a copper axe can be remelted 
again and again, and will come out as good as new. The in- 
telligent use of metal-let us say, simply metallurgy-begins 
when these advantages have been realized. 
But that realization required a readjustment of the forms 
of thought. The change from tough solid copper to molten 
metal and back to the solid state again is dramatic, and must 
have seemed mysterious. The sameness between the shapeless 
lump of raw copper, the liquid in the crucible, and the well- 
formed casting, must at first have been difficult to grasp. Man 
was here controlling a remarkable process of physical change. 
He would have to adjust whatever naive ideas of substance 
he entertained in order to recognize identity through its sev- 
eral stages. 
Moreover, the control of the process was only possible by 
means of a whole complex of discoveries and inventions. A 
temperature in the neighborhood of 1200 0 C. is requisite to 
melt copper. That requires a blast. Some device had to be 
invented for forcing a current of air upon the flame; bellows 
are the correct solution, but are not directly attested till 1600 
B.C. Furnaces, crucibles, and tongs had to be invented. Casting 
requires molds. It is easy enough to reproduce by casting an 
object that is flat on one side by impressing it on clay and 
pouring molten metal in the hollow left by the pattern. But 
that is useless for making a stout dagger with a ridge on both 
faces to strengthen it. Such an implement required a two-piece 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 97 
mold, the halves of which must correspond exactly and must 
be bound or clamped together. By 3000 B.C. the ingenious cire 
perdue process was employed in Mesopotamia. A model of the 
desired object is first made in wax and then coated in clay; 
the clay is heated, becoming pottery, while the wax is allowed 
to run out; metal is then poured into the cavity, and finally the 
clay mold is broken, disclosing the metal casting reproducing 
the form of the wax model. 
These few words may suggest how intricate the course of 
casting really is. But the actual operations are much- more 
tedious and intricate than a page of print can indicate. For 
instance, precautions must be taken to prevent the liquid 
metal from oxidizing or sticking to the mold. In a closed mold 
there is a danger of air bubbles forming, which would cause 
a fatal weakness in the casting. Again, after casting, the tool 
has to be hammered and smoothed down with a file or an 
abrasive. 
Evidently the .smith must dispose of a formidable body of 
industrial lore; his craft traditions embody the results of long 
experience and many deliberate experiments. They represent 
a new branch of applied science--elements carried over into 
modern chemistry and physics-but blended with a tangle of 
magic that we have happily forgotten. The transmission of this 
lore need not differ in kind from that of potter's lore. But the 
smith's task was more complicated and exacting than hers, the 
knowledge he required more specialized. It is very doubtful 
whether metallurgy could be practiced as a domestic industry 
in the intervals of agricultural work. Among modern barba- 
rians smiths are normally specialists, and metal-working has 
probably always been a fuB-time job. The smith's may there- 
fore be the oldest specialized craft save the magician's. But a 
community can afford a smith only if it possess a surplus of 
foodstuffs; the smith, being withdrawn from food-production 
himself, must be fed from the unconsumed surplus of the 
farmers. The industrial use of metal may thus be treated as a 
sign of the specialization of labor, that a community's food 
supply exceeds its normal needs. 
But it generally means more; it usually means the final 
sacrifice of economic independence. Copper is far from com- 
mon; its ores are not found on the alluvial and loss plains 
preferred by neolithic farmers, but among wooded or stony 
ranges. Very few farming communities can have possessed 
copper mines on their home territory; the great majority had 
always to import the metal or its ore. In the end it had to b 
obtained by the production of a surplus of foodstuffs above 
what was needed for home consumption. 

98 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The scientific and economic implications of the extraction 
of metal from its ores are perhaps more far-reaching than 
those of metal-working. Copper ores are crystalline or pow- 
dery minerals generally occurring as veins in hard ancient 
rocks. The transformation of the ores into copper is a fairly 
simple chemical change. But what an astonishing one to early 
man! The ore does not look the least like the metal. The 
change it undergoes in contact with glowing carbon is mirac- 
ulous-surely a change of substance, a transubstantiation! The 
recognition of a continuity of substance must have been been 
very difficult, and a rational account was achieved only by 
modern chelnistry; till then alchemical ideas about transmuta- 
tion could subsist. But, whatever his theories, man learned 
enough practical chemistry to distinguish what sorts of stone 
would yield copper when heated with carbon. 
The right sorts of stone are, as remarked, far from common. 
Once alive to the value of metal and the possibility of trans- 
muting stones into it, men must have sought deliberately for 
suitable ores and made numerous experiments, trying first one 
stone and then another. Many were fruitless, but other metals 
were discovered in the quest. Silver and lead both occur in 
prehistoric graves in Egypt, and were extensively used in 
Mesopotamia before 3000 B.C. Beads of meteoric iron occur 
in Egyptian graves shortly before 3000 B.C., and a little later 
iron ores were occasionally smelted in Mesopotamia. But on 
an industrial scale iron was not smelted nor worked anywhere 
before 1400 B.C. Tin was known to the metallurgists of Sumer 
and the Indus valley soon after 3000 B.C., being employed 
chiefly as an alloy of copper to simplify the process of casting. 
The first copper ores to be exploited were presumably de- 
rived from surface deposits. Many such lodes must once have 
existed, but have been exhausted long before modern geologi- 
cal surveys were started. Eventually, however, men had to 
follow the vein beneath the ground and begin mining. The 
copper miner had to learn how to split hard rocks by kindling 
fires against them and throwing water on the heated surfaces. 
Systems of propping and timbering had to be devised to sup- 
port the walls and roofs of the galleries. The ore had to be 
broken up, separated from the rock by washing, and trans- 
ported to the surface. No records, however, survive to illus- 
trate the steps by which the science of mining was founded; 
but by 1000 B.C. copper miners, even in still-barbarous Eu- 
rope, were applying a science that a layman today can admire, 
but cannot attempt to expound. 
The art of smelting is no less abstruse. As in casting, some 
sort of a blast is essential. And for production on a large scale 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 99 
a furnace had to be devised. And only surface ores of copper 
can be directly reduced by heating with charcoal; deeper ores 
are generally sulphides, and have to be roasted in the open to 
oxidize them before they can be smelted. Other metals require 
different treatment. Lead, for example, will volatilize and 
vanish with the smoke if its ore be heated in the sort of open 
furnace used for smelting copper. 
Prospectors, miners, and smelters must therefore command 
a body of knowledge even more abstruse than that demanded 
of the smith. They must have classified the different kinds of 
ore, learned the outward signs for their diagnosis, the appro- 
priate techniques for their treatment. The requisite knowledge 
could only be gained by experimentation and comparison of 
results on an even larger scale than was demanded by metal- 
working. Mining must have been an even more specialized 
trade than that of the smith. Miners as a rule cannot have been 
food-producers, but must have relied on a surplus of food.. 
stuffs produced by those who consumed their products. 
Intelligent metallurgy must have been widely understood in 
the Ancient East soon after 4000 B.C. But metal ousted stone 
very slowly. The advantages, stressed above, must not be 
exaggerated. For hoeing up the soil, stone blades serve the 
cultivator well; he will often have to replace them, but nor- 
mally that is easy. A flint blade works excellently for cutting 
up carcasses, for reaping grains, for trimming leather, and 
even for shaving; it wears out quickly, but a new knife or 
razor can be fashioned in a few minutes where flint is abun- 
dant. Stone axes or adzes will fell trees, shape posts, or hew 
out a canoe almost as quickly and neatly as copper ones; only 
you will have to pause periodically and make a new axe from 
a convenient pebble. The chief defect of stone tools was that 
they wore out so quickly. But when the raw materials were 
Iying about and time was not absurdly precious, it was not an 
intolerable hardship to have to make new tools from time to 
time. It needed the special geographical conditions of an allu- 
vial plain, where suitable stones were rare, to drive home the 
value of the new and more permanent material and to create 
an effective and general demand for metal. And to make the 
satisfaction of that demand possible, improved methods of 
transport were needed. That meant the harnessing of animal 
motive power and of the winds. Both were, like the discovery 
of metal and the invention of metallurgy, preconditions of the 
second revolution and achieved before it. 
Harnessing the strength of oxen or asses and the forces of 
the wind was man's first effective essay in making natural 
force work for him. When he had succeeded, he found him- 

100 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
self for the first time controlling and even directing continuous 
forces not supplied by his own muscles. He was on the right 
road to releasing his body from the more brutal forms of 
physical labor-the road that leads to the internal-combustion 
engine and the electric motor, the steam hammer and the 
mechanical navvy. And at the same time he was learning new 
principles in mechanics and physics. 
Mixed farmers had a suitable motive power ready to hand 
in the cattle they had already domesticated. Perhaps the ox 
was first set to drawing a plow. But, of course, a plow had to 
be invented-the long-bladed hoe of the prehistoric Egyptians, 
the draw-spade such as is still used in Japan, or a foot-plow 
like those used in the Hebrides last century may have pro- 
vided the model. And the plow heralded an agricultural revo- 
lution. Plowing stirs up those fertile elements in the soil that 
in semi-arid regions are liable to sink down beyond the reach 
of plant roots. With two oxen and a plow a man can cultivate 
in a day a far larger area than can a woman with a hoe. The 
plot gives place to the field, and agriculture (from Latin ager, 
"a field") really begins. And all that means larger crops, more 
food, and expanding population. And incidentally men re- 
place women as principals in cultivation. When this revolution 
was accomplished is quite unknown. In Hither Asia, Egypt, 
and the Aegean it had been completed long before the dawn 
of history. But in Germany the cultivation of small plots with 
hoes was still the sole economy down to about 2000 B.C. 
In open desert and steppe country the ox could be made 
to draw a sledge or travoise such as primitive hunting tribes 
still use for the transport of tents and furniture from camp to 
camp. (The dog having attached himself to man long before 
cattle or sheep were domesticated, dog-sleighs nlay be older 
than ox-carts and sledges.) Ox-drawn sledges were still being 
used about 3000 B.C. at Dr to convey to their final resting 
place royal corpses. But long before that date the sledge had 
been transformed by an invention that revolutionized locomo- 
tion on land. The wheel was the crowning achievement of pre- 
historic carpentry; it is the precondition of modern machinery, 
and, applied to transport, it converted the sledge into a cart 
or wagon-the direct ancestor of the locomotive and the auto- 
mobile. 
It is easy enough to make guesses as to how the wheel might 
have been invented, but reliable data on the subject are hard 
to obtain. As wooden objects cannot normally last many 
centuries, the archaeologist can only learn about vehicles from 
people who happen to have left drawings or models of them 
in some durable material like pottery or stone. Their admit- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 101 
tedly defective and one-sided testimony justifies the following 
positive statements: Wheeled vehicles are represented in Su- 
merian art as early as 3500 B.C., and in North Syria perhaps 
even earlier. By 3000 B.C. carts, wagons, and even chariots 
were in general use in Elam, Mesopotamia, and Syria. In the 
Indus valley wheeled carts were in use when the archaeological 
record begins about 2500 B.C., and at about the same date in 
Turkestan too. Some five centuries later, at least, they are 
attested in Crete and Asia Minor. On the other hand, the 
device was definitely not used by the Egyptians till about 1650 
B.C., when it was forced upon them by Asiatic invaders, the 
Hyksos. 
FIG. S.-PLOWING, MILKING, AND HOEING IN ANCIENT EGYPT. 
The earliest wheeled vehicles were naturally clumsy affairs. 
Even by 3000 B.C. the Sumerian chariots and wagons had 
solid wheels composed of three pieces of wood clamped to- 
gether and bound with leather tires studded with copper nails. 
The wheels turned in one piece with the axle, which was fas- 
tened underneath the car's body with leather straps. The vil- 
lage ox-carts in Sindh today faithfully repeat this structure. 
The wheel not only revolutionized transport, it was already 
applied in manufacturing industry by 3500 B.C., and a brief 
digression is needed to explain this. With a horizontal wheel, 

102 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
at the center of which he can set his lump of clay spinning, 
the potter can shape in a couple of minutes a vessel that it 
would take several days to build up by hand. And the product 
will be more symmetrical. Pot-making was the first mecha- 
nized industry, the first to apply the wheel to manufacturing 
machinery. And the craft was transformed as a result. Eth- 
nography shows that among the simpler people today the 
making of pots by hand is a domestic craft plied by the 
women, whereas manufacture on the wheel is a specialized 
trade reserved to men. The available evidence suggests that 
the same was true of antiquity. And so the introduction of 
the wheel into the ceramic industry marks another step in the 
specialization of labor; the potters are now specialists, with- 
drawn from the primary task of food-production and exchang- 
ing their wares for a share in the communal surplus. 
These two primary uses of the wheel may just possibly 
have arisen independently, though that is scarcely credible. In 
any case, they do not always go together. In Hither Asia and 
FIG. 6.-EARLY SUMERIAN WAR CHARIOT. 
India, indeed, wheel-made pots are certainly as old as wheeled 
vehicles. But in Egypt the potters' wheel was adopted before 
the wheeled car, whereas in Crete models of wagons are .1 
couple of centuries older than the earliest wheel-turned pots. 
In Europe the potters' wheel was not employed north of th 
Alps till after 500 B.C., though wheeled vehicles had been in 
use perhaps a thousand years earlier. But this is, after all, a 
digression. 
The introduction of wheeled vehicles drawn by oxen or 
other beasts accelerated communications and enormously 
simplified the transportation of goods. Vehicles do not, how- 
ever, represent the sole method of employing animal motive 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 103 
power in transportation. Goods can be loaded directly on a 
beast's back and men can sit there. About 2000 B.C. merchan- 
dise was normally carried between Babylonia and Asia Minor 
on donkey-hack. The history of this sort of transport is even 
harder to decipher in the archaeological record than is that 
of vehicular traffic. The donkey is native to Northeast Africa, 
and must have been domesticated there long before 3000 B.C., 
presumably to act as a beast of burden. Tame asses are record- 
ed in Egypt by the date just mentioned, and at the same time 
were being employed to draw plows in Mesopotamia. There- 
after the ass remains the commonest beast of burden and 
riding-animal in the Near East. 
The horse too, Forde thinks, may have been domesticated 
first for milking and riding. But apart from some dubious 
models of saddles from the Indus valley, dating round about 
2500 B.C., there is no really satisfactory evidence for horse- 
riding much before 1000 B.C. The beast is supposed to be a 
native of the steppes of Central Asia and Europe. In Hither 
Asia horses certainly appear about 2000 B.C., and were intro- 
duced thence into Egypt by the Hyksos about 1650 B.C. But 
in all cases they appear exclusively as draught animals har- 
nessed to war-chariots. And at a still earlier date, 3000 B.C. or 
before, some sort of equid is depicted drawing chariots on 
Sumerian monuments. The identity of these beasts is, however, 
disputed. Some authorities, such as Frankfort, say the animal 
is meant for a horse; others say a mule; the majority, including 
Hilzheimer and Woolley, now contend that an onager-the 
Asiatic wild ass-is intended. It should be remarked in paren- 
thesis that the harness used in connection with the Sumerian 
and all other ancient chariots seems to be modeled on that 
originally devised for attaching the bullock to a cart. And 
owing to the anatomical differences between bovids and 
equids, this ancient harness was very burdensome to horses 
and consequently very inefficient. 
None the less the domestication of horses must have sub- 
stantially increased the range and speed of communication. 
Even though this acceleration would seem, on the available 
evidence, to fall largely outside the period surveyed in this 
chapter, horse transport has to be reckoned with as a possi- 
bility before the second revolution: there may have been 
peoples on the edge of the well-explored valley tracts, already 
endowed with the mobility that the control of horses guaran- 
tees. Such hypothetical peoples may have acted as agents in 
the diffusion of ideas and inventions over distances and with 
speeds inconceivable if bullock-carts and donkeys had been 
the fastest means of conveyance available. And another possi- 

104 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
bility must be remembered: camels or dromedaries may have 
been tamed before 3000 B.C. But, given camels, deserts cease 
to be barriers to intercourse and become, like seas, links be- 
tween centers of population. 
Parallel with the foregoing improvements in land transport 
went developments in navigation. But the evidence is even 
more scanty than that just surveyed. Dugout canoes and skin- 
boats must have been used by fishers before the first revolu- 
tion. Soon after it paintings on prehistoric Egyptian vases dis- 
close substantial boats made of bundles of papyrus lashed 
together, propelled by forty or more rowers or paddlers, and 
equipped with a sort of cabin near the center. But sailboats 
are not depicted in Egypt till a little after 3500 B.C., and 
seem to belong to a type foreign to the Nile. Yet it is almost 
certain that by 3000 B.C. at latest sailboats were freely navi- 
gating the eastern Mediterranean. Though there is even less 
direct evidence, the same statement would surely apply to 
the Arabian Sea too. 
Thus men have begun to overcome the mechanical diffi- 
culties in the way of marine transport (they have, that is, 
learned to build plank boats and to rig sails), and have ac- 
quired sufficient topographical and astronomical knowledge 
to utilize the highways of the sea. By water, as by land, the 
people of the Orient were now in a position to pool their 
natural resources and the experience they were severally build- 
Ing up. 
The arts, processes, and contrivances just enumerated are 
outward expressions of a body of science and applications of 
accumulated experience. Their diffusion means also the pool- 
ing of that practical knowledge. It equipped the peoples of the 
Orient with the technical control over Nature requisite for the 
completion of a second revolution, the establishment of a new 
type of economy and society. But other factors intervened be- 
fore the knowledge thus acquired was applied in actual 
practice. 
The vast area between the Nile and the Ganges has in the 
foregoing pages been treated very much as a unit, despite 
insistence on diversity of economies within it; the develop- 
ments just traced have been presented as a continuous and 
peaceful process. But such an account hardly corresponds to 
the archaeological facts. Radical and sometimes catastrophic 
changes in pottery and domestic architecture, in art and burial 
rites, are in reality discernible in the settlement mounds of 
Iran, Mesopotamia, and Syria, and in the cemeteries of Egypt. 
Such changes are generally held to indicate displacements of 

PRELUDE ,TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 105 
population, the conquest or invasion by and infiltration of new 
peoples. 
In a region exposed to droughts and floods, migrations are 
liable to happen, especially when its inhabitants are utterly 
dependent on Nature for crops and fodder. A sudden drought 
then may mean starvation for peasants relying on dry cultiva- 
tion and for pastoralists grazing their herds on the steppe. And 
the specter of famine may drive its victims to seek food in the 
river valleys where grain for men and fodder for stock are 
still obtainable; they may enter as suppliants, like the "Chil- 
dren of Israel," and accept some sort of servitude in exchange 
for life, or they may find refuge in force of arms and arrive 
as conquerors. In any case, the steppe-folk thus set in motion 
will mix with, replace, or dominate the older valley population. 
The changes in material culture, art, and religion reflected 
in the archaeological record of the Orient must in many cases 
have been due precisely to immigrations and conquests of the 
sort just adumbrated, and books on Oriental prehistory are 
largely preoccupied with the attempt to define and trace the 
movements of peoples thus revealed. But here it is enough to 
remind the reader that evidence for such migration actually 
exists, and then to suggest certain consequences for the growth 
of human economy. 
It is believed that the "clash of cultures" set up by invasion 
and immigration facilitates the spread of new ideas by break- 
ing down the rigidity of established societies. To survive, any 
society must attain an adjustment to its environment; it lives 
by exploiting the natural resources of its territory. But just in 
so far as the adjustment achieved is successful, the commu- 
nity concerned will tend to become conservative. When a 
group are enjoying a sufficiency of food in simple comfort 
with spells of rest, why should they change their behavior? 
They have painfully learned the tricks and dodges, the arts 
and crafts necessary to coax this modicum of prosperity out of 
Nature; why do more? Indeed, change may be dangerous. The 
success of simply equipped societies depends on everyone 
doing what has proved to be the right thing at the right time 
and in the proper way; it imposes a complete pattern of be- 
havior on all the community's members. This pattern finds 
expression in social institutions and in traditional rules and 
prohibitions. It is sanctified by magico-religious beliefs and 
fears. Just as the practical acts of life are accompanied by 
appropriate rites and ceremonies, so mystical forces are sup- 
posed to watch over the traditional rules and avenge any trans- 
gression of them. The established economy is reinforced by 
an appropriate ideology. 

106 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The force of superstitions that consolidate and maintain 
established social institutions and economic arrangements is 
enormous in the simpler societies of today. It must have been 
so too in the Ancient East. The adjustment then achieved by 
even the most favored communities was, after all, very pre.. 
carious. An insufficient or an excessive flood, an untimely 
hailstorm, a plague of locusts, might imperil the whole com.. 
munity; for its resources were restricted, its reserves were 
small. But the disasters threatening its life are mysterious and 
even today incalculable. They might very easily be regarded 
as supernatural interventions, inflicted to avenge transgres- 
sions of customary rules of behavior. Any divergence from 
established practice, any departure from behavior that had 
been found safe and effective, might theoretically provoke 
such punishments. Any innovation was therefore dangerous, 
and public opinion would frown upon change. 
But if an immigrant community mingle with the old, this 
complacent and timid conservatism will be disturbed. The 
new arrivals have ex hypothesi grown up under different con- 
ditions; they will accordingly have created for themselves an 
economy appropriate to their own environment. They feel 
needs different from, and perhaps complementary to, those 
experienced by the older inhabitants. For instance, if pastoral- 
ists, they may be accustomed to eat more meat than is usually 
consumed by peasants. They may have come to prize obsidian 
for the manufacture of knives, and so be dissatisfied with flint 
which is less delicate. Or they may regard substances-lapis 
lazuli, for instance-that had been easily obtainable in their 
original territory, as indispensable. New demands will thus be 
added to the old by the new arrivals. 
Again the newcomers will bring their own institutions and 
their own ideology. The prescriptions and prohibitions, the 
rites and ceremonies, regarded as essential to life in their 
former environment, are not likely to coincide entirely with 
those respected by the original inhabitants of the occupied 
territory. Two patterns of behavior, two sets of institutions, 
two bodies of ideas will thus be operating side by side and 
competitively. It may thus be demonstrated to both parties 
that departures from traditional modes of action, regarded by 
one or other as obligatory, are not so dangerous, after all. The 
land still yields its fruit, though turned over with a plow guided 
by men instead of a hoe wielded by women. 
Finally, it has been suggested that conquest is an essential 
prerequisite to the accumulation of communal capital needed 
for the accomplishment of the second revolution. The latter 
required that a substantial proportion of the community 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 107 
should be permanently withdrawn from the primary business 
of getting food to be employed by reproductive works, in 
secondary industries, in transportation, commerce, and ad- 
ministration. That is possible only if there is a surplus of food- 
stuffs already available to support those members of the 
community who are no longer themselves producing their 
o\vn food. Moreover, in practice a surplus is needed to barter 
for raw materials not available locally. 
Now the farmers in the Nile Valley or Mesopotamia could 
easily produce the requisite surplus. They would, indeed, 
doubtless produce so much above their immediate needs as to 
provide against bad seasons. But why should they do more? 
Man, it is argued, is a lazy beast and prefers a simple life to 
luxuries earned by unremitting toil. Conquest would certainly 
constitute one means of overcoming this natural inertia. A 
tribe of pastoralists, for instance, may conquer the land of a 
peasant community. 'fhey will leave the peasants on the land, 
and even protect them from other enemies, on condition that 
they pay a tribute of farm produce. The peasant is thereby 
obliged to exert himself to produce more than he needs for 
the support of his own household; he must provide a sub- 
stantial share, perhaps more than he retains himself, for his 
new "masters." These form a sort of landed "aristocracy," a 
class living off the tribute of peasants. The system is familiar; 
it survives in a very simple form in East Africa; it was charac- 
teristic of medieval Europe and was widespread in antiquity. 
Now such an "aristocracy" is generally also an oligarchy; 
its members are far less numerous than the peasants who 
remain the primary producers. Yet the landlords can extort 
from these far more farm produce than they can themselves 
consume. They thus dispose of an abundant surplus of food- 
stuffs, part of which they will employ for the support of work- 
ers producing manufactured articles, which aristocrats can 
consume, and for foreign trade. 
N ow it must be admitted that the realization of the second 
revolution did require an accumulation of capital in the form 
primarily of foodstuffs, that the accumulation had to some 
extent to be concentrated to make it effectively available for 
social ends, and that in Egypt the first accumulation and con- 
centration was apparently the result of conquest. But it is not 
demonstrable that such conquest was in all cases the effective 
cause for the necessary accumulation and concentration of 
capital. In Mesopotamia we shall see that it was nominally a 
native god (in practice, of course, the corporation of his self- 
appointed priests) that administered the accumulated wealth 
of a Sumerian city; there are only the vaguest and most am- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
biguous hints of an aristocracy owing its wealth to conquest 
rather than to religious prestige and home-grown social tradi- 
tion. And in the oldest Indian cities we simply do not know 
how the communal surplus was accumulated or controlled. 
Military conquest is one means of assuring the accumulation 
of a surplus of wealth. But theories that regard it as an essen- 
tial precondition of the second revolution must be regarded 
with reserve. 
Other corollaries to the disturbances of peaceful develop- 
ment at which the archaeological record hints are better at- 
tested. On the site of one village we find another, the arrange- 
ment, architecture, and furniture of which are so different 
from those of its predecessor as to indicate a real break in the 
social tradition; that must mean the arrival of a new people 
to replace or dominate the former settlers. But such replace- 
ment or domination can hardly have taken place peacefully. 
It must surely have been achieved by force, i.e. by war. In that 
case some sort of warfare must have been waged before the 
second revolution was consummated. 
This has, of course, been denied by Elliot Smith and Perry, 
and it is not easy to prove warfare by archaeological evidence. 
Weapons are, of course, found in graves and settlements that 
are older than the revolution. But it is not easy to distinguish 
weapons of war from implements of the chase, arms for kill- 
ing men from those for dispatching game. Again, very early 
settlements-for instance at Susa-were certainly protected 
by some sort of ramparts. Most probably these were defenses 
against human foes, but they might conceivably have been 
designed merely to keep out marauding wild beasts. On the 
whole, warlike raids by nomadic or uprooted peoples have to 
be admitted. And if so, it is equally necessary to admit some 
degree of organized defenses against such raiders on the part 
of the prosperous settled communities. In a word, warfare has 
to be admitted though only on a small scale and of a spasmodic 
kind. Yet it might be an industry. Cattle and grain stolen from 
peasants supported life just as well as those you reared or grew 
yourself. The protection of crops and herds against marauders 
was just as vital a part of the communal economy as sowing 
the fields and breeding cattle. 
Now, warfare must have economic repercussions. More 
than anything else, perhaps, it stimulated the demand for 
metal. It does not matter much if a flint knife breaks in skin- 
ning an animal. It is a much more serious matter if the acci- 
dent happens in hand-to-hand combat with an enemy. It was 
battle, above all, that manifested the superiority of tough dura- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOI4L"TION log 
ble copper or bronze over brittle flint and stone. Again, war- 
fare gave exceptional opportunities for outstanding individuals 
to display courage and capacity for leadership, and thus to 
earn prestige and authority. It thus became a contributory 
factor in the rise of chiefs invested with effective temporal 
power, and ultimately of monarchs. 
Finally, war helped to a great discovery-that men as well 
as animals can be domesticated. Instead of killing a defeated 
enemy, he might be enslaved; in return for his life he could 
be made to work. This discovery has been compared in im- 
portance to that of the taming of animals. In any case, by early 
historic times slavery was a foundation of ancient industry 
and a potent instrument in the accumulation of capital. Bound 
captives, presumably doomed to servitude, are depicted on 
some of the oldest figured documents (sealings) from Meso- 
potamia, and are as ancient as scenes of battle. 
But war was not necessarily the sole source of slaves. The 
poorer or weaker members of a community might surrender 
their services to more prosperous fellows in return for food 
or shelter. Exiles from another community might be accepted 
on the same terms. Whole communities of refugees from 
drought might be allowed to settle in valleys and oases in re- 
turn for dues or services; the "Children of Israel" are by no 
means the only Asiatic tribe known from _Jntemporary rec- 
ords to have found refuge in Egypt under such conditions. 
The recruitment of slaves or clients by other means than cap- 
ture is illustrated among various barbarian and savage peoples 
of modern times, and is suggested by quite early written texts. 
War and famine were alike potential agents recruiting the 
labor force at the disposal of cities after the second revolution. 
The great public works then undertaken, the variety of crafts 
thereafter plied, employed a host of workers. The latters' 
status is hard to define. How many labored "freely" in return 
for wages, or out of sheer piety, or like conscripts in fulfil- 
ment of customary obligations to the community, or finally 
as slaves, the absolute chattels of an individual, a temple, or a 
State? All we know for the earliest times is that every laborer 
who continued to work must somehow be fed and supported 
by the surplus gathered by primary producers. 
And over against the possible slaves we have to reckon with 
privileged classes-indeed, with chiefs or even kings. The 
Egyptians preserved explicit traditions of independent dynas-' 
ties ruling in Upper and Lower Egypt before the unification 
of the land under one sovereign, the first Pharaoh, Menes, 
originally a king of Upper Egypt. But this unification seems 

110 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
to coincide with the realization of the second revolution in 
Egypt. In that case we must admit kings in Egypt before the 
revolution. The same inference may perhaps be drawn from 
Sumerian traditions of dynasties ruling "before the Flood," 
whatever that may mean. In any case, a way to royal power 
must have been open before city life began. Conquest was not 
the sole road to a throne-economic success, but most of all 
magico-religious prestige, might lead to that glory. The 
magician may have been the first independent craftsman, the 
first member of any community to have a claim on the surplus 
product of the collective food-quest without contributing there- 
to by physical activity. But the magician's wand is an embryo 
scepter, and historical kings still retain many trappings from 
their magic office. 
Now the first revolution had not abolished magic. Quite 
the reverse. Man, let us insist again, was still dependent on 
the incalculable chances of rain, flood, sunshine, still exposed 
to disaster from droughts, earthquakes, hailstorms, and other 
natural but unpredictable catastrophes. He still sought to con- 
trol the beneficent forces and to ward off noxious powers by 
rituals, incantations, and charms. Anyone who could success- 
fully claim to control the elements by his magic would, of 
course, earn immense prestige and authority. It is needless to 
demonstrate in detail how many opportunities of aggrandize- 
ment through alleged magical prowess must have presented 
themselves in ancient societies, but the chapter may be fitly 
closed with a reference to one great discovery: that of the 
solar calendar-that on one theory was one of the sources of 
royal authority in Egypt. 
Farming in the Nile Valley is entirely dependent upon the 
annual flood; the latter's advent is the signal for the whole 
cycle of agricultural operations to start. To forecast precisely 
the day of its arrival and warn the peasant to prepare for it, 
would be and is of great advantage to all the valley's popula- 
tion. It would at the same time seem to be a proof of some 
sort of supernatural knowledge and power; the distinction 
between prediction and control is too subtle for simple peoples. 
Yet in reality the forecast can be made with considerable 
precision. The flood is a function of the annual movement of 
the earth round the sun-actually it depends upon the south- 
west monsoon breaking upon the mountains of Abyssinia. 
It will normally reach any given place at the same point in 
each of the earth's journeys round the sun-that is, on the 
same day in each solar year. All that is necessary, therefore, is 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION I I I 
to know the length of the solar year and reckon such a year 
from one observed flood as starting-point to the next. 
Now most simple people who have any sort of calendar at 
all reckon by lunar months, and not by solar years, and there 
is evidence that the Egyptians were no exception to the rule. 
But no fixed number of lunar months (lunations) corresponds 
exactly to a solar year. To be able to predict the flood, there- 
fore, the Egyptians had to determine the length of the solar 
year in days and devise an artificial calendar to reconcile solar 
and lunar years. Now observations recorded over a period of 
fifty years would suffice to show that the average interval be.. 
tween inundations was, to the nearest day, 365 days. On this 
basis an official calendar was introduced, most probably at the 
time of the unification of Egypt under Menes, in which the 
year of 365 days was divided into ten months of thirty-six 
days each, with a period of five intercalary days each year. 
It is difficult to S how even this result could have been ob- 
tained without written records, and it represents the first 
triumph of mathematical astronomy and the first vindication 
of the claim of science to predict. But of course there was an 
error in the calculation of just under six hours, and the 
accunlulation of this error in time put the calendar entirely 
out of gear with the real seasons, and made it useless as a 
guide to the peasants in their agricultural work. New Year's 
Day originally coincided with the advent of the inundation, 
but after a century the inundation could not be expected until 
the 25th day of the first month. The royal officials discovered 
how to correct this error by observations on the star Sirius 
(Egyptian: Sothis) which, in the latitude of Cairo, is the last 
star to appear on the horizon before dawn obscures all stars 
at the flood season. They used their observations on the 
"heliacal rising" of Sirius to give the signal for the start of 
agricultural operations, but by this time it was too late to re- 
form the official calendar-the requisite reform would have 
aroused the same sort of opposition, but naturally much more 
bitter, as has frustrated all attempts to fix the date of Easter. 
So the old official calendar was maintained, though the Egyp- 
tians recognized as Sothic cycles the periods of 1461 years 
when the official New Year's Day did actually coincide with 
the heliacal rising of Sirius. 
Now historical kings in Egypt, as in Babylonia and else- 
where, were intimately connected with the regulation of the 
calendar. It has been suggested that they owed their authority 
in part at least to that first application of predictive science, the 
establishment of the calendar. The Pharaohs may even have 

I 12 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
kept secret the further discovery of the utility of the heliacal 
rising of Sirius as a sign of the flood's proximity to exploit it 
for their own prestige. The knowledge would have enabled 
the Pharaoh to predict the flood to the fellahin, and thus 
vindicate his magical powers of controlling the seasons and 
the crops. That is perhaps just a nice speculation. The determi- 
nation of the solar year and the creation of an official calendar 
dependent on that standard are historical facts of the highest 
importance for the history of science. For the Egyptian is 
admittedly the parent of all Old World solar calendars, in- 
cluding our own. 

z 
o 
H 
E-t 
< 
N 
H 
H 
H 
> 
I-f 
U 
 
o 
en 
 
t4 
Q 
 
U 
 
 
 
o 
 
< 
::g 
 
U 
E-t 
 
 
en 
I. 
t'-- 

CHAPTER VII 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
By 4000 B.C. the great tract of semi-arid lands round the 
East Mediterranean and eastwards to India was populated by 
a multiplicity of cor.dmunities. Among them a diversity of 
economies, appropriate to the variety of local conditions, 
must be imagined-hunters and fishers, hoe-cultivators, 
nomadic pastoralists, and settled farmers. And on their fringe 
we can add other tribes spreading out into the distant wilder- 
ness. Among them these diverse communitit;s had augmented 
man's cultural capital by the discoveries and inventions in- 
dicated in the last chapter. They had severally accumulated 
an imposing body of scientific knowledge-topographical, 
geological, astronomical, chemical, zoological, and botanical 
-of practical craftlore on agriculture, mechanics, metallurgy, 
and architecture, and of magical beliefs that might also en- 
shrine scientific truths. As a result of the commerce and move- 
ments of peoples just hinted at, such science, techniques, and 
beliefs were being widely diffused; knowledge and skil1 were 
being pooled. And at the same time the exclusiveness of local 
groups was being broken down, the rigidity of socia1 institu- 
tions was being relaxed, self-sufficing communities were 
sacrificing their economic indepen dence. 
The last-named development progressed faster than else- 
where in the great riverine depressions, in the Nile V a]]ey, on 
the alluvial plains between the Tigris and Euphrates, and on 
those bordering the Indus and its tributaries in Sindh and Pun- 
jab. There a generous and unfailing water supply and a fertile 
soil annually renewed by floods ensured a reliable and 
superabundant supply of food and permitted the population 
to expand. On the other hand, both the original draining of 
the marshes and jungles fringing the rivers and the subsequent 
maintenance of drainage channels and protective dykes im- 
posed exceptionally heavy demands for sustained and 
disciplined effort upon the communities profiting by these 
advantages. And, as explained on p. 90, irrigation placed 
in the communities' hand an effective means of enforcing 
discipline. 
And, despite the abundance of foodstuffs, alluvial valleys 
114 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
115 
are exceptionally poor in other raw materials essential to 
civilized life. The Nile Valley lacked timber for building, free- 
stone, ores, and magic stones. Sumer was still worse off. The 
only native timber was supplied by the date-palm, quarries of 
building stone were remoter and less accessible than in Egypt; 
not only was copper ore lacking, but flint of which the Nile 
cliffs furnished an excellent supply was equally hard to obtain. 
Indeed, on the alluvial plains and marshes even hard pebbles, 
suitable for making axeheads, were rarities. From the very 
first the Sumerians had had to import Armenian obsidian or 
other exotic stones for cutting tools. Sindh and Punjab 
suffered from the same shortage of essential raw materials as 
Sumer. 
And so on the large alluvial plains and riverside flatlands 
the need for extensive public works to drain and irrigate the 
land and to protect the settlement would tend to consolidate 
social organization and to l:t:ntralize the economic system. At 
the same time, the inhabitants of Egypt, Sumer, and the Indus 
basin were forced to organize some regular system of trade 
or barter to secure supplies of essential raw materials. The 
fertility of lands gave their inhabitants the means for satis- 
fying their need of imports. But economic self-sufficiency had 
to be sacrificed and a completely new economic structure 
created. The surplus of home-grown products must not only 
suffice to exchange for exotic materials; it must also support a 
body of merchants and transport workers engaged in obtain- 
ing these and a body of specialized craftsmen to work the 
precious imports to the best advantage. And soon soldiers 
would be needed to protect the convoys and back up the 
merchants by force, scribes to keep records of transactions 
growing ever more complex, and State officials to reconcile 
conflicting interests. 
And so by 3000 B.C. the archaeologist's picture of Egypt,. 
Mesopotamia, and the Indus valley no longer focuses atten- 
tion on communities of simple farmers, but on States em- 
bracing various professions and classes. The foreground is 
occupied by priests, princes, scribes, and officials, and an 
army of specialized craftsmen, professional soldiers, and 
miscellaneous laborers, all withdrawn from the primary task 
of food-production. The most striking objects now unearthed 
are no longer the tools of agriculture and the chase and other 
products of domestic industry, but temple furniture, weapons,. 
wheel-made pots (p. 102), jewelry, and other manufactures 
turned out on a large scale by skilled artisans. As monuments 
we have instead of huts and farmhouses, monumental tombs, 
temples, palaces, and workshops. And in them we find all 

116 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
manner of exotic substances, not as rarities, but regularly im- 
ported and used in everyday life. 
Evidently the change in the archaeologists' material reflects 
a transformation in the economy that produced the material. 
Evidently too the transformation should be accompanied by 
a rise in the population. Priests, officials, merchants, artisans. 
and soldiers should represent new classes that, as classes, could 
find no livelihood in a self-sufficing food-producing com- 
munity, still less in a band of hunters. And the archaeological 
evidence alone suffices to confirrn that expectation. The new 
cities are spatially larger and can accommodate a much denser 
population than the agricultural villages that have been ab- 
sorbed in them or that still subsist beside them. Mohenjo-daro 
in Sindh, for example, spread over a square mile of land; it 
was a close agglomeration of two-storied houses neatly 
arranged along broad streets or narrow alleys. Again, the 
urban cemeteries attest not only an increase of wealth, but 
also multiplication of people. On the Nile we have not only 
village graveyards continuing from prehistoric times, but also 
large cemeteries of monumental tombs reserved for royalties 
and officials. The so-called "royal cemetery" at U r was prob- 
ably used by only a fraction of the citizen body, and on the 
most generous estimate for not more than three centuries 
(most authorities would reduce this figure by half). Yet it 
comprised over 700 interments still recognizable when dis- 
covered-a vastly larger number than found in any purely 
prehistoric cemetery. 
The change from self-sufficing food-production to an 
economy based also on specialized manufacture and external 
trade did accordingly promote a marked expansion of the 
population. It had such an effect on vital statistics as to earn 
the title of revolution on the definition given on p. 19. 
In the economic sphere the results of the second revolution 
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and India were similar, but only in an 
abstract way. Concretely its results were strikingly different in 
each area. The details not only of the economic structures but 
.also of the political and religious systems reposing thereon 
diverge conspicuously. This divergence extends down to the 
simplest archaeological objects. In each region smiths were 
working the same chemical substances by analogous simple 
processes into tools and weapons to serve common human 
needs. But their products-axes, knives, daggers and spear- 
heads-assume quite distinct forms on the Nile, on the 
Euphrates, and on the Indus. There is no less contrast be- 
1ween Indian, Sumerian and Egyptian pottery, though the 
potter's craft was common to the three regions. And like con- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
117 
trasts can be followed in every aspect of man's activity. An 
abstract account of the revolution in general cannot therefore 
take the place of a description of its course in the several 
regIons. 
In Mesopotamia the archaeologist can watch the several 
stages of the revolution at a number of different sites in the 
south, in Sumer, at Eridu, Dr, Erech, Lagash, Larsa, Shurup- 
pak; the later stages can also be observed in the north, in 
Akkad, at Kish, Jemdet Nasr, Opis, Eshnunna and Mari. In 
Sumer at each site the economic systems at the start and at 
the end are not only similar, but identical; and ultimately this 
identity proves to be founded on a common language, religion, 
and social organization. The events revealed by the excava- 
tions at Erech may accordingly be taken as illustrating what 
was happening at other sites. 
Erech began as a village of neolithic farmers. The decay and 
renewal of successive villages, as described on p. 39, gradual- 
ly formed a mound or tell that slowly rose above the level 
of the marshy plain. The first fifty feet of this artificial hill 
consist entirely of the ruins of reed huts or mud-brick houses. 
The simple relics collected from them illustrate the progress 
summarized in tbe last chapter-an increasing use of metal, 
the introduction of the potter's wheel, and so on. The village 
is growing in size and wealth, but it remains a village. 
But then, instead of the walls and hearths of modest huts, 
appear the foundations of a truly monumental building-a 
temple or group of temples. And close by rises an artificial 
mountain, the prototype of the "ziggurat" or staged tower 
that was an indispensable part of an historical Sumerian 
temple. This first ziggurat was built entirely of hand-formed 
lumps of mud with ]ayers of bitumen between them. But it 
towered more than thirty-five feet above the then existing 
surface of the ground-the street-level of the contemporary 
settlement-and its top measured over 1000 yards square. The 
mountain's steeply-sloping sides were relieved by buttresses 
alternating with recesses, and were further adorned and con- 
solidated by thousands of little pottery tumblers. These had 
been pushed side by side in close-packed rows into the mud 
of the ziggurat while it was still wet. They served to consolidate 
the faces while they were drying, and eventually stood out 
forming decorative patterns of round dimples when the monu- 
ment was complete. 
On the mountain-top was a tiny shrine with white-washed 
walls of mud brick and a staircase by which the deity might 
descend from the heavens. At the foot were more imposing 
temples. 

118 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
The erection of the artificial mountain and of the temples, 
the collection and transportation of the materials, the manu.. 
facture of the thousands of pots and bricks required a large 
and disciplined force of laborers and craftsmen. While these 
were withdrawn from food-production they must have been 
supported, if not paid, from some common store of surplus 
food. Whose? Presumably it was already controlled by the 
power, we may perhaps say already "deity," to whose honor 
and glory the buildings were dedicated. The fertility of the 
land and the pious superstitions of its cultivators must have 
endowed its divine lord with riches at least in surplus food.. 
stuffs. 
But the erection of such a monument required more than 
laborers and their food. The whole was carefully planned: the 
artificial mountain was laid out with its corners to the cardinal 
points. A centralized directing force was requisite. The god 
being but a fictitious projection of the communal will, that 
force must have been supplied by his servants. Naturally 
enough the imaginary god has found earthly representatives 
and interpreters glad to administer and to enlarge his ter- 
restrial possessions in exchange for a modest share of his in- 
come. The wizards and magicians, guessed at in neolithic 
villages, have emerged as a corporation of priests sanctified 
with divine authority and emancipated from any mundane 
labors in field or pasture. These interpret the divine will to 
the toiling masses or, in other words, twist the magic 
ceremonies, by which society would compel natural forces, 
into ever more complicated rites for conciliating the power 
that now personifies these. And in this process of invention 
there are revealed the plans of temples, just as historical kings 
relate that the plan for a temple has been revealed to them in 
a dream. 
We may assume then that, as in the earliest historical period, 
a corporation of priests already corresponds to this first of 
temples. And, as in all written documents, these priests must 
have provided the administrators of the god's treasury. But the 
administration of the rich treasures of the temple would im- 
pose quite a new task on the persons engaged. What those 
tasks were, written documents will soon reveal: it may be 
anticipated that some means had to be devised for keeping 
track of the various offerings and of their utilization, lest the 
deity should demand of his priest accounts of his stewardship. 
And, in fact, in the ziggurat-shrine the excavators found a 
tablet bearing the impression of a seal and hollows that are 
certainly numerals. It is the world's oldest account tablet, the 

THE AN REVOLUTION 
"9 
immediate forerunner of a long series of Sumerian temple 
accounts. 
Thus the first temple at Erech reveals a community, raised 
to the dignity of a city, disposing of a surplus of real wealth 
accumulated in the hands of a deity and administered by a 
corporation of priests. It implies an organized force of workers, 
specialized industries and some rudimentary system of com- 
merce and transportation. And at this crucial moment the be- 
ginnings at least of accountancy and even writing emerge. 
And, of course, Erech did not stand alone; the sites of the 
other great Sumerian cities have yielded remains of the same 
cultural stage and of a like absolute antiquity. And from this 
point the development of urban civilization can be traced 
continuously till the moment when the full light of written 
history dawns upon it and within it. The story is one of 
accumulating wealth, of improving technical skill, of increas- 
ing specialization of labor, and of expanding trade. 
The temple at Erech fell into disrepair, and was rebuilt at 
least four times. Each successive temple is grander than its 
predecessor. The pots hammered into the walls of the first 
ziggurat are replaced by cones of baked clay, the ends of 
which are painted black, red, and white. These are stuck into 
the mud-brick walls so as to make mosaic patterns. By the 
beginning of the historical period inlays of mother-of-pearl 
and carnelian on black bitumen replace the mosaic of clay 
cones. The inner walls of the sanctuary are decorated at first 
with figures of animals molded in clay. Later these are re- 
placed by friezes of plaques cut out of stone or shell and 
mounted in bitumen. At the dawn of history large-size groups 
of animals in copper, cast or beaten up over a core of bitu- 
men, replace the molded clay figures. 
The stage represented by the third principal phase of re- 
building at Erech is equally well known in Akkad (Northern 
Babylonia), particularly at Jemdet Nasr. By this time increase 
of wealth, a profounder knowledge of applied chemistry and 
geology, and more regular and extended commerce are dis- 
closed by the importation and utilization of lead, silver, and 
lapis lazuli. Increased technical skill is indicated by the manu- 
facture of articles in glazed paste and of light war-chariots. 
And now the account tablets are regularly inscribed with 
symbols and numerals. The symbols are mainly pictures, but 
include already conventional signs that are hardly recognizable 
as likenesses of concrete objects, but must already possess a 
conventional meaning. There are different numeral signs for 
units, tens, and sixties or hundreds. The tablets already apply 

120 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
simple arithmetical formulas-reckoning, for instance, the 
area of a field as the product of two adjacent sides. 
The growth of the god's revenues, and the consequent in- 
crease in the complexity of accountancy, have compelled the 
priestly administrators to devise systems of writn£ and 
numeral notation intelligible to their colleagues and succes- 
sors in the permanent corporation of temple officers. To 
simplify and abbreviate their labors they have had to discover 
and formulate rules of reckoning and "laws" of geometry. 
By the next phase, well after 3000 B.C., the "royal 
cemetery" of Ur brilliantly illustrates the culmination of the 
process. Goldsmiths can now make wire and solder; they 
produce delicate chains and elaborate ornaments in granula- 
tion and filigree work. The coppersmith is master of the 
hammer and of casting, and is probably employing the cire 
perdue process. And so he can provide his fel1ow-craftsmen 
with a variety of delicate and specialized tools-axes, adzes, 
chisels, gouges, drills, knives, saws, nails, clamps, needles, and 
so on. Jewelers can now pierce the hardest stones and en- 
grave them for seals. Sculptors are beginning to carve vases 
and statuettes out of limestone and even basalt. The carpenter, 
besides boats, chariots, and couches, fashions harps and lyres. 
Naturally there are professional musicians to play upon them; 
these actually take their places in the tomb beside their royal 
masters. 
All this luxury and refinement means more than accumu- 
lated wealth and intensified specialization. It reposes on an 
enriched craft-lore and new discoveries in applied science. 
The fine castings of the Sumerian smiths could not have been 
achieved with pure copper. They are hardly conceivable unless 
the alloy of copper with tin that we term bronze had been dis- 
covered, and actual analyses have demonstrated the employ- 
ment of this alloy. This does not in itself vindicate for the 
Sumerians the credit of the discovery; bronze was also used in 
India about the same date. It presumably began as an accident- 
al alloy resulting from smelting a copper ore containing tin 
as a natural impurity or from chance mixtures of copper and 
tin ores. But it is only in an urban industry using "copper" 
drawn from a variety of different sources that comparison 
would reveal the superiority of the "copper" from one district 
or ore. That observation must be the first step to the isolation 
of the impurity to which that superiority was due, and so to 
the deliberate preparation of the alloy. Bronze can have been 
discovered only by deliberate comparison and experimenta- 
tion. 
Other evidence of experimentation is afforded by a small 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
121 
dagger of iron belonging to the same period. It had been 
made, not from meteoric iron or natural telluric iron, but 
from metal reduced from its ore. It may have been the result 
of an isolated experiment, and there is no evidence that the 
discovery was followed up. It was not till about 1300 B.C. 
that iron came into regular industrial use, and then not in 
Mesopotamia, but elsewhere in Asia Minor. Yet another dis- 
covery of the period was clear glass. Glazed stones and fayence 
had been known to the prehistoric Egyptians, and the art of 
their manufacture had been introduced into Mesopotamia be- 
fore 3000 B.C. But some time after that date we have examples 
of clear glass. This may rank as a Sumerian discovery resulting 
from experiments with the other glazes, all of which depend 
upon the properties of alkaline silicates. 
The employment on such a vast scale of imported sub- 
stances foreign to the alluvial plains implies that the com- 
lllcrcial rlatiuns foreshadowed in earlier periods had been 
extended and made more regular. Some of the copper was 
brought from Oman south of the Persian Gulf. Silver and 
lead probably came from the Taurus mountains in Asia 
Minor, attested as a great exporting center soon after 2500 
B.C. Large shells were derived from the Persian Gulf and the 
Arabian Sea. Timber must have been brought from moun- 
tains that catch the rain-from the Zagros, or perhaps even 
from Lebanon on the Mediterranean coast. Lapis is believed 
to have been derived from Afghanistan. 
And trade did not stop short at raw materials. The second 
revolution was already being accomplished in Egypt and 
India; the cities of Sumer were in commercial relations with 
others on the Nile and the Indus. Commodities manufactured 
by the specialized industries of one urban center were traded 
to the bazaars of another. In several Mesopotamian cities stray 
seals, beads, and even pots have turned up that are not Sumer- 
ian in character, but are, on the other hand, common in con- 
temporary cities in Sindh and Punjab. They afford conclusive 
proof of international trade linking the Tigris with the Indus 
1200 miles away. They reveal a picture of caravans regularly 
crossing the rugged ranges and salt deserts that separate the 
two valleys, or of fleets of dhows sailing along the waterless 
coasts of the Arabian Sea between the rivers' mouths. 
Now that sort of commerce in the Orient is not, and never 
can have been, a mere transportation of bales of merchandise 
from place to place. At the termini and at stations on the way 
the caravans and merchant dhows must make prolonged halts. 
Representatives, probably colonists from the exporting coun- 
try, must receive the goods at their destination and arrange a 

122- 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
return Joad, entertaining the travelers in the meantime. Just 
as there are permanent colonies of British merchants in 
Oporto, Stamboul and Shanghai, so we may imagine colonies 
of Indian merchants settled at Dr and Kish. Trade under 
such conditions is very really a means of intercourse, a channel 
by which ideas can be diffused on an international scale. 
Again, it is not only goods-the concrete embodiments of 
new inventions-but also men-artisans and inventors-that 
are transported by the caravans. In the Orient skilled labor is 
surprisingly mobile, and it is so traditional1y. Craftsmen 
gravitate to centers where they can profitably employ their 
skill. And this must be true of antiquity. The new class of 
expert craftsmen, created by the second revolution, had been 
liberated from the tasks of primary food-production, and so 
from attachment to the soil. They were perhaps at the same 
time released from tribal bonds and not yet firmly attached to 
the nascent local States. So they could move whithersoever 
profitable employment offered. Or, were they slaves, they 
would be sent as commodities to where their skill would fetch 
the highest price for their persons. In any case, this mobility 
explains the rapid diffusion of technical processes. 
Such were the stage of the second revolution in 
Mesopotamia and such its industrial and economic conse- 
quences for man's material culture. The severa! stages are 
undoubtedly moments in an organic process of economic 
accumulation and of scientific and technical advancement. But 
this continuity need not apply to the ethnological and political 
domains. There are, indeed, indications that accumulation 
and advancement were interrupted or promoted by the advent 
of new peoples, perhaps by conquests and invasions. 
So, for instance, burial rites were changed. The neolithic 
farmers were general1y buried extended, lying full length upon 
their backs. In the cultural phase III (represented at J emdet 
Nasr) the dead were interred crouched with the knees drawn 
up to the chin; in the royal cemetery of Dr the skeletons gen- 
erally lie flexed in the attitude of sleep, while some person- 
ages, supposedly royalties, are laid to rest in monumental 
tombs surrounded with human victims, sacrificed at their 
obsequies. Some changes in architecture too seem to indicate 
more than mere technical advances. The second temple-com- 
plex at Erech rests on foundations of limestone blocks, a 
material that seems exotic in the alluvial plain. In the next 
group stone is abandoned and flat kiln-fired bricks are used. 
But the last group of .emples and all contemporary monu- 
ments are built of absurd pIano-convex bricks, flat on one 
face only, but cushion-shaped on the other. It has been thought 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
123 
that the new architectural devices represent foreign fashions 
introduced into Sumer by invaders from abroad. Sealings 
certainly give indications of warfare and battles. And at the 
end, when written records become explicit, we find Babylonia 
occupied by two distinct linguistic groups: some of its in- 
habitants speak Sumerian, others talk a Semitic dialect- 
Akkadian-allied to Hebrew and Arabic, but radically differ- 
ent from Sumerian. 
The nature and effects of the rather problematical ethnic 
and racial disturbances cannot be defined precisely. They 
certainly did not seriously interrupt the continuity of material 
culture. And the gods and their temples survived the crises; 
the priestly corporations retained their identity whatever hap- 
pened to other social structures. And that was true of all sub- 
sequent history. The written records of Babylonia describe 
frequent changes of dynasty and frequent conquests by foreign 
invaders. In these catastrophes temples might be plundered 
and wrecked, but the new king or the successful conqueror 
regularly displayed his piety and his power by rebuilding and 
enriching with fresh revenues the city temples. As late as 
323 B.C. Alexander of Macedon sealed his conquest of Asia 
by rebuilding the E-sagila, the great temple of Babylon. The 
repeated reconstruction of the prehistoric temples at Erech 
and the other cities is concrete testimony to the same con- 
tinuity of religious corporations with their unbroken cultural 
traditions that history unambiguously attests later on. 
Now, as the temple corporations, continuing through all 
vicissitudes, grew richer, the task of administering the grow- 
ing revenues became heavier and heavier. The administrators 
had to devise ever better means for recording their complicated 
business transactions. Eventually they created a system of 
writing which not only their colleagues and immediate suc- 
cessors, but also modern scholars could read. By the period 
of the fourth temple complex at Erech decipherable written 
documents emerge to supplement the deductions of pre- 
historic archaeology. 
Soon after 3000 B.C. the earliest written texts give us a 
picture of the social and economic organizatior:L of Sumer 
and Akkad. The land is divided up among fifteen or twenty 
city States, each politically autonomous, but all enjoying a 
common material culture, a common religion, and a common 
language, and all largely interdependent economically. The 
center of each city was the sacred temenos or citadel con- 
taining the temples of the city god and other deities. We may, 
if we like, infer that the god is a personification of magic 
forces; dramatic representations of the death and rebirth of 

1 2 4 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
vegetation, of sowing and harvest, may once have been per- 
formed as magic rites designed to compel the germination of 
the crops. In time the actors who symbolized the grain and its 
magic fertility would be taken as playing the role of a deity 
who controlled the magic forces. The magic force which man 
had sought to compel would be personified as a god who 
must be helped and conciliated. Before history begins, society 
has projected its collective will, its corporate hopes and fears, 
into this fictitious person whom it reveres as Lord of its 
terri tory. 
In any case, each god has an earthly dwelling, the city 
temple, a material estate, and human servants, the priestly 
corporation. The oldest decipherable documents from Meso- 
potamia are, in fact, the accounts of the temple revenues kept 
by the priests. They reveal the temple as not only the center 
of the city's religious life, but also the nucleus of capital 
accumulation. The temple functions as the great bank; the 
god is the chief capitalist of the land. The early temple archives 
record the god's loans of seed or plow animals to cultivators, 
the fields he has let to tenants, wages paid to brewers, boat- 
builders, spinners, and other employees, advances of grain or 
bullion to traveling merchants. The god is the richest member 
of the community. His wealth ii available to the community 
from whose piety he, in fact, derived it. But the same piety 
required that the borrower should not only pay back the loan, 
but also add a little thank-offering. The god's ministers were 
doubtless careful to remind you of your duty, and even 
stipulated in advance what decency demanded you to offer. 
Such thank-offerings would today be called interest, and the 
temple's tariff might be styled usurious by the impious. 
This economic system that made the god a great capitalist 
and landlord, his temple into a city bank, evidently goes back 
to remote prehistoric times. The figured gypsum tablet from 
the oldest temple at Erech, the tablets from J emdet N asr 
with their picture-writing, are undoubtedly precursors of the 
temple accounts that can now be read. The latter accordingly 
justify the description of Sumer's economic development al- 
ready deduced. They will form the basis of the analysis of the 
second revolution's scientific consequences to be given in the 
next chapter. 
But by 3000 B.C. there is already emerging beside the deity 
in every city a temporal potentate. He styles himself humbly 
the god's "vicegerent," but also boldly "king." Perhaps he had 
once impersonated the god in those sacred dramas imagined 
above as a factor in the genesis of godhead. Indeed, he still 
takes the part of the god in some acts of the drama. But he 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
125 
has emancipated himself from the fate of the original actor- 
to be consig.ned to the tomb as the seed is to the earth. And 
he has certainly usurped a substantial share of the god's tem- 
poral power over men. He even oppresses his subjects accord- 
ing to quite early documents. The State has, indeed, "arisen 
out of Society, places itself above it, and separates itself from 
it. " 
Nevertheless, the king fulfilled essential economic func- 
tions in the deveJopment of Sumerian society. He was pos- 
sessed of the material power of a civil ruler and a military 
commander. One use of this power may have been to Sfie 
that "the antagonisms," generated by the revolution, "classes 
with conflicting interests, did not consume themselves and 
society in sterile struggle." But of that the records are silent. 
They do mention the use of the State's power to supplement 
the work of "private enterprise" in providing for the economic 
needs of the country. Early kings boast of their economic 
activities-of cutting canals, of building temples, of importing 
timber from Syria, and copper and granite from Oman. They 
are sometimes depicted on monuments in the garb of brick- 
layers or masons and of architects receiving the plan of a 
temple from its god. 
Doubtless the royal power accelerated the accumulation of 
capital in foodstuffs and real wealth. Courtiers, ministers, 
musicians, and men-at-arms were supported by the surplus 
thus extorted. And the army was fulfilling an economic func- 
tion in guarding the city, its canals, its irrigated fields and 
pastures against the incursions of starveling nomads from 
the surrounding steppes or wild tribes from the mountains. In 
the end it would create a political order more compatible with 
economic realities than the system of city-states. 
Lower Mesopotamia is a geographical unit, dependent for 
life on the waters of its twin rivers, for a civilized life on the 
importation of the same exotic substances from common 
sources. Precisely because they were dependent on the waters 
of the same rivers, disputes about lands and water rights were 
liable to arise between the several autonomous cities. Just be- 
cause all relied on the same foreign trade to bring them the 
same necessities for industry, commercial rivalries were inevit- 
able amongst sovereign states; the contradiction between an 
economic system that ought to be unitary and political sepa- 
ratism was made manifest in interminable dynastic wars. Our 
earliest documents after the temple accounts, in fact, record 
wars between adjacent cities and treaties that temporarily 
ended them. The ambition of any city dynast was to obtain 
hegemony over his neighbours. 

12b 
TH URBAN REVOLUTION 
But no permanent result was obtained by these internecine 
conflicts tiJl 2500 (or later) B.C. Then the Semitic ru1er or 
Agade or Akkad whom we term Sargon established an em- 
pire over al1 Babylonia which lasted with intervals of revolt 
for nearly a century. His feat was subsequently imitated, more 
or less successfully, by kings of Ur and of other cities. £ Jt 
only a little after (or before) 1800 B.C. was Babylonia made a 
political reality, a unified nation with a common capital, a 
common code of written law, a common calendar, and a per- 
manent system of government by Hammurabi, king of Baby- 
lon. Then at last the city-state was absorbed into the territorial 
state that corresponded on the whole to the rea]ities of eco- 
nomic needs. 
In Egypt it seems as if political unification coincided with 
the accomplishment of the second economic revolution. The 
Nile Valley is geographically even more a natural economic 
unit than is the plain of the Tigris and Euphrates, and so the 
natural factors tending to unity were more efficient. At the 
saIne time, the contrast between the narrow valley of Upper 
Egypt and the open Delta, Lower Egypt, is fundamental. His- 
torically the unification of Egypt means the union of these 
Two Lands in a single kingdom. That event preceded Sargon's 
unification of Babylonia by some five centuries, so that the 
second revolution in the two regions is approximately con- 
temporary. 
Egypt is again less completely dependent on imports from 
abroad than is Mesopotamia. In particular, local supplies of 
excellent flint rendered metal less essential for industrial pur- 
poses; indeed, stone was still being used by Egyptian farmers 
and artisans a thousand years after their Babylonian con- 
temporaries had been using only metal tools. It was, in fact, 
primarily luxury articles and magic necessities-malachite, 
gems, gold, spices-that had to be imported into Egypt. It 
was accordingly only a demand for such substances on a large 
scale that made inevitable the systematic organization of ex- 
ternal trade and the specialization of manufacturing indus- 
tries. That demand became effective only through the rise of a 
class that set an extravagant value on the exotic materia1s for 
magical purposes, and at the same time disposed of the sur- 
plus wealth needed to gratify their desires. 
And so the reserves of supplies required for the transforma- 
tion of the economic system were not accumulated in the 
temples of a communal deity, but in the hands of a monarch 
who had already placed himself above the society from which 
he had arisen. The unification of Egypt and creation of a state 
based on secondary industry and commerce as well as food- 

THE UREAN REVOLUTION 
127 
production were finally accomplished when a king of Upper 
Egypt, Menes, conquered the Delta. His ancestors have left 
no concrete memorials of their rise to power comparable to 
the prehistoric temples of Sumer. And so we have to recon- 
struct the course of the revolution, the rise of the monarchy, 
by hazardous inferences from later literary sources, instead 
of reading off the concrete record of archaeological remains. 
A plausible but rather speculative, and certainly much over- 
simplified, account of the genesis of the Egyptian monarchy 
would run as follows. In the prehistoric village, communities 
of self-sufficing food-producing clans whose cemeteries line 
the Nile Valley may have fallen under the sway of a class of 
magicians. By the time most individual villagers, having found 
their private magics futile, were prepared to rely on the magic 
of the cleverer persons, some acquired a little authority by 
successful pretensions to influence the fertility of the crops, the 
weather, and the Nile flood. The invention of a calendar 
making possible the accurate prediction of the flood's advent 
would, as suggested on p. 111, be a sure way of justifying such 
pretensions and consolidating such authority. To enforce them 
the actual power of cutting off real water by blocking irriga- 
tion channels would be an effective means. 
But it is likely that our hypothetical magician-chiefs would 
have enjoyed only a limited tenure of authority, as did the 
historical chiefs who ruled Nilotic tribes last century. Their 
magic powers would be regarded as correlative to physical 
powers. Only a healthy and vigorous chief would perform effi- 
ciently the requisite rites; before old age impaired his potency 
he must be slain to make room for a young and virile succes- 
sor. 
That fate might be escaped could a chief persuade his fol- 
lowers that by his secret magic he could secure immunity 
from physical infirmities. One of Menes' ancestors may, in 
fact, have established some such claim to magic rejuvenation. 
In any case, all historical pharaohs performed periodically a 
rite-the Sed-festival-that seems designed to secure a re- 
newal of youth by a simulated death and resurrection. By this 
rite, modeled on the agricultural festivals mentioned on p. 
123, 124, pharaoh rose after his symbolic death magically 
restored to youth, like the grain that has been sown. 
Perhaps at the same time the magic chief contrived to iden- 
tify himself with the totem of his clan and to monopolize 
communion with the animal or object that all clansmen had 
once revered as their common ancestor. In any case, Menes 
and his successors arc identified with the Falcon, Horus, who 
had been just the totem of his clan. But, as we saw on p. 84, 

130 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
into Upper Egypt. The army, which had been the instrument 
of forcible unification, was employed thereafter to ward off 
such plunderers and trespassers. Quite early texts disclose the 
organization of a regular system of defense through the estab- 
lishment of frontier posts manned by permanent garrisons 
commanding the ways of access to the Nile Valley. 
It was, of course, these realist measures that promoted the 
extraordinary growth in wealth and population reflected in 
the archaeological record after Menes' conquest. But it has 
been necessary to explain the peculiar ideology associated 
with those measures, because in the archaeological record 
economic achievements and scientific discoveries appear only 
as applied to magical ends, as distorted in an ideological 
medium. 
Down to 2000 B.C. the archaeological record of Egypt con- 
sists almost entirely of graves and their furniture. From per- 
haps 5000 to about 3000 B.C. extend pre-dynastic cemeteries 
of simple pit-graves furnished more or less richly with home- 
made articles (p. 127 above). Modest improvements in tomb 
construction, the appearance of imported luxuries in growing 
numbers, occasional copper implements and beads of fayence 
illustrate the advances and discoveries described in Chapter 
VI. The unification of Egypt under 1enes and his immedi- 
ate successors (Dynasty I) is symbolized by the construction 
near Abydos of monumental tombs which find only remote 
and vague precursors among the later pre-dynastic graves. 
The royal tombs of i\bydos were miniature palaces of brick 
and timber erected at the bottom of vast pits dug in the desert 
sand. There are also mastabas of mud brick built above ground 
to serve as funeral shrines for the cult of the dead and store- 
houses for mortuary offerings. The tombs are furnished with 
a quite unprecedented wealth and variety of exquisitely 
wrought furniture, 'eapons, vessels, toilet articles, and orna- 
ments wrought with masterly perfection of cedar-wood, gold, 
copper, alabaster, obsidian, lapis lazuli, turquoise, and other 
choice materials, native or foreign. The storerooms are crowd- 
ed with well-made pots containing oil, beer, grain, and other 
foodstuffs. Inscriptions on seals and wooden tablets, recording 
outstanding events of the reign, prove that a system of writing 
had already been invented, although the script is still primitive. 
Servants and officials are buried in rooms adjacent to the 
royal burial chamber, and have presumably been slain to 
accompany their master. 
A multitude of laborers must have been employed in dig- 
ging the grave-shafts, in preparing and transporting the bricks 
and planks, and in erecting the tombs and mastabas. The subtly 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
129 
Mesopotah.\i3, this substantial god devoted part of his power 
and wealth to the material prosperity of his kIngdom; a share 
of his revenues was invested in genuinely reproductive under- 
takings. A pharaoh of Dynasty II is represented ""cutting the 
first sod" of a new irrigation canal. Operations instituted by 
the king for the control of the floodwaters are mentioned. 
Prom the foundation of the unified kingdom under Menes a 
special gauge, the Nilometer, was constructed to measure the 
height of the Nile, and records were kept of the floods. These 
measurements and records were designed primarily to serve 
as a basis for the assessment of taxes. But, like the calendar, 
they indirectly helped the farmer as well as the tax-gatherer. 
The importation of raw materials, needed for the develop- 
ment of Egyptian industries as well as for funerary ceremonies, 
was financed from the royal revenues. Copper and turquoise 
were mined in Sinai. Expeditions, equipped by the State and 
escorted by royal soldiers, were periodically dispatched across 
the desert for the purpose. It was the same with the importa- 
tion of cedar wood and resins from North Syria. Ships for the 
voyage to Byblos were equipped and provided with trade 
goods by the State. Similarly, government officials led expedi- 
tions to the Upper Nile and brought back gold and spices. 
The principal object of this foreign trade was doubtless to 
secure luxuries and magic substances or war materials- 
while peasants and laborers still used stone tools in the fields 
and quarries, soldiers were armed with metal weapons. Still, 
commerce brought materials essential to progress in civiliza- 
tion and in science. It offered a livelihood for new classes- 
merchants, sailors, porters, soldiers, artisans, and clerks- 
supported from the surplus revenues collected by the pharaoh. 
Finally, the monarchy from its foundation conferred upon 
the Egyptians real benefits that the Sumerians still lacked. A 
series of villages strung out along the banks of a single river 
are liable to be involved in mutual squabbles over boundaries 
and water rights. Actually throughout Egyptian history right 
down to modern times such parochial disputes have broken 
out violently whenever the central government is weak. Menes 
and his successors repressed such wasteful conflicts as long as 
the Old Kingdom endured. And besides maintaining internal 
peace, they preserved the land from foreign aggression. The 
arid plateaus on either side of the Nile Valley were sparsely 
populated by tribes of poor pastoralists and hunters. Such 
were liable at any moment to raid the fertile valley. The Delta 
was exposed to attack from Libyans on the west and from 
bedouins on the east. Nubians, perhaps still in the stage of 
nomadic garden-culture, were constantly pressing downstream 

13 2 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
men were employed continually for ten years on quarrying the 
stone alone. Though not "free workers," the army of quarry- 
men, masons, and porters were provided with food and shelter 
out of the royal revenues. Though many must have perished, 
it is still likely that this distribution of wealth promoted a 
growth in population. 
But not only labor was required: the architects had to learn 
to co-ordinate and control this vast force of workers and to 
solve the mechanical problems of applying manpower to the 
lifting of heavy and unwieldy blocks. Moreover, a mystical 
significance seems to have attached to the accuracy of the 
structure's orientation and proportion. The success achieved 
is surprising. The base of the great pyramid is intended to be a 
perfect square, with a side of 7753/4 feet. The error, according 
to modern measurements, does not exceed one inch in any 
side! 
The accuracy of Egyptian workmanship was largely 
achieved by inexhaustible patience and trial-and-error. But a 
monument like a pyramid must have been planned to scale in 
advance and precisely measured. Its execution is hardly con- 
ceivable without prior calculations involving geometrical 
formulas. Extant mathematical texts confirm this expectation. 
For example, they contain a whole group of problems devoted 
to calculating the batter of a pyramid. The sepulchral monu- 
ments, indeed, imply the application of a considerable body of 
mathematical knowledge. The Egyptians' peculiar beliefs 
about dead kings seem thus to have inspired scientific dis- 
coveries that had more practical uses too. 
By the IVth Dynasty care for the conservation of the body 
had led to the development of mummification, giving employ- 
ment to a whole class of professional embalmers and affording 
exceptional opportunities for the accumulation of knowledge 
of human anatomy. In the pre-dynastic graves contact with the 
dry desert sand had sufficed to preserve the flesh and hair of 
corpses. Enclosed in coffins of wood or alabaster and in built 
tombs after the revolution, the bodies were no longer naturally 
preserved from putrescence. To stay its ravages chemical 
methods of embalming and a ritual of magic spells were 
gradually elaborated. 
The deceased's survival 'could further be ensured by carving 
likenesses in wood or stone-portrait statues of him. These 
had to be "animated" by magical means. And to be effective 
they must be as lifelike as possible. Hence the superb natural- 
ism of some Old Kingdom statues and bas reliefs. 
The dead man needed in the afterworld the objects and the 
services he enjoyed here. Hence not only were the tombs liber- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
131 
fashioned articles deposited therein are indubitably the prod- 
ucts of speciaJized and highly trained carpenters, smiths, stone- I 
cutters, engravers, goJdsmiths, and jeweJers. These laborers 
and expert artisans, withdrawn from primary production, have 
been paid by the surp1us collected by the monarch-the booty 
of conquest and the tribute regularJy exacted. And that surplus 
must have been used for securing the foreign materials, like 
cedar-wood, copper, obsidian, and lapis lazuli, so lavishly em- 
ployed. Inscriptions in the tombs attest already the existence 
of scribes and officiaJs charged with the collection and ad- 
ministration of the royal revenues, the planning and direction 
of building operations, and other functions. The unification of 
Egypt has, in fact, evoked the same new classes and the same 
new professions as the urban revolution in Sumer. But their 
services seem to be devoted primarily to the conservation of 
royal corpses. 
To the same end were applied the growing resources, the 
fresh scientific discoveries of subsequent reigns. To secure 
greater permanence and security for the king's last resting- 
place, the tomb came to be hewn out of the living rock under 
Dynasty III. The quarrymen thus learned to carve the hardest 
rocks with rudimentary tools; the architects had to plan and 
layout a complex of galleries and shafts that they could never 
look at as a whole (they had, that is, to solve the same prob- 
lems as are involved in drilling a tunnel or a mine gallery). 
Corbelled vaults of mud brick were employed even under 
Dynasty II; by Dynasty III the principle of the true arch (with 
keystone) had been mastered and applied. 
The overground monuments-mastabas and funerary 
chapels-were similarly elaborated. Under Dynasty III stone 
replaced mud brick to give the structure greater permanence. 
The bundles of papyrus reeds that had once supported the 
king's earthly palace were thus converted into fluted columns 
of imperishable stone-an idea which we have inherited 
through Greece from IIIrd Dynasty Egypt. The colored reed 
mats that once hung between the papyrus columns were 
copied in glazed tiles under Zoser. Under the same monarch, 
the mastaba, now built of stone, was enlarged, becoming the 
so-called stepped pyramid. Cheops in Dynasty IV then trans- 
lated this into the true pyramid. 
The execution of such works required a gigantic labor force. 
The huge blocks of limestone or granite for the pyramid, 
weighing anything up to 350 tons, were quarried at Tura, on 
the east bank of the Nile, floated downstream to Gizah above 
Cairo, and then dragged up a ramp to the level of the plateau 
100 feet above the river. Herodotus was told that 100,000 

134 
THE 'URBAN REVOLUTION 
the same effect on population as in the cities of Mesopotamia. 
And, as there, it coincided with the first development of writ- 
ing and mathematics. Nevertheless, now that we have exam- 
ined them at close quarters, the two systems appear remark- 
ably dissimilar. The contrast is no longer confined to the 
individual products of the several trades, but affects even 
fundamentals: the focus of accumulation appears in the one 
area a priestly corporation, in the other an individual monarch; 
the economic unit in Sumer is a city with outlying fields and 
hamlets which could and did function by itself. In Egypt, on 
the contrary, the unit is the kingdom as a royal estate; the 
manors or cities into which it may be subdivided would cease 
to function if isolated from it, or rather would relapse into 
more or less self-sufficing peasant communities. Egyptian 
civilization is in no sense a colonial outpost of the Sumerian 
nor VIce versa. 
The same contrasts, overshadowing all abstract agree- 
ments, would probably be revealed did written documents 
supplement the archaeological record in the Indus valley. 
There the second revolution had been probably contemporary 
with that in Egypt and Sumer, and was in any case perfected 
by 2500 B.C. By that date large cities had been established in 
Sindh and the Punjab. They may exceed a square mile in 
area. The houses are built mainly of kiln-fired bricks, and 
boast at least two stories. The streets and alleys on which they 
open have evidently been laid out in conformity with a pre- 
conceived plan which is preserved through several periods 
of reconstruction. A system of sewers serves the houses. 
Among these can be distinguished shops and factories, the 
sumptuous abodes of wealthy merchants or officials, and the 
hovels of artisans and transport workers. 
The buildings and aricles found in them have been 
produced by specialized craftsmen-brickmakers, carpenters, 
potters, coppersmiths, glaziers, stonecutters, goldsmiths, and 
jewelers. The regularity of the streets implies a civic authority 
with officials to enforce its decisions. Public servants were 
required for cleaning the drains. There must have been a 
class of clerks, since a system of writing and numeral nota- 
tion was in use as well as standardized weights and measures. 
All these classes, evidently very numerous, must be sup- 
ported by the surplus foodstuffs produced by peasants living 
in the city or in suburban villages. But even fishermen, toiling 
far away on the Arabian Sea, made contributions; for dried 
sea-fish was imported. The urban artisans, for their part, must 
produce a surplus of manufactured commodities to be 
bartered for the raw materials needed in industry, but un- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
133 
ally provided with furniture and offerings, but estates were 
set apart to provide. a permanent supply of the requisite offer- 
ings to the deceased. To ensure his enjoyment of this provision, 
magic pictures of the life of the estate were painted on the 
tomb walls, already under Dynasty IV and more regularly 
later. These pictures are our best source for the secular life 
and economic organization of Egypt in the later days of the 
Old Kingdom. They depict an economic unit that is not a city, 
but a large farm like a medieval manor. The farm is worked 
by peasants under the administration of bailiffs or overseers. 
The scenes include the work in the field, the breeding of cattle, 
hunting and fishing. And we see the peasants coming in to pay 
FIG. B.-GOLDSMITH'S WORKSHOP FROM AN OLD KINGDOM 
TOMB PAINTING. 
their rent or dues, always in kind, while a scribe notes down 
on papyrus what each man brings and an overseer with a whip 
keeps the tributaries up to the mark. But the estate was not 
purely agricultural; it included potteries, smithies, carpenters' 
and jewelers' workshops. Here again we see overseers weigh- 
ing out quantities of material to the craftsmen and scribes not- 
ing down the amounts issued. 
The manorial community looks very like a self-sufficing 
unit with specialized labor and graded classes. It is, of course, 
in reality inconceivable apart from the larger economic system 
that is the Egyptian State. That system provides the manor's 
artisans with their raw materials, and absorbs the surplus 
products of the farm. And we know that genuine cities existed 
even though none has so far been excavated from this period. 
With the political unification of Egypt there emerged in the 
Nile Valley an economic system in which manufacture and 
commerce ranked on a par with the production of foodstuffs 
by farming, hunting, and fishing. This revolution in Egypt had 

134 
THE 'CRBAN REVOLUTION 
the same effect on population as in the cities of Mesopotamia. 
And, as there, it coincided with the first development of writ- 
ing and mathematics. Nevertheless, now that we have exam- 
ined them at close quarters, the two systems appear remark- 
ably dissimilar. The contrast is no longer confined to the 
individual products of the several trades, but affects even 
fundamentals: the focus of accumulation appears in the one 
area a priestly corporation, in the other an individual monarch; 
the economic unit in Sumer is a city with outlying fields and 
hamlets which could and did function by itself. In Egypt, on 
the contrary, the unit is the kingdom as a royal estate; the 
manors or cities into which it may be subdivided would cease 
to function if isolated from it, or rather would relapse into 
more or less self-sufficing peasant communities. Egyptian 
civilization is in no sense a colonial outpost of the Sumerian 
nor VIce versa. 
The same contrasts, overshadowing all abstract agree- 
ments, would probably be revealed did written documents 
supplement the archaeological record in the Indus valley. 
There the second revolution had been probably contemporary 
with that in Egypt and Sumer, and was in any case perfected 
by 2500 B.C. By that date large cities had been established in 
Sindh and the Punjab. They may exceed a square mile in 
area. The houses are built mainly of kiln-fired bricks, and 
boast at least two stories. The streets and alleys on which they 
open have evidently been laid out in conformity with a pre- 
conceived plan which is preserved through several periods 
of reconstruction. A system of sewers serves the houses. 
Among these can be distinguished shops and factories, the 
sumptuous abodes of wealthy merchants or officials, and the 
hovels of artisans and transport workers. 
The buildings and aricles found in them have been 
produced by specialized craftsmen-brickmakers, carpenters, 
potters, coppersmiths, glaziers, stonecutters, goldsmiths, and 
jewelers. The regularity of the streets implies a civic authority 
with officials to enforce its decisions. Public servants were 
required for cleaning the drains. There must have been a 
class of clerks, since a system of writing and numeral nota- 
tion was in use as well as standardized weights and measures. 
All these classes, evidently very numerous, must be sup- 
ported by the surplus foodstuffs produced by peasants living 
in the city or in suburban villages. But even fishermen, toiling 
far away on the Arabian Sea, made contributions; for dried 
sea-fish was imported. The urban artisans, for their part, must 
produce a surplus of manufactured commodities to be 
bartered for the raw materials needed in industry, but un- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
135 
obtainable on the alluvial plain. Not only have the cities of 
the plain yielded deodara wood, imported from the Himalayas, 
and metals and precious stones brought from distant high- 
lands, but commodities manufactured in the cities have been 
found in prehistoric villages among the hills of Baluchistan 
and even far away in Mesopotamia. 
The prehistory of the Indus civilization is still unknown; 
the simpler villages and tov/nships from which the cities have 
arisen remain unidentified. By 2500 B.C. the same uniform 
civilization extends from the muth of the Indus throughout 
the lo\\dands of the Punjab right up to the foothilJs, but there 
is no evidence whether any political unity corresponded to this 
cultural uniformity. It is even uncertain what was the nucleus 
of capital accumulation. We have indications of a division 
into classes of rich and poor, but whether a king or a god 
stood at the head of the hierarchy is uncertain. Both temples 
and palaces are so inconspicuous among the ruins that their 
very existence is dubious. 
The revolutions just described occurred almost simultane- 
ously in Egypt and Sumer, and probably in India too. In each 
case the revolution was based on the same scientific dis- 
coveries, and resulted in the addition to the population of the 
same new classes. It is hard to believe in the independence of 
these events, especially when the proofs of long-standing in- 
tercourse between the areas be recalled. And this intercourse 
became closer than ever at the moment of the revolution or 
just after it. Just about the time of Egypt's unification, devices 
that may reasonably be regarded as Mesopotamian in origin 
--cylinder seals, certain artistic motives, crenelated brick 
architecture, a new type of boat-appear on the Nile for the 
first time. Soon after the revolution Indian manufactures were 
being imported into Sumer. 
Some sort of diffusion had evidently been going on. Yet 
no theory of one-sided dependence is compatible with the 
contrasts revealed by closer scrutiny. Urban civilization was 
not simply transplanted from one center to another, but was 
in each an organic growth rooted in the local soil. If we want 
a modern analogy, the establishment of mechanized industry 
and factory production by European capitalists in Africa or 
India will not serve. We must think rather of the rise of that 
system of production in the countries on both sides of the 
Atlantic. America, Britain, France, the Low Countries shared 
a common scientific, cultural, and mercantile tradition long 
before the Industrial Revolution. Despite wars and customs 
barriers, the interchange of goods, ideas, and persons went on 
continuously. England, indeed, was in the van of the Revolu- 

136 
TI-IE URBAN REVOLU'rION 
tion itself, but the other countries did not merely copy her 
mechanical inventions or economic organization; they had 
been experimenting along the same lines, and made in- 
dependent contributions when the time came. The establish- 
ment in China or even Russia of factories and railways 
modeled on Western lines and staffed with European and 
American managers and technicians was quite a different 
process. 
And so Egypt, Sumer, and India had not been isolated or 
independent before the revolution. All shared more or less a 
common cultural tradition to which each had been contribut- 
ing. And it had been maintained and enriched by a continuous 
intercourse involving an interchange of goods, ideas, and 
craftsmen. That is the explanation of the observed parallelism. 
But once the new economy had been established in the 
three primary centers, it spread thence to secondary centers, 
much like Western capitalism spread to colonies and economic 
dependencies. First on the borders of Egypt, Babylonia, and 
the Indus valley-in Crete and the Greek Islands, Syria, 
Assyria, Iran, and Baluchistan-then further afield, on the 
Greek mainland, the Anatolian plateau, South Russia, we see 
villages converted into cities and self-sufficing food-producers 
turning to industrial specialization and external trade. And the 
process is repeated in ever-widening circles around each sec- 
ondary and tertiary center. 
In the new cities not only abstract agreements in economic 
structure and underlying science, but also identity in the forms 
of artificial products, like amulets, seals, and letters, demon- 
strate how many of the vital elements of civilization had been 
borrowed from the primary centers on the Nile, the Euphrates, 
and the Indus. The second revolution was obviously propa- 
gated by diffusion; the urban economy in the secondary centers 
was inspired or imposed by the primary foci. And it is easy to 
show that the process was inevitable. 
The civilizations of the alluvial plains were dependent on the 
importation from abroad of raw materials; part of their sur- 
plus wealth had to be expended upon obtaining the requisite 
imports. But the coveted materials seldom lay in an unin- 
habited wilderness. And so communities within whose terri- 
tories the materials lay could claim a share in the surplus. They 
must, indeed, be persuaded to produce more of their metal, 
timber, spices, or precious stones than was required for do- 
mestic consumption to barter to Egyptians, Sumerians, and 
Indians, or at least to lend their services to the latter as guides, 
porters, and laborers. 
New opportunities of livelihood were thus opened up to the 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
137 
possessors of industrial materials. But to profit by these oppor- 
tunities industrial specialization was necessary. The surplus 
wealth of the alluvial plain was available to support families in- 
habiting metalliferous mountains if those families were with- 
drawn from food production to mine and transport ore. In 
practice, of course, local food production was not arrested, but 
the new wealth was employed to support a new population that 
on the old economy would have been superfluous and con- 
demned to starvation or emigration. The new role of purveyor 
of raw material meant both an increase in population and also 
class-divisions. A couple of examples will illustrate the process. 
The Egyptians required large quantities of cedar-wood for 
tombs, for boat-building, and for furniture. They obtained it 
from Lebanon in North Syria, and shipped it from the port of 
Byblos (close to Beirut). But long before the rise of the 
Egyptian dynasties, Byblos, like other Syrian harbors, was the 
site of a township. Its inhabitants, the Giblites of the Bible, 
were presumably more or less self-sufficing fishers and farmers. 
They had participated in the intercourse outlined in Chapter 
VI, and had been in contact with Egypt, and probably with 
Mesopotamia too, before the second revolution. 
The effect of the revolution in Egypt had been to make ef- 
fective a tremendous demand for the raw materials Byblos 
could supply. In satisfying it, the Giblites had an opportunity 
to share in the surplus wealth of Egypt; its expenditure opened 
up means of livelihood to families for whom the local farming 
and fishing could offer no sustenance. But its acceptance spelt 
the final abandonment of economic self-sufficiency. Byblos 
would henceforth owe its prosperity to producing for a foreign 
market. 
Imported articles of Egyptian manufacture, found at Byblos 
and going back to the period immediately before Menes' uni- 
fication, illustrate the Giblites' share in Egypt's prosperity. 
And, of course, Egyptian merchants or officials had to settle 
there to look after the vital trade, just as English merchant 
houses have their representatives in Oporto. The Egyptians in- 
structed the Giblites in the administration of the growing city 
and the management of their revenues; they may even have 
established a sort of protectorate. A stone temple was erected 
in the city and was decorated by immigrant Egyptian crafts- 
men. To meet the needs of commerce the Giblites learned the 
Egyptian script. 
Thus the Giblites adopted discoveries of the Egyptians, as- 
similated their economy to the standards of the urban revolu- 
tion and increased in numbers. Their township became a city, 
and was soon rich enough to become a market for raw mate- 

138 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
rials from other regions, a secondary center for the diffusion 
of the new economy. But Giblite civilization was not just a 
transplantation of the Egyptian; native traditions in architec- 
ture, pottery, and other crafts, in dress and religion were con.. 
served. It was the refinements superadded that were taken 
over from Egypt. And inspiration may have come from other 
quarters too. On the other hand, Giblite civilization remained 
provincial as compared with the Egyptian. The borrowed re- 
finements were not developed as they were in the home coun- 
try. The Egyptians, for instance, improved their script with 
the passage of time; the Giblites preserved the archaic charac- 
ters adopted under the early dynasties and kept them un- 
changed for nearly a thousand years. 
In much the same way, the importation of copper, silver, and 
lead from the Taurus mountains into Mesopotamia resulted in 
the growth of an urban civilization in Cappadocia on the 
plateau of Asia Minor. Before 2500 B.C. the native settlements 
there had scarcely advanced beyond a neolithic economy. The 
local villagers or townspeople were content with the stone tools 
and handmade pots produced by unspecialized domestic in- 
dustry. Soon after 2500 B.C. we read of Assyrian merchants 
settled among the native townships and trading in ore. A few 
centuries later the correspondence of such merchants shows 
how they were bartering Babylonian manufactures for metal 
and local products. Evidently the surplus wealth of Mesopo- 
tamia was providing for miners and smelters who made no 
direct contribution to the communal food supplies. At the 
same time, excavation reveals the townships growing into 
cities dependent on industry and trade. Metal becomes com- 
mon, pots are manufactured on the wheel by professionals 
instead of being built up by the housewife. Mesopotamian de- 
vices are borrowed to meet the requirements of the new 
economic situation. The cylinder seal is adopted as a means for 
labeling property and signing documents. Soon the Babylonian 
script is adapted to transcribe the local languages. But Cappa- 
docian civilization, like the Giblite, preserved its local pecu- 
liarities. And again the borrowed elements were developed 
more slowly than in Mesopotamia. The local seals, for in- 
stance, go on repeating designs a thousand years after they 
had gone out of fashion in Babylonia. 
But often the second revolution was propagated by violence 
and imposed by the force of imperialism. Some communities 
were too backward and unenterprising to appreciate the ad- 
vantages of the new economy and its products. The nomads 
who hunted or grazed their flocks on the flanks of Sinai were 
not to be enticed by corn or manufactured trinkets into mining 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
139 
copper for the Egyptians. The mines were exploited by workers 
sent from Egypt, and the royal army had to protect then: 
against the nomads. Prom the IInd Dynasty pharaohs have had 
themselves depicted on the rocks of Sinai "smiting the 
wretched bedouin." In this case armed intervention did not ex- 
tend civilization or create new urban centers. 
In other cases, however, the victims of imperialism were 
educated thereby to compete with the aggressors in material 
culture. The Sumerians had to import their raw materials from 
lands inhabited by progressive communities like the Elamites, 
and to reach them the caravans had to traverse similar terri- 
tories. Now the communities thereby affected often inhabited 
adequately watered territories and had prospered under a 
neolithic regime. They did, indeed, adopt devices like the 
wheeled car and the potters' wheels and imported gold, lapis 
lazuli, and other luxury articles. 
But on the whole they were satisfied with homemade prod- 
ucts and could live in modest comfort on their own resources. 
Their demands for luxury articles were too feeble to persuade 
them to produce timber or metal in the vast quantities required 
by the Sumerian cities, or to tolerate caravans disturbing their 
fields and pastures. They may ultimately have resisted the 
overtures of Sumerian merchants and attacked their caravans. 
And then the Sumerians would have to undertake punitive ex- 
peditions to secure raw material and to protect trade routes. 
Very early texts refer to wars waged by the cities of Sumer 
and Akkad against Elamites and other "barbarian" neighbors. 
While these references may refer to raids by impoverished 
mountaineers upon the rich plains, they may equally indicate 
struggles of the sort just envisaged. Besides unifying Babylo- 
nia, Sargon of Agade embarked upon campaigns of conquest 
in surrounding regions, the economic motives of which are 
clear enough. His own inscriptions mention explicitly as ob- 
jectives the Silver Mountains (Taurus) and the Cedar Forests 
(? Lebanon). A later document describes how he was invited 
to Cappadocia to support the metal traders settled there, and 
refers also to a mountain of lapis lazuli. A still later tablet is to 
claim a "Tinland" among Sargon's conquests. Undoubtedly he 
subdued the metalliferous district of Elam and extended his 
dominions from the Upper Sea (Mediterranean or Caspian) to 
the Lower Sea (the Persian Gulf), thus embracing the regions 
on which Babylonia was dependent. 
In some instances at least the conquests resulted in the 
forcible implantation of urban civilization, converting more or 
less self-sufficing townships into industrial and commercial 
cities. At Nineveh in Assyria (opposite Mosul), Sargon's 

14° 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
grandson founded a temple to Ishtar, the first of a long series 
of temples erected on the site. Now that symbolized an eco- 
nomic revolution; for, as in Sumer, the temple constituted a 
permanent center for the accumulation of wealth and the de- 
velopment of industry. Its erection and adornment involved 
the expenditure of a surplus that would nourish a prolific, if 
servile, proletariat. It would create a new demand for lapis 
lazuli, timber, metal, and so on, thus turning Nineveh into a 
secondary center of diffusion. This process may have been re- 
peated under Sargon or a little earlier in other Assyriaa towns. 
And about the same period the Babylonian script and other 
devices were introduced, fully formed, into Assyria. 
Sargon and :1is successors can therefore claim to have been 
"founders of cities" even where townships had existed long 
before them. There is this much truth in the biblical phrase 
about "Asshur going forth from Shinar (Sumer) and building 
Nineveh," etc. The people of Assyria had not come from 
Babylonia, but the earliest temples in what were to be the his- 
torical cities of Assyria were founded by Akkadians (Nineveh) 
or Sumerians, or were at least furnished with cult statues of 
Sumerian type (Assur). 
N ow Syria and Assyria were certainly populous long before 
3000 B.C., very likely even before Sumer was colonized. But 
those steppe countries enjoy a regular rainfall, so that the in- 
centive to close social organization that worked so efficaciously 
in Lower Mesopotamia was lacking. The population was scat- 
tered among numerous permanent villages which grew into 
little townships like the modern Kurdish villages. Their pros- 
perous inhabitants had adopted the wheel and other devices, 
and occasionally made use of imported substances like lapis 
lazuli, gold, and copper. But at least down to 3000 B.C. they 
preserved their economic independence; they remained con- 
tent with stone tools and weapons, and so did not have to rely 
on imports. But after 3000 B.c.-perhaps, indeed, as late as 
the time of Sargon-they suddenly began to use metal regu- 
larly. Their tools and weapons are all of distinctively Sumerian 
form, so that there is no doubt who were their instructors in 
metallurgy. And the sacrifice of self-sufficiency thus attested 
was accompanied by other familiar signs of the second revolu- 
tion; soon some towns begin to expand into cities, while a few 
are absorbed by more successful neighbors. It is by no means 
certain how far the revolution here was the result of actual 
conquest by Sargon or by some Sumerian precursor. Even the 
cities that may most plausibly be claimed as Akkadian foun- 
dations did not remain colonies and dependencies for long. 
They had never lost their native culture, and soon became 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
141 
centers of revolt, and ultimately at times the capitals of new 
States like Assur itself. 
For economic imperialism did not propagate the second 
revolution only by conquest. Successful resistance to its attacks 
or the threat thereof was only possible by assimilating part of 
the civilization of the aggressors. Stone weapons were no more 
a match for the bronze armament of the Babylonian troops 
than were the bows and tomahawks of the Red Indians effec- 
tive against Europeans' firearms. To succeed in defending their 
independence, peoples hitherto content with a neolithic equip- 
ment had to adopt arms of metal. That meant in practice that 
they had to learn metallurgy and adjust their economy to its 
requirements. It was not enough to purchase or steal some 
axes, spears, and helmets, manufactured in Babylonia: they 
must capture smiths to train armorers among their own people; 
they must produce surplus foodstuffs to support the new 
craftsmen and to secure the requisite raw materials; they must 
organize trade to ensure regular supplies. In a word, they must 
submit to the second revolution and adopt an urban economy. 
The beginnings of metallurgy and of a rudimentary city 
life in Assyria may often be explained in this way. And not in 
Assyria only: in all the regions traversed by Sumerian trade 
routes and exposed to Sargon's campaigns-in North Syria, in 
Luristan, in Elam-we find centers of metallurgy arising soon 
after 3000 B.C. where Sumerian types were copied locally, and 
often modified according to local tastes. In one way or another 
Sumerian trade and the imperialism it inspired were propa- 
gating metallurgy and the new economy it implies. 
Between 3000 and 2000 B.C. bronze-using civilizations were 
established in Crete, on the Greek mainland, at Troy on the 
Dardanelles, in the Kuban basin north of the Caucasus, on the 
plateau of Asia Minor, in Palestine and Syria, in Iran, and in 
Baluchistan. Each of these civilizations has a character of its 
own, but all exhibit so many concrete features of agreement 
with the products of Egypt, Sumer, or the Indus basin or of 
one of the secondary centers that their indebtedness to earlier 
foci of civilization is indisputable. 
These secondary and tertiary civilizations are not original, 
but result from the adoption of traditions, ideas, and processes 
received by diffusion from older centers. In most cases the 
mechanism of this transmission is lost. The foregoing pages 
should reveal that effective mechanisms of diffusion were at 
work. The second revolution, once established, had to spread. 
And every village, converted into a city by the spread, became 
at once a new center of infection. Before 1500 B.C. the new 
industrial structure was reaching Spain, Britain, and Germany. 

14 2 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
In less than five centuries more it had penetrated to Scandi- 
navia and Siberia. 
But in this process of diffusion culture was de 6 raded. 
People who have learned a new technique are apt to apply it 
clumsily; proficiency requires generations of practice and of 
discipline. Again, the higher civllization is not adopted in its 
entirety; the recipient people feel the need of, and can assimi- 
late, only a few items in the new cultural equipment. It is pos- 
sible, for instance, to learn enough metallurgy and to get 
enough ore for armaments without learning to write or estab- 
lishing such a commercial organization as should make writing 
indispensable. There thus arise different rades of civilization, 
varying degrees of approximation to the standards set by the 
primary centers. And these grades tend to be arranged in zones 
about the primary centers. 
By 2500 B.C. the Minoans of Crte were dwelling in cities 
and living by industry and comnlerce. So intent arc they, in- 
deed, on profiting by the surplus wealth of Egypt and Syria, 
that they will build a city even on a tiny island with no cul- 
tivable land, provided it offer a convenient harbor. They had 
borrowed various items of the necessary technical equipment 
from Egypt or Sumer, directly or through Syria. They had 
early adopted the seal as a device for labeling their jars of oil 
and bales of merchandise. But the early native seals are rather 
crude products. Eventually they devised a rather clumsy picto- 
graphic script to assist them in their accountancy. They could 
smelt and work metals, and they employed the Sumerian type 
of axe-head with a hole for the shaft. But early Minoan metal 
tools look very clumsy beside the original models. Wheeled 
wagons were employed at first, but not the potters' wheel. 
The Helladic people of Mainland Greece had begun to live 
in cities rather later than the Cretans, and were less dependent 
on trade and manufactures. They made no seals of their own, 
presumably because trade was on too small a scale for the 
device to be needed. Naturally they did not know how to write. 
Stone was still effectively competing with copper as tool ma- 
terial, and metal weapons were poor imitations of the Minoan. 
Finally, the barbarians living north of the Balkans in what 
was to become the Austro-Hungarian Empire were only just 
beginning to use metal for weapons and ornaments, and occa- 
sionally for tools, by 2000 B.C. But they continued to live in 
small and nearly self-sufficing village communities. Of course 
they had no use for writing, or even for seals. Metallurgy they 
had learned from Greece and Troy, but they were far behind 
their masters. And their neighbors to the north were still 
neolithic! 

CHAPTER VIII 
THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE 
THE economic revolution just described was possible only be- 
cause Sumerians, Egyptians, and Indians disposed of a body 
of accumulated experience and applied science. The revolu- 
tion inaugurated a new method of transmitting experience, 
fresh ways of organizing knowledge, and more exact sciences. 
The science requisite for the revolution had been transmitted 
in the form of craft lore by oral precept and example. The be- 
ginnings of writing and of mathematics and the standardiza- 
tion of weights and measures coincide in time with the revolu- 
tion. The synchronism is not accidental. The practical needs of 
the new economy had, in fact, evoked the innovations. 
In Sumer, we have seen, the resources needed to transform 
economic organization were accumulated in temples and ad- 
ministered by priests. The administrators were not isolated 
individuals, but continuing corporations. Nor were the temples 
isolated units. In the earliest historical times we find temples to 
the same deity in several Sumerian cities. The gods worshipped 
in them were not, or at least not exclusively, local deities; they 
were common to the whole land, like many of the saints to 
which Christian churches are dedicated. Presumably their 
priests too were not entirely restricted in their allegiance to the 
single city, but had a sort of international citizenship in "the 
kingdom of heaven" again like medieval clerics. Probably, 
though not certainly, these conditions go back to prehistoric 
times. The sovereignty of the same deities over the whole land 
would be the theologico-political counterpart of the uniformity 
of material culture throughout Sumer (and eventually through- 
out Babylonia). 
A Sumerian temple C:isposed, as we have seen, of vast es- 
tates, flocks, and herds, and of huge revenues. It expended and 
augmented that wealth by assisting its votaries with advances 
and loans. Now the priests who administered that revenue 
must give an account to their divine master of their dealings 
with his property and must ensure the conservation and en- 
143 

144 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
richment of his estates. They were confronted with -a prob- 
lem unprecedented in human history; never before had such 
vast wealth been concentrated under unitary control. To keep 
track of the god's dues and of his transactions the priest dare 
not rely on his memory. Nor would private mnemonic devices, 
like tying a knot in a handkerchief, help. 1 The individual 
priest was mortal, but the corporation to which he belonged 
was immortal, like the god it served. The priest might die 
before his master's loan had been -epaid, but his duty of ex- 
acting repayment would be fulfilled by a colleague or succes- 
sor. The god's minister must record how many jars of seed and 
of what quality he had advanced, how many sheep and of what 
breeds he had entrusted to a shepherd. And the transactions 
must be recorded in such a way that the priesthood, not just 
the priest, could interpret the record and secure satisfaction for 
the god. In a word, writing as a socially recognized system of 
recording was essential for keeping the temple accounts 
satisfactorily. 
It will be recalled that in the first temple at Erech which 
signalized the transformation of the village into th city a 
primitive account-tablet was found. The symbols on it attest, if 
not a system of writing, at least a system of numeral notation. 
Rather later (but not later than 3000 B.C.) clay tablets bearing 
accounts are found not only at Erech, but also at J emdet N aSf 
and other sites. 
On the clay the priest has drawn characters and also nu- 
merals. The characters are mostly shorthand pictures-a jar, 
a bull's head, two triangles, and so on. The script is therefore 
termed pictographic. You can guess what the signs mean by 
simply looking at them. Even so they are already to some 
extent conventional. Society has selected and sanctioned one 
out of several possible ways of representing summarily, say, 
a bull. And some of the signs already mean more than the 
simple picture can indicate: the jar means a jar containing 
so much-in fact, a unit of measurement. Such a sign, standing 
for an idea, is termed an ideogram; its value is said to be ideo- 
graphic (our mathematical symbols +, -, X, --;.--, and so on 
are examples of ideograms) . 
Finally, there are already signs that cannot be recognized 
as depicting any specific object. The meaning of these ideo- 
grams is purely conventional. The priest has rightly despaired 
of indicating with a few strokes the distinction between several 
kinds of sheep. Instead he has adopted conventional signs to 
] You know-it is to be hoped-what the knot meant, but a policeman. 
picking up your dead body, could not expect to guess which of the innumer. 
able possible errands the knot had been designed to recall! 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 145 
denote mouflon, urial, ram, wether, ewe. These signs are de- 
liberate inventions by individual priests. But they must be 
accepted by the corporation, sanctioned by society to be useful. 
Just because the accounts were not private documents and 
the signs were more than reminders to an individual, the sys- 
tem of writing employed had to be conventional. A canon of 
signs had to be established and authorized by society. In fact, 
we possess actual lists of signs as well as accounts from this 
period. And all administrators must be initiated into the con- 
vention. The process of initiation is what we call learning to 
read and write. (That consists, of course, in learning what 
meanings, i.e. sounds, the usage of our society attaches to 
twenty-six arbitrary symbols and learning to form the char- 
acters in the way approved by our fellows.) There must ac- 
cordingly have been schools for scribes. The sign-lists which 
have been dug up could serve very well as school texts. 
Moreover, since the same signs were employed both at 
Erech in Sumer and at Jemdet Nasr in Akkad, there must have 
been an interchange of pupils and masters between the various 
cities. The system of writing was not a convention peculiar to 
a particular temple-corporation, but was recognized and au- 
thorized by Sumerian society as a whole. 
A large collection of tablets unearthed at Shuruppak (Fara) 
illustrates the development of Sumerian writing at the begin- 
ning of the historical period-after 3000 B.C. These documents 
are exclusively temple accounts and sign-lists used as school 
texts. In the latter the signs are grouped by subjects; different 
sorts of fish, for instance, are listed consecutively. And after 
each sign is added the name of the clerk or priest who in- 
vented it. 
The signs are now highly conventionalized. The pictograms 
have been so simplified and abbreviated that the object in- 
tended is barely, if at all, recognizable. Moreover, signs are 
now used to represent sounds as well as ideas or things; they 
have become phonograms as well as, or instead of, ideograms. 
The sign W stood for bearded head and for the Sumerian 
word ka, face. It may be now employed to denote just the 
syllable ka, without any reference to heads or faces. By select- 
ing signs with the proper phonetic value it is now possible to 
spell out words-proper names or terms denoting concepts of 
actions that can hardly be represented by pictures. (In practice 
the above sign might also be used for "to speak," "to cry," 
"word," etc., and for the Sumerian equivalents dug, gug, 
e nim! ) 

146 . 'THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
Signs continued, however, to be used with an ideographic 
value (to denote things or concepts instead of sounds) by 
themselves. And even when a word was spelt out phonetically 
an ideogram was often added to indicate to the reader the sort 
of word intended. Ideograms thus used are termed determina. 
tives. 
After 3000 B.C. we begin to find documents other than ac- 
counts, contracts, and sign-lists-at first mainly names and 
titles, then treaties, liturgical and historical texts, spells, and 
fragments of legal codes. And the script is further simplified; 
instead of being drawn, the various elements of the sign were 
stamped on to the soft clay with a wedge-shaped stylus. Be- 
cause the signs are composed of wedge-shaped impressions, 
this classical Babylonian script is termed cuneiform. It re- 
mained in use till almost the beginning of our era, and was 
later adapted to write various foreign languages-Hittite (in 
Asia Minor), Vannie (in Armenia), Persian, and so on. 
But even before 2500 B.C. the script, invented by the 
Sumerians, was being used to transcribe the language of their 
Semitic fellow-countrymen-Akkadian. This use of Sumerian 
characters to write Semitic names may have accelerated the 
conversion of ideographic into phonetic signs. But it conl- 
plicated the result. A given sign is now liable to stand for one 
or more concepts, the sound of the Sumerian name of the con- 
cepts and the sound of the corresponding Semitic word. (The 
complexity is really much greater, since the same sign even in 
Sumerian might stand for several words, and so for several 
sounds.) Probably Sumerians and Babylonians never felt any 
difficulty here, but for modern scholars the transliteration of 
Sumerian names into European alphabets is always difficult, 
Ur-nina has been changed to Ur-nanshe, Ur-engur to Ur-nam- 
mu, and so on. 
The fortunate circumstance that the Sumerians adopted 
clay as their writing material and made their documents im. 
perishable by baking the clay, allows us to follow the history 
of writing from its very beginnings in Mesopotamia. It shows 
the development of writing and of city life advancing step by 
step. It is no accident that the oldest written documents in the 
world are accounts and dictionaries. They disclose the severely 
practical needs that prompted the invention of the Sumerian 
script. 
Nowhere else can the practical economic origin of writing 
be demonstrated so clearly, because nowhere else can the art 
be traced to its starting point. Other peoples probably began 
writing on perishable materials and applied their script to in- 
scriptions on more durable substances only when it was well 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN !{NOWLEDGE 147 
advanced. The earliest Egyptian documents that survive are 
names and titles on seatings and vases, notes of accounts 0f 
inventories, and short records of events on slips of wood found 
in the royal tombs of the 1st and Ilnd Dynasties at Abydos. 
By this time (3000 or 2950 for the oldest) the system is al- 
ready more mature than that of the oldest Sumerian docu- 
ments. The signs are, indeed, quite recognizable pictures, and 
must originally have been pictograms. Indeed, in the early 
kings' names and titles, the pictures sometimes "come to life." 
And some characters retain their value as ideograms; indeed, 
as determinatives (p. 146), such were used throughout the 
whole period during which the Egyptian scripts were current. 
But even in the days of Menes many picture-signs have a 
purely phonetic value, and words are regularly spelled out 
instead of being indicated by ideograms alone. The purely 
pictographic stage has been passed and remains a matter of 
inference. And quite soon the Egyptians were in possession 
of an alphabet: twenty-four signs have been adopted, each 
to stand for a single consonant (vowels were not written). 
But though any words could thus be spelt, ideograms and 
detern1inatives were never abandoned. 
Of course even the picture-signs, though much more realistic 
than Sumerian pictograms, conform to a social convention. 
And in addition to this hieroglyphic script, the Egyptian scribes 
soon devised a quicker cursive hand (termed hieratic), the 
characters of which are so much simplified that the object 
once depicted is no longer recognizable. 
The names, titles, and historical summaries that constitute 
the oldest surviving documents of Egyptian literature can hard- 
ly be used as evidence for the causes inspiring the invention 
of writing on the Nile. The practical uses of the art are attested 
from the time of the earliest dynasties. Scribes are explicitly 
mentioned among the royal officials. The observations on the 
height of the Nile and the assessments based thereon (p. 129) 
must have been written down. In later tomb-pictures (p. 133) 
we see the scribes busily scribbling down the rent or tribute 
brought in by tenants and herdsmen. In the workshop scenes 
they are recording the materials removed from store to be 
worked up by the individual artisas. 
The scribes are officials, members of an organized and per- 
manent public service. Their accounts and records must be 
intelligible to their colleagues, their superiors, and, in the last 
resort, to their supreme master, who is an earthly god. They 
must, as in Sumer, conform to a social convention; and read- 
ing and writing must be learned. 
Nothing can be said of the Indus script, since only brief and 

148 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
un deciphered inscriptions on seals or copper tablets survive. 
It may here be noted that in Crete, where the Minoans began 
to develop a script before 2000 B.C., the vast majority of the 
extant documents are account tablets or inventories. The in- 
vention of writing was thus probably inspired everywhere, as 
in Sumer, by the peculiar practical needs of the urban econ- 
omy. Admittedly the Sumerian script was invented, and at 
first used exclusively, by priests of a sort. But the Sumerian 
priests invented writing not in their capacity of ministers of 
superstition, but in that of administrators of a worldly estate. 
They, like the Egyptian and Minoan scribes, used the inven- 
tion first not for magical and liturgical purposes, but for prac- 
tical business and administration. 
The invention of writing (as here defined) really marks an 
epoch in human progress. For us moderns it seems significant 
primarily because it offers an opportunity of penetrating to the 
very thoughts of our cultural ancestors, instead of trying to 
deduce those thoughts from their imperfect embodiments in 
deeds. But the true significance of writing is that it was destined 
to revolutionize the transmission of human knowledge. By its 
means a man can immortalize his experience and transmit it 
directly to contemporaries living far off and to generations 
yet unborn. It is the first step to raising science above the 
limits of space and time. 
The utility of early scripts for this high mission must not 
be exaggerated. Writing was not invented as a medium of pub- 
lication, but for the practical needs of administrative corpora- 
tions. The earlier Sumerian and Egyptian scripts were distinct- 
ly clumsy instruments for expressing ideas. Even after a proc- 
ess of simplification lasting over 2000 years the cuneiform 
script employed between 600 and 1000 distinct characters. 
Before one could read or write, one had to memorize this 
formidable array of symbols and learn the complex rules for 
their combination. Egyptian hieroglyphic and hieratic scripts, 
despite their alphabetic elements, remained cumbered with a 
bewildering multitude of ideograms and determinatives, so that 
the number of characters required ran to about 500. 
Under these conditions writing was inevitably a really diffi- 
cult and specialized art that had to be learned by a long ap- 
prenticeship. Reading remained a mystery initiation into which 
was obtainable only by a prolonged schooling. Few possessed 
either the leisure or the talent to penetrate into the secrets of 
literature. Scribes were a comparatively restricted class in 
Oriental antiquity, like clerks in the Middle Ages. This class, 
it is true, never became a caste. Admission to the schools did 
not depend upon birth, though quite how scholars were se- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 149 
lected is uncertain. But the "reading public" must have been 
a small minority in a vast population of illiterates. 
Writing was, in fact, a profession, rather like metallurgy or 
weaving or war. But it was a profession that enjoyed a privi- 
leged position and offered prospects of advancement to office, 
power, and wealth. Literacy came thus to be valued not as a 
key to knowledge, but as a stepping-stone to prosperity and 
social rank. A rather hackneyed quotation from later Egyptian 
literature will illustrate an attitude that can hardly have been 
peculiar to the Nile Valley or the period of the texts. 
An amusing group of Egyptian documents dating from the 
New Kingdom contrasts the prestige and privileges of a scribe 
with the hardships of a craftsman or a cultivator. They take 
the form of paternal admonitions, but embody sentiments that 
might be expressed today by a farmer or small shopkeeper 
writing to a son who has to choose between proceeding to 
higher education or entering industrial employment. 
"Put writing in your heart that you may protect yourself 
from hard labor of any kind and be a magistrate of high 
repute. The scribe is released from manual tasks; it is he 
who commands. . . . Do you not hold the scribe's palette? 
That is what makes the difference between you and the man 
who handles an oar. 
"I have seen the metal-worker at his task at the mouth 
of his furnace with fingers like a crocodile's. He stank worse 
than fish-spawn. Every workman who holds a chisel suffers 
more than the men who hack the ground; wood is his field 
and the chisel his mattock. At night when he is free, he toils 
more than his arms can do (? at overtime work); even at 
night he lights (his lamp to work by). The stonecutter seeks 
work in every hard stone; when he has done the great part 
of his labor his arms are exhausted, he is tired out. . . . 
The weaver in a workshop is worse off than a woman; (he 
squats) with his knees to his belly and does not taste (fresh) 
air. He must give loaves to the porters to see the light." 
The prospects of social advancement implied in these ad- 
monitions may not have been so bright or definite at earlier 
periods or in other countries. But the general attitude towards 
clerical employments and theoretical science as contrasted to 
manual labor and applied sciences probably goes back to the 
earliest phases of urban life, and was the same in Sumer as in 
Egypt. The foregoing quotations accordingly recall the fact 
that the second revolution had produced or accentuated a 
division of society into classes. In practice kings, priests, 

150 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
nobles, and generals stand opposed to peasants, fishermen, 
artisans, and laborers. And in this class division the scribes be- 
long to the former class; writing is a "respectable" profession. 
Now material progress in prehistoric times had been due 
mainly to improvements in technique, made presumably by the 
craftsmen and husbandmen themselves. But in the class divi- 
sion of urban society scribes belong to the "upper classes," 
in contrast to the working artisans and farmers; writing is a 
respectable profession while farming, metallurgy, and carpen- 
try are not. The practical applied science of botany, chem- 
istry, and geology were not accordingly embraced in the liter- 
ary tradition whose exponents looked down upon manual 
labor; craft lore was not reduced to writing nor handed on in 
book form. 
On the other hand, certain sciences and pseudo-sciences- 
mathematics, surgery, medicine, astrology, alchemy, haruspicy 
-were made the subjects of written treatises. They thus 
formed a body of learned sciences, accessible only to those who 
had been initiated into the mysteries of reading and writing. 
But by this very fact the disciplines in question were liable to 
be divorced from practical life. In entering the school the pupil 
turned his back on the plow and the bench; he had no desire 
to return to them. 
Inevitably, too, words written with such difficulty and de- 
ciphered so laboriously must seem to possess an authority of 
their own. The immortalization of a word in writing must have 
seemed a supernatural process; it was surely magical that a 
man long vanished from the land of the living could still speak 
from a clay tablet or a papyrus roll. Words thus spoken must 
possess a kind of mana. Thus learned men in the East, like 
schoolmen in our own Middle Ages, were apt to turn to books 
in preference to Nature. In Egypt books on mathematics, sur- 
gery, and medicine, composed under the Old Kingdom (before 
2400 B.C.) were slavishly, and often very incompetently, 
copied after 2000. Between 800 and 600 B.C. the upstart kings 
of Assyria were at pains to acquire for their libraries copies of 
texts going back to the time of Hammurabi (about 1800 B.C.) 
or of Sargon of Agade (2350). 
Instead of demanding that a book should be up to date and 
embody the latest disoveries, the Egyptian or Babylonian stu- 
dent valued it for its antiquity. A publisher would then adver- 
tise his wares not as a "new and revised edition," but as a faith- 
ful copy of a fabulously old text. And so the "jacket" of the 
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus runs: "Rules for enquiring into 
nature and for knowing all that exists. The roll was written in 
the thirty-third year of King Aauserre in the likeness of a writ- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 15 1 
ing of antiquity made in the time of king Nemare (1880-1850 
B.C.). It was the scribe Ahmose who made this copy." One of 
the treatises included in the Ebers Medical Papyrus is entitled 
"The Book of Healing Illnesses found in ancient writing in a 
chest at the feet of Anubis in the time of King UsaphaYs" (a 
monarch of Dynasty I). 
Nevertheless the schools for scribes did actually function as 
what we should call research institutes. Even for the purposes 
of teaching it was necessary to organize and systematize the 
knowledge to be imparted. The post of instructor gave oppor- 
tunities and inducements for addition to knowledge by a sort 
of "theoretical research." 
Particularly in Mesopotamia the very "scholastic" attitude, 
just criticized, promoted the systematic organization of learn- 
ing. Prom 2500 B.C. onwards people of Semitic speech were 
winning the upper hand in Babylonia. The First Dynasty of 
Babylon that finally unified Sumer and Akkad about 1800 was 
Semitic. And so Semitic Akkadian thereafter became the offi- 
cial language of the kingdom. Sumerian became a dead lan- 
guage. But the revered old texts were written in Sumerian. And 
Sumerian remained the language of religion, just as Latin did 
in medieval Europe. The priests of the temples, retaining their 
corporate identity from prehistoric Sumerian times, were 
trained in the Sumerian tradition whatever their native speech 
might have been before ordination. 
Naturally they held that the ancient gods of the land must 
still be conciliated with Sumerian liturgies; the old magic 
powers could be compelled only with Sumerian spells. The 
temple schools had therefore now to teach and study Sumerian, 
just as medieval colleges had to study Latin. In addition to in- 
struction in reading and writing, they had to provide for some 
at least of their students a "higher education" and to study sub- 
jects of no practical utility in mundane affairs. In the course of 
this study they learned to make grammars and dictionaries to 
facilitate the comprehension and correct recitation of the old 
Sumerian hymns and incantations and to collect and arrange 
the ancient texts. Though inspired by hopes of supernatural 
gain, this work did give scholars training in the organization 
of knowledge and in research; and it has enabled us to read 
Sumerian. 
Even in Egypt the reverence for ancient traditions going 
back to the glorious Pyramid Age, attested in the titles we 
quoted on pp. 150-1, impelled later generations to the system- 
!tic study of documents composed in a language and a script 
'urther removed from contemporary usage than are those of 
;haucer's days from our own. 

152 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
And in neither country was the scribe's education confined 
to reading and writing. To fulfil the functions normally re- 
quired of him, the scribe must study mathematics too. Some 
must have been trained also in astrology, medicine, surgery, 
and perhaps even alchemy. The bulk of the papyri and tablets 
which modern scholars designate "mathematical," "medical," 
or in general "scientific," have probably been produced and 
used in such schools. To these we may add accounts and field- 
plans, calendars, and other documents illustrating applications 
of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and so on. From these 
sources we have to deduce how ancient learning was organized, 
how it was transmitted, and what it had achieved. 
Accounts and calendars obviously bear precisely the same 
relation to the science of mathematics as do metal slags and 
castings to the science of chemistry. From each we can infer 
the amount of scientific knowledge the accountant or the 
metallurgist was actually applying in the course of his business. 
Field-plans are not differentiated from the material handled by 
the "prehistoric archaeologist" by the fact that they have 
figures and words written in. 
Secondly, there are included in the "scientific" texts them- 
selves various tables comparable to our multiplication and in- 
terest tables. These are, of course, helps to reckoning and in- 
struments of calculation. Though the extant examples are 
mostly drawn up for use in "schools," they are strictly com- 
parable to the instruments used by a craftsman in the applica- 
tion of his branch of science. Multiplication tables fulfil the 
same function as furnaces, crucibles, and bellows. The insight 
they give into mathematical knowledge is of precisely the same 
order as that which can be obtained into applied chemistry 
from an examination of uninscribed archaeological relics. 
The remaining texts, however, have no exact counterparts 
in the material which pure archaeology uses as illustrations of 
applied sciences. These documents are the actual instruments 
in the transmission of scientific knowledge. They take the place 
of textbooks for school use, books of reference, and perhaps 
communications in learned journals amongst us. But they are 
strikingly unlike modern textbooks that aim at explaining the 
general theory and methods of a whole discipline, and equally 
unlike the monographs which aim at the exposition and dem- 
onstration of a particular discovery or generalization. 
The mathematical texts are simply concrete examples of 
different problems worked out in full. They illustrate to the 
reader how to do sums of various kinds. But by themselve 
such series of examples could hardly suffice to enlighten 
novice as to new methods nor impart to him fresh knowledge 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 153 
They must have been intended as supp]ements to oral instruc- 
tion. The same is true of the medical texts. They contain at 
best a summary of symptoms, recapitulated in a diagnosis, and 
followed by a prescription. They thus resemble the notes of 
cases a student would take during his hospital practice. They 
presuppose some sort of oral instruction given by the professor. 
It looks then as if there was no real distinction between the 
transmission of the learned sciences and that of the applied 
sciences or crafts; the sort of instruction given to a student of 
mathematics or medicine was essentially the same as that given 
to an apprentice in metallurgy or weaving. The apprentice 
watches his master at work, is shown how to perform the op- 
eration, and is then set to work himself under his master's eye 
to be corrected when he goes wrong. Just in the same way, the 
pupil scribe or doctor in Egypt and Babylonia must have 
watched his professor working out simple examples of treating 
actual cases. Literature gives no hint that this practical instruc- 
tion was preceded Or supplemented by a reasoned exposition 
of general principles and abstract theory such as today distin- 
guishes a university training, in engineering, say, from mere 
apprenticeship. 
The learned sciences in the Ancient East were still more 
obviously allied to the crafts in their aims. Egyptian and 
Babylonian mathematics, medicine, and astrology professedly 
aimed at satisfying specific needs felt by Egyptian and 
Babylonian societies. They aimed at solving problems actually 
arising in the course of business and building, at the cure of 
known diseases, and at the determination of agricultural 
seasons, and still more the prediction of men's fortunes. 
Mathematics is as obviously a consequence of the economic 
needs of the urban revolution as is writing. The business trans- 
actions of temple corporations and revenue administration by 
a public service need standardized weights and measures, a sys- 
tem of numerical notation, and rules to expedite counting, as 
much as they need writing. 
Measurement, of course, did not begin with the revolution. 
It only means comparing objects in resr:ect to length, width, 
weight, and so on. In some form it must be as old as human 
industry . You cannot fit a string to a bow nor an axe-head to 
its shaft without measurement. At first the objects to be fitted 
were compared directly one to the other. As soon as indus- 
trial operations became more complicated, it was more con- 
venient to compare each part to one standard. In boat-building 
it would be inconvenient to have to compare each plank you 
were cutting with the keel already laid down and with the last 
plank cut. It was easier to compare the keel with, say, your 

154 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
arm, and cut each plank to the number of arm's lengths repre- 
sented in the keel. 
At first the standards would be individual natural objects. 
Your finger, your palm, and your forearm (ell or cubit) 
provided, as it were, personal units of length. In exchanges a 
grain of barley or a sackful of grain would be treated as a unit 
of weight. But for social labor that requires both accuracy and 
the co-operation of several workers personal measures prove 
inadequate; no two workers need have arms of precisely the 
same length. So too i exchanging quantities the varying 
weights of different barley-grains and disproportion in the con- 
tent of sacks may cause injustice. Weights and measures have 
to be standardized. That is, society must agree to assign a 
fixed value to the finger, the span, and the cubit, the grain and 
the sackful. The social standards of length are then marked on 
measuring rods; weights of stone or metal are made to repre- 
sent the convenient grain and sackful. Soon it is arranged that 
the several conventional units of length, volume, weight, and 
so on shall bear simple mathematical relations to each other, 
though retaining their old names. The cubit is chosen as a 
simple multiple of the span, and so on. Standardization of 
weights and measures, therefore, like language and writing, re- 
poses on a convention. Weghts and measures, like words and 
characters, have to be authorized by social usage. 
Incidentally, measurement by conventional standards is 
more abstract than the comparison of concrete individual ob- 
jects. And all measurement involves abstract thinking. In 
measuring lengths of stuffs you ignore their materials, colors, 
patterns, textures, and so on, to concentrate on length. Ulti- 
mately the process leads to concepts of "pure quantity" and 
"Euclidean space." 
It must not be supposed that ancient societies were inter- 
ested in infinite length or empty space. Their abstractions were 
limited by practical interests. The ancient Sumerian measures 
of area have in some cases the same names as measures of 
weight; in particular the smallest unit in both "tables" is the 
se or grain, in other words, Sumerian "square measure" was 
originally a seed measure. The Sumerian's interest was the 
quantity of seed needed to sow his field. He regarded the field 
not as occupying so much "empty space," but as needing so 
much seed-grain. With the areas of bits of uncultivable desert 
or blue sky he was not concerned. 
Weighing, it may be remarked, required also the invention 
of a special instrument, the balance. Objects supposed by Petrie 
to be weights have been discovered in prehistoric Egyptian 
graves. If Petrie be right, it must be admitted that the invention 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 155 
of the balance and standardization of weights began some time 
before the revolution. 
That is intrinsically probable. In any case, the several com- 
munities among whom the revolution was traced in Chapter 
VIII came to attach rather different conventional values to 
their several units. After the revolution, that is, we find differ- 
ent systems of weights and measures in Egypt, Mesopotamia, 
and India. Even in Mesopotamia itself minor differences in 
weights may be due to the adoption of divergent standilrds in 
several autonomous cities. Trade was, however, sufficiently in- 
ternational for the standards of one country to find recognition 
and usage in another. So the Egyptian sometimes measured by 
Babylonian units of weight instead of the native weights. 
Counting must go back to the earliest human societies, 
though some savages today cannot, it is alleged, count beyond 
five. Presumably men began by counting on their fingers. 
Hence the wh.1espreau lleciInal system whereby numbers from 
one to ten have distinct names. 
In all cases, of course, men were numbering actual objects- 
salmon caught, sheep in a fold, threads in the weft, and so on. 
The modest totals that a paleolithic hunter or a neolithic herds- 
man might want to remember could be recorded by notches on 
a stick. For recording the vast revenues of a Sumerian temple 
or an Egyptian pharaoh such series of strokes became too cum- 
bersome. The priestly corporation and the civil service had to 
adopt a conventional system for noting down large quantities. 
Both in Sumer and in Egypt there are documents, using a con- 
ventional system of numeration, that are older than the earliest 
extant examples of writing. 
In both countries and also in India (and subsequently in 
Crete) the conventions adopted for recording large totals 
were substantially the same. Units were represented by one 
sign repeated as often as necessary to denote any number up to 
9. A different symbol ws adopted to denote 10 and multiples 
of 10, and so with the next higher units. In Egypt the following 
umbo]s are attested as early as Dynasty I: I == I; n == 10; 
@ = 100;  === 1000. In Mesopotamia the system developed 
along different lines. 
On the oldest account tablets from Erech and J emdet N asr, 
the following numerals occur: D = 1, 0 === 10, 0 = 100. But in 
other texts from the same cities, probably rather later, the nu- 
merals have the following values: D === 1, 0 === 10, D = 60, 0 
= 600. This is the ..o-called sexagesimal system used by the 
Sumerians and then by the Babylonians as long as their civiliza- 
tion survived. Naturally, the forms of the numerals were sim- 

156 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
plified in the course of time, as in Egypt. But in Babylonia this 
simplification had surprising consequences. 
When the imprint of a wedge-shaped stylus took the place 
of drawn signs in the script D became f, 0 became < , D T, 
and 0  or (in the "mathematical texts" (). Hence by about 
2000 B.C. the same sign represented any power of sixty (includ- 
ing one) and ten such units respectively. Only the order of 
the signs helped distinguish their values:  T < < < T must 
mean 2 X 60 + 3 X 10 + 1, or, in our notation, 151. The 
Babylonians thus found themselves in possession of a system 
using "place value" just like our own. It had one defect: there 
was no sign for zero; but some time after 1000 B.C. this de- 
ficiency was made good. 
All these systems are rather clumsy; to write 879 in 
Egyptian, for instance, twenty-four distinct signs had to be 
drawn. On the other hand, addition and subtraction are almost 
as easy as in counting on the fingers: III added to::' evidently 
make ::::. Multiplication and division by 10 are also easily 
represented. To multiply 2 by 10 merely involved changing 
T T to < < · 
Our oldest "mathematical documents," the pictographic ac- 
count tablets, illustrate only the simplest mathematical opera- 
tions. They record numbers of actual sheep, measures of bar- 
ley, or jugs of beer. Totals are reached by addition and sub- 
traction. The areas of fields (in the sense defined on p. 154) 
are reckoned as the product of two sides. Under such condi- 
tions fractions need not arise. The scribe i counting real sheep 
and men. An eighth of a sheep and five-eighths of a man would 
be meaningless. In dealing with measures and volumes, the 
several units, each with distinct names, took the place of frac- 
tions, as elementary arithmetic expresses fractions of a pound 
in ounces, pennyweights, grains, etc. So in Sumer convention 
had fixed the values of the "natural units" of length so that 15 
fingers made 1 span, 2 spans 1 cubit, and so on. Both in 
Sumerian and Egyptian writing, simple numerals, unaccom- 
panied by any other sign or word, might be used to denote 
units of weight or of length: so in Sumerian D might stand for 
1 gan and 0 for 1 bur ( i.e. 18 gan). Perhaps from this sort of 
practice arose "individual signs" used to denote certain frac- 
tions: in Egyptian C for 1;2", (x = ;4) '1' , and 1? 
%; in Babylonian + for 1;2", -» 1h and !J1 %. 
But the complexities introduced into social life by the urban 
revolution rised problems that required more advanced 
mathematical processes for a satisfactory solution. Large 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 157 
armies of laborers were gathered together to execute gigantic 
public works, and provision must be ma-de for these in ad- 
vance. It was necessary to calculate the supplies of food and 
raw material that must be collected; the time likely to be 
occupied had accordingly to be estimated. But that might in- 
volve reckoning up the cubic contents of sloping banks of earth 
or of pyramids or the number of bricks in the walls of a well. 
The wages of gangs had to be apportioned in accordance with 
the qualifications or output of each member. 
Grain was stored up in granaries that might be cylindrical or 
pyramidal in shape; still, the overseers and revenue officers 
needed to know how much grain to expect from such con- 
tainers. Trade was organized on a partnership basis, and the 
profits had to be apportioned according to the shares con- 
tributed. A Sumerian deity was daily placated with large offer- 
ings of beer, the strength of which was prescribed by ritual 
usage. The tenlple brewer Ileeuu tu know the quantities of 
grain requisite for the malting and for the actual liquor, and 
the overseer must ascertain how much grain to issue to him for 
each purpose and for each brew. Egyptian superstition de- 
manded extreme accuracy in the erection of pyramids; the 
mason must know the exact measures of the individual blocks 
that must be cut to face such monuments. 
The sort of problem which an Egyptian scribe might have 
to solve is stated in a late papyrus, dating from about 1200 
B.C. The speaker is supposed to be upbraiding a rival for in- 
competence:- 
"You say: 'I am the scribe who issues commands to the 
levy. ' You are given a reservoir to dig. But you come to me 
to inquire about the rations for the soldiers and say: 'Reckon 
it out. ' You desert your office and the burden of teaching 
it to you falls on me. 
"You are the clever scribe at the head of the levy. A ramp 
is to be constructed, 730 cubits long, 55 cubits wide, con- 
taining 120 compartments and filled with reeds and beams. 
. . . The quantity of bricks required for it is demanded of 
the generals, and the scribes are gathered together without 
one of them knowing anything. They put their trust in you 
saying: 'You are the clever scribe, my friend! . . . Answer 
us, how many bricks are needed for it?' 
"It is said to you, 'Empty the magazine that has been 
filled with sand under your lord's monument that has been 
brought from the Red Mountain. It measured 30 cubits 
when lying extended on the ground and 20 cubits in breadth. 
The magazine consisted of several divisions each 50 cubits 

158 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
high. You are commissioned to find out how many men will 
demolish it in six hours.'" 
(The problems are, of course, insoluble as stated, but that is 
part of the jest here.) 
It is problems of just the foregoing kinds that are worked out 
in the extant mathematical texts from Egypt and Babylonia. 
Most of the problems seem to us rather trivial; few should 
seriously perplex an elementary school boy today. But it would 
be grossly unfair to judge scribes who lived 5000 years ago by 
modern standards. Operations that worried them are familiar 
to us just because we have, through the Greeks and Arabs, in- 
berited the techniques they devised. 
Actually the Sumerian and Egyptian scribes were experi- 
menting in an utterly strange and uncharted domain, opened 
up by the unprecedented events of the urban revolution. The 
problcms they had to solve were absolutely new, and had never 
arisen before because they were created by the revolution itself. 
Like the rest of its results, they are famiJiar as the very basis of 
our own civilization. But the ancient mathematician had actu- 
ally to invent methods for their solution. 
In the first place, they had to create the machinery for 
reckoning. The first step had been to devise a system of no- 
tation, to reduce to writing whole numbers for which, after all, 
names already existed in spoken language. The next step was 
to improve the technique of reckoning. Addition and sub- 
traction are simply counting abbreviated by memorizing results 
already obtained. In "adding" 5 to 3 we just remember that the 
result (presumably first obtained by counting) is 8, instead of 
counting up step by step. As already remarked, the Egyptian 
and Sumerian notation gave graphic expression to this fact. 
Multiplication is a further abbreviation of addition. To 
multiply 5 by 3 means to add three 5's together . We learn at 
school that the result is 15. The Egyptians do not seem to 
have recorded this result as something to be memorized. In 
any case, they never applied the process familiar to us. They 
always proceeded by the method of "duplication." They 
added the multiplicand to itself. But they did remember that 
12 + 12 (i.e. 12 X 2) === 24, and abbreviated the process 
to that extent. An example illustrates the method. This is how 
the Egyptians would work out 12 X 12 and 14 X 80:- 
1 12 1 80 
2 24 \ 10 800 
"4 48 2 160 
\ 8 96 v 4 320 
Total 144 Total 1120 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 159 
(You write 1 opposite the multiplicand, and then double 
each side till in the first column you have numbers totalling 
up to the multiplier, ticking off the relevant lines. You then 
add up the corresponding figures in the second column. In 
example 2 the process is simplified by the decimal notation 
as described on p. 156. 
In division the process is reversed. The division of 19 by 8, 
which the Egyptian would have expressed as '.reckoning with 
8 to find 19," would be thus set out:- 
1 8 
'v 2 16 
2 4 
- 
'v 4 2 
- 
'v 8 1 
result 2 + 4 + 8 
(Here he doubles and halves the divisor until numbers in the 
second column add up to the dividend, ticking off the integers 
and fractions in the first column and adding together the 
ticked figures. 1/2, 1/4 can be written, 2, 4 , in conformity with 
Egyptian fractional notation.) 
It is probable that the Sumerians tirst used similar "ad.. 
ditive" methods. But before 2000 B.C. the Babylonians were 
familiar with multiplication as we know it. That means that 
they possessed multiplication tables, and such have come 
down to us. They had, that is, noted down the results ob... 
tained by additive methods and tabulated them for memoriza... 
tion or reference. They had thus equipped themselves with 
instruments for ready reckoning, and thereby enormously 
lightened and accelerated the work of calculation. 
Possibly it was the great importance of trade for Babylonia 
that evoked this simplification of arithmetical procedure. 
Mesopotamia had been more dependent than Egypt on foreign 
trade in prehistoric times and remained so. Her geographical 
position makes her a junction of natural trade routes, whereas 
Egypt is relatively isolated. The transaction of foreign busi... 
ness on a large scale would certainly have been expedited 
by the new procedure. At the same time the cOlnpilation of 
the tables, i.e., the systematic recording and arrangement of re... 
suIts obtained by simpler reckonings, may be credited to the 
"research organization" of the temple schools. 
The extant tables give the product of the multiplier with 
all integers up to 20 and with 30, 40, and 50 too, and are 
set out and arranged like ours. But the multipliers include 
also seemingly high numbers like 1,15 and even 44,26:40 (all, 

160 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
of course, expressed in sexagesimal notation). They could 
therefore serve also as division tables, as explained below. 
Tables of squares, cubes, and other powers, square roots, 
cube roots, etc., also survive. 
Evidently the practical problems that confronted the scribes, 
such as even the division of rations among workmen, must 
eventually have forced them to deal with fractional quantities. 
To comprehend what that meant, it is well to recall how frac- 
tions bothered us in our early schooldays. To Egyptians and 
Babylonians they were something absolutely novel. You can- 
not conveniently represent fractions, as you can integers, on 
the fingers or an abacus. A notation had to be devised for 
quantities which could not be thus concretely imaged. 
The Egyptians denoted fractions (with numerator 1) by a 
sign over the denominator, which may be represented in our 
notation by a stroke. (There were, of course, special signs 
for 1/2, 1/3, and 2/3 as noted.) It would clearly be difficult on 
this notation to write 2/5 or 7/10. And, in fact, the Egyptians 
never wrote such fractions at all. They always expressed them 
as a sum of fractions with numerator 1, or, as we should say, 
of aliquot parts, save that 2/3 might be introduced into the 
series. Our examples are accordingly resolved as follows: 
- - 
2/5 === 1/3 + 1/15 (or, in Egyptian notation, 3 + 15) and 
7/10 == 2/3 + 1/30. Tables were compiled giving the correct 
resolution of all fractions whose numerator is 2 and whose 
denominator is an odd number from 3 to 101. The first part 
of the Rhind Papyrus sets forth this table with "working out" 
attached. 
The Egyptians had then hardly grasped that fractions were 
amenable to precisely the same rules as integers. The failure 
was due primarily to their primitive technique of reckoning; 
division carried out on the Egyptian plan automatically results 
in just such series of aliquot parts. Defective notation was a 
contributory cause in perpetuating the usage. 
The transformtion of the numeral system, described on 
p. 156, incidentally gave Babylonian mathematicians a com- 
plete mastery of fractional quantities about 2000 B.C. The 
simplification of the script meant that the value of a numeral 
depended entirely upon its position relative to others. With us 
the same figure, 5, is used to denote 5 X 10, 5 Xl, 5/10, and 
so on. Which value it possesses is determined in each given 
case by its position relative to other figures including zero and 
decimal point. Just so about 2000 B.C. the Babylonians came in 
mathematical texts to use the same group of signs < < to 
denote 20 and 20/60; but they lacked signs for 0 and. and 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 161 
used a sexagesimal scale. Thereby they were enabled to extend 
the mastery of numbers to the whole domain of the rational. 
For they could express fractions just as we do in "d:cimals": 
1/5 could be written ; 12 (it is convenient for us to Insert a ; 
to represent the "point" that the Babylonians lacked), 2/5 
;24, and so on. And they treated their sexagesimal fractions 
exactly like integers. 
This notation simplified the difficult operation of division. 
They drew up tables of the reciprocals of numbers between 1 
and 60:- 
2 
3 
4 
30 
20 
15 
5 
6 
8 
12 
10 
7;30, and so on. 
Thereafter instead of dividing by, say,S, you multiplied by its 
reciprocal ;12 (12/60). But what happened when the recip- 
rocal was not a finite number-60/7, for instance-is un- 
known. 
The system of sexagesimal fractions and the new processes 
thereby initiated were incidental consequences of a change in 
the script. But the realization of its potentialities and their ex- 
ploitation were achievements apparently of the temple schools. 
The system seems, in fact, confined to the "mathematical 
texts" compiled in and for such schools. It was, however, used 
in the earliest texts for the solution of problems in architecture 
and military engineering and for calculating interest and 
principal. Apparently only a thousand years later was the new 
mathematic applied to astronomical calculations, despite the 
importance of astrology in the temple curricula. 
To teach and apply the new methods of reckoning it was 
desirable to adopt conventionally standardized terms for the 
several operations; to make mathematics a science an exact 
terminology was essential. The definition of terms is, of course, 
a social function, and the schools were the institutions to 
select the expression that should alone be accepted as the 
designation or indicator of each operation. As far as Egypt is 
concerned, there is considerable variation in the Rhind Papy- 
rus in the expressions used to denote addition, subtraction, and 
so on; multiply 5 by 4 may be expressed "count with 4 5 
times," "reckon with 4 5 times." In the Moscow Papyrus the 
terminology is less variable, but not yet quite fixed. 
The Babylonian texts, on the other hand, from 2000 B.C. em- 
ploy a very explicit terminology. Indeed, the Ba.bylonians were 
well on the way to creating a mathematical symbolism that 
would materially accelerate calculation. First, the technical 

162 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
terms for several operations were words of one syllable ex- 
pressed by a single cuneiform sign. Then the Babylonians, 
though they spoke a Semitic tongue, used the old Sumerian 
terms for operations like "multiplied by," "find the reciprocal 
of." Finally, many of the technical words were written as 
ideograms instead of being spelt out. (Our arithmetical and 
geometrical symbols+,X,,7r are, of course, true ideograms.) 
The later the texts, and therefore the deader the Sumerian 
language, the more Sumerian terms and ideograms were used. 
They became quite abstract symbols freed from the concrete 
notions of "nodding the head" or "breaking away" that inhere 
in Egyptian terms. But, even in Egyptian, ideograms were 
sometimes employed as mathematical symbols; in the Rhind 
Papyrus a pair of legs may denote + or -, according to the 
direction of the feet. 
The terminology for what we regard as ratios was curious. 
Babylonian and Egyptian texts frequently refer to the "batter" 
c 
A 
E: 
B 
FIG. 9.-DIAGRAM TO ILLUSTRATE THE FORMULA FOR "BATTER." 
or "slope" of a pyramid's sides. We should express this as a 
ratio, as we say 1 in 10 for the gradient of a hill. The Egyptians 
always express this as a length, e.g., 5-1/25 palms. What they 
really meant was 5-1/25 palms horizontally for each cubit of 
height or, as we should say, "AE/ED, where ED is one unit 
of length, a cubit." The Babylonian expressed this more 
clearly: "for 1 cubit, 1 the batter-value" (always reckoned in 
GAR). Both phrases illustrate how very concrete mathemati- 
cal thinking remained. 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 163 
br 
M z 
r 
};!t )14  & 
 
 
 .... 
t:5' )t   
6 z 
  <: 
  H 
Z 
A.:A;: 0 
11  H 
i.  >t 
 
  < 
A   
TI  -0 lJ. -..::. I 
 t 'QP }  0 
 
 <Y- 0 
H 
 
 
.( 4- 
q'/  
 
I 
 
Ii 
 
 
The conditions of urban economy, indicated on pp. 156-7 
required some knowledge of geometrical relations. The areas 
of fields must be determined for estimations of the seed re- 
quired for sowing them and the rent or tax that might be ex- 
acted in respect of them. But for such estimates and assess- 
ments absolute accuracy was unnecessary: the bailiff only 
wanted to know roughly how much grain to allow for each 
field; the tax-collector needed a general idea of the yield to 
be expected. We have seen that even before 3000 B.C. the 
Sumerians were calculating the areas of fields as the product 

16 4 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
of length by breadth; they were, that is, applying the correct 
geometrical formula for the area of a rectangle. 
In later documents the areas of irregular quadrangles are 
calculated by various approximations, usually the mean of 
the products of the two pairs of adjacent sides. Polygonal 
fields were divided up into quadrangles and triangles, the 
areas of which were similarly calculated. In Egypt, even in 
New Kingdom contracts, the area of a four-sided field is taken 
as half the sum of two adjacent sides multiplied by half the 
sum of the remaining sides. In the case of a triangular field 
the lengths of two sides were added together and halved, and 
then multiplied by half the length of the third side. 
The documents just examined generally contain plans of 
the fields in question. The lengths are written in along the 
sides, but the plans are not drawn accurately or to scale. The 
theory that exact geometry arose out of land-surveying in 
Egypt or Babylonia is not supported by the evidence at our 
disposal. 
Again, it would be useful as a check to know the quantity 
of grain to be expected from a rectangular silo with sloping 
sides, but absolute accuracy was not essential. So, to estimate 
the contents of a pit in the form of a truncated pyramid, the 
Babylonians were content with a calculation that we should 
[ (a + b)2 (a - b)2 ] 
express by the formula V == h 2 + 2 ' 
though this formula is incorrect. 
On the other hand, architects and engineers often required 
more exact calculations to fulfill the tasks imposed on them. 
The accuracy of a pyramid was a matter of ritual significance. 
To secure it the sizes of the blocks facing it must be accurately 
calculated. And so the Egyptian scribes had discovered and 
used the correct formula for the volume of a truncated 
pyramid. A famous problem in the Moscow Papyrus runs:- 
"Example of reckoning a ?truncated pyramid. 
If one says to you a ?truncated pyramid of 6 (cubits) in 
height to 4 (cubits) on the underside to 2 (cubits) on the 
upper side. 
Reckon with this 4 squared, it gives 16. 
Double 4, it gives 8. 
Reckon with this 2 squared; it gives 4. 
Add together this 16 to this 8 and to this 4. It gives 28. 
Reckon 1/3 of 6; it gives 2. Reckon with 28 2 times; it 
gives 56. 
See: 56 it is. You have got the answer." 
The process here set out can be expressed V = 1/3h(a 2 + 

THE REVOLUTION m H1J1.IAN KNt>WLEDGE 165 
ab + b 2 )-the correct formula for the frustum of a pyramid. 
The rough figure accompanying the example suggests an 
irregular pyramid-in fact, one of the blocks casing a regular 
pyramid (Fig. 11). 
Problems involving the relation of the circumference to the 
diameter of a circle, the "irrational" quantity which we call 
7r, inevitably arose. In their solution the Babylonians were 
content with a very rough approximation, 7r === 3, presumably 
obtained by direct measurement. The Egyptians, on the other 
hand, used a surprisingly close ap- La 
proximation in estimating the area   · 
of circles. An example in the 
Rhind Papyrus runs:- 
"Method of reckoning a cir- 
cular piece of land of diameter 
9 khet. What is its area? 
You are to subtract 1/9 of it, 
namely 1. Remainder 8. 
You are to reckon with 8 8 
times; it becomes 64. This is its 
area in land: 6 thousands-of-Iand 
and 4 setat." 
. 
 
lJt 
If 
It 
FIG. 11.- EXACT COpy OF 
FIGURE FROM Moscow 
PAPYRUS, REVERSED AND 
WITH SYMBOLS TRANSLIT- 
ERATED. 
The formula used is (d - 1/9d) 2, 
which makes 7r == (16/9) 2. The 
result of Pythagoras' Theorem (that 
in a right-angled triangle the square 
on the side opposite the right angle is equal to the sum of the 
squares on the other two sides) was perfectly familiar to the 
Babylonians from 2000 B.C. Of course, they could not apply 
it in all calculations, since they could not handle surds. When 
the sum of the two squares yielded a number that was not itself 
a perfect square, they had to resort to other methods of ob- 
taining an approximate result. A tablet in Berlin gives two 
calculations of the diagonal of a door ;40 GAR high and ; 1 0 
GAR wide. They give respectively values of ;41,15 and ;42,13, 
w 2 
20, and can be represented by the formulas d === h + 2 h 
and d == h + 2 w 2 h. The first formula is the ar ithmetical 
mean between two approximations to the value of V h 2 + w 2 . 
In Egypt there is no direct evidence for the application of 
Pythagoras' Theorem. The oft-repeated statement that a 
triangle with sides 3, 4, and 5 was used in laying out a right 
angle is quite unfounded. 
The Babylonians could even calculate the height of an arc, 

166 THE REVOLUTION IN HU1:AN KNOWLEDGE 
given the length of its chord and the circle's diameter. Their 
actual procedur e can b e expressed by the formula 
h === 1 12 (d - V d 2 - a 2 ), and is perfectly correct. It im.. 
plies appreciation of the properties of similar triangles, but 
not, of course, that Babylonians had worked out the various 
steps in pure geometry by which the formula is deduced by 
Euclid. 
In fact, we do not know how any of the foregoing 
geometrical rules were obtained. They certainly had not been 
deduced a priori from the properties of abstract space as they 
purport to be in EucHd's geometry. For such a "pure geome.. 
try" there is no evidence at all. Figures often accompany the 
geometrical problems in the mathematical papyri and tablets, 
but such figures are no more drawn to scale than are the field.. 
plans in contracts. On the other hand, the patterns decorating 
craft-products, piles of bricks, and composite wooden boxes 
often give very striking ocular demonstrations of geometrical 
propositions. Checker patterns, that arise almost spontane- 
ously in basketry and matting, illustrate concretely the 
geometrical formula for the area of a rectangle. Incidentally, 
painted checker patterns were popular on vases precisely at the 
time of the earliest pictographic tablets on which the Sumer- 
ians applied this formula. 
Early Oriental decorative art was very largely geometric. 
Patterns of triangles and checkers in textiles or mosaic might 
easily illustrate Pythagoras' Theorem. Designs based on in- 
tersecting circles or on squares and triangles inscribed in 
circles were very popular, and might show how to calculate 
the height of an arc. But these patterns are produced by 
artists and craftsmen, not mathematicians. 
Nor do the mathematical texts ever enunciate a general 
rule or formula. No rule is stated for finding the area of a 
rectangle or a circle nor the volume of a cylinder or trun- 
cated pyramid. There is no statement beyond the actual work- 
ing out as given in the two Egyptian examples cited. No text 
gives any more explanation of the reason for the operations 
than is contained in the quoted problems. Indeed, the quan- 
tities dealt with are seldom even pure numbers, but generally 
so many loaves or cubits or bushels. 
The mathematical texts, in fact, consist entirely of con.. 
crete problems of the sort likely to arise in real life worked 
out step by step, like the examples in a school arithmetic. And, 
as in a school arithmetic, the actual values in the problems 
have been so selected that a neat result can be obtained by 
the methods at the disposal of the scribe: the circles' diameters 
are always divisible exactly by 9, the quadratics do not lead 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 167 
to surds. The examples do not illustrate how the deductions 
of a pure mathematics could be applied to problems of every- 
day life. They illustrate rather methods whereby problems 
arising in practice had been satisfactorily solved. 
Nevertheless, the activity that produced our mathematical 
texts was not confined to recording problems that had been 
put to the scribe and his methods of solving these. Still less did 
it consist merely of making simplified versions of such prob- 
lems for the instruction of beginners. The examples look as 
if they had been deliberately constructed. They give the im- 
pression that scholars in higher centers of learning were setting 
themselves problems just to see what they could do neatly. In 
that way they would be building up techniques whch were 
later applied not only to the familiar tasks dealt with in the 
examples, but also to those confronting other colleagues, like 
astrologers. 
To this extent the Babylonian mathematical tablets at least 
disclose as strictly "theoretical" a science as any paper 
presented to the Royal Society. It was theoretical in the sense 
that it resulted from investigations each of which was not 
deliberately directed to the solution of any specific practical 
problem. But as a whole the problems investigated were 
strictly modeled on the actual real-life problems from which 
they started. Indeed, it looks as if the research they disclose 
was really limited in its scope by consciously conceived pos- 
sibilities of practical application. In any case, no attempt was 
made to generalize the results. 
It would help us to estimate the scientific value of Egyptian 
and Babylonian mathematics if we knew exactly how the 
results of investigations were arranged. In a scientific arith- 
metic the examples would today be grouped according to the 
methods employed, irrespective of whether the problems con- 
cerned grocers, builders, surveyors, or generals. The existing 
material gives little indication of the principles of arrange- 
ment followed in Egypt and Babylonia. In the Moscow 
Papyrus no systematic arrangement at all is recognizable. The 
examples in the Rhind Papyrus are deliberately grouped as 
follows:- 
1. Problems 1-6. Division of 10 loaves between 1, 2, 6, 7, 
8, and 9 men. 
11. 7-20. "Completions": multiplication of vulgar and im- 
proper fractions. 
Hi. 21-23. "Completions": subtraction of fractions. 
iv. 24-38. Simple equations. 
v. 39-40. Division of loaves in unequal proportions. 

168 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
vi. 41-47. 
Quantities of grain contained in receptacles of 
varying shapes. 
Areas of fields of varying shapes. 
Batter of pyramids. 
Brewers' problems. 
vii. 48-55. 
viii. 56-68. 
ix. 69-78. 
Groups vi-ix are related primarily by their subject matter- 
the materials dealt with or the occupations concerned. It is true 
that similarity of subject matter often involves similarity in 
method of solution. But the areas in vii include rectangles, 
triangles, and circles; the containers in vi, cubes, cylinders, and 
so on. The term "completion" is applied to two apparently 
quite dit'feren t operations. 
It looks as if the Egyptian examples were arranged for the 
convenience of reference by employers of labor, granary-over- 
seers, surveyors, and brewers rather than by any logical 
affini ty . 
In Babylonia we have to rely generally on the small groups 
of examples on a single tablet. A Strassburg tablet contains 
thirty problems, all deling with the division of triangular 
fields. Three could today be solved by linear equations, seven 
would require quadratics. Thirty-two problems are decipher- 
able on a tablet in the British Museum. They concern: (i) 
masses of earth moved and the tasks to be assigned to indi.., 
vidual laborers in complicated engineering works, (ii) the 
numbers of bricks walling a cylindrical well, (iii) the division 
of water-clocks, (iv) the time occupied by weaving operations, 
(v) the evaluation of crops from fields of different areas, and 
(vi) the height of the arc of a circle. They involve a great 
variety of geometrical relations. But, given familiarity with 
these, all the problems could be expressed either as simple 
proportions or as simple calculations of areas and volumes. 
Was the tablet's writer conscious of the inner relationship be- 
tween problems superficially so different? 
On the whole we have to judge the scientific value of the 
work embodied in our texts by its results. They disc lose con- 
siderable skill in the formulation of problems. A study of the 
examples would accustom the scholar to arrange the data 
which professional practice might present in a manner suit- 
able for mathematical treatment. 
And then the examples illustrate the capacities of their com- 
pilers. The Egyptians were grievously handicapped by their 
imperfect symbolism and crude technique of reckoning. 
Though they could handle the fractions with surprising success, 
these must have delayed progress. In pure mathematics their 

TIlE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 169 
highest efforts, judging by the extant examples, would now- 
adays be called compound proportions or simple linear equa- 
tions. One of the latter may be quoted from the Rhind Papyrus 
(No. 34):- 
A quantity whose half and whose quarter are added to it 
becomes 10:- 
VII + 1/2 + 1/4 
2 3 + 1/2 
V 4 7 
V 1/7 1/4 
1/4 + 1/28 1/2 
V 1/2 + 1/14 1 
Total this quantity is 5 + 1/2 + 1/7 + 1/14 
The method here adopted is just to multiply 1 + 1h -1- tA to 
find 10. It is followed by a "proof," which consists in halving 
and quartering the solution and adding the results to it to 
show that they do add up to 10. 
The Babylonians, aided by their sexagesimal fractions could 
aim higher than the Egyptians and actually solve quite neatly 
problems involving quadratic and even cubic equations. One of 
the simpler quadratics may be quoted. (Note that the depth is 
always given in GAR, the other measures in cubits, i.e., 1/12 
GAR.) 
"Length, Breadth. 1 ;40 the length. The 7th part of that 
whereby the length exceeds the breadth and 1 cubit added 
thereto is also the depth. ;50 the volume excavated. What 
are breadth and depth? 
You: Multiply 1 ;40, the length, by 12, the fraction of the 
depth; you see 20. Find the reciprocal of 20. ;3 you see. 
Multiply ;3 by ;50. ;2, 30 you see. Multiply ;2, 30 by 7. ;17, 
30 you see. Multiply 7 by ;5, 1 cubit. ;35 you see. Subtract 
;35 from 1; 40, the length. 1; 5 you see. Break away 1/2 
from 1;5 (;32, 30) Square ;32, 30. ;17, 36, 15 you see. Re- 
move therefrom ;17, 30. ;0, 0, 15 you see. ;2, 30 the 
(square) root add to ;32, 36 and subtract (it therefrom). 
;35 and ;30 you see as breadth. 7 35 5 depth. The process." 
(The "sum" is unfinished.) 
These and other technical processes were transmitted 
directly or indirectly to the Greeks to form the foundation of 
their higher mathematics. The Babylonians, for their part, re- 
mained limited by their utilitarian aims. As their generals and 

170 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
merchants were content with rough estimates, they remained 
satisfied with incorrect formulas for the volume of a truncated 
pyramid and the ludicrous approximation 7r == 3! 
The movements of the heavenly bodies had to be studied by 
early man for practical needs of navigation and of agriculture 
(pp. 86, 110). Favored by the clear skies normal1y ruling be- 
tween the 10th and 35th degree of latitude, the regularity of 
celestial events and their connection with mundane ones must 
soon have been recognized. Success in foretelling from obser- 
vations of the heavenly bodies the times for harvest or the 
advent of a flood, then led to the prosecution of such observa- 
tions in the vain hope of predicting other events affecting men's 
fortunes (p. 86). After the urban revolution, astronomy was 
still studied both for the legitimate purpose of regulating agri- 
cultural works and the connected festivals and for the futile 
aims of astrological prediction. The study was now supported 
by the authority of organized States, it was equipped with the 
devices the new crafts could produce, its results were recorded 
in writing. 
In Egypt astronomy remained necessary to guide agricul- 
tural operations. It is, indeed, true that the Egyptians, probably 
around 2900 B.C., had devised a calendar that attempted to rec- 
oncile the old reckoning by lunar months with the solar year. 
But that calendar was inaccurate (p. 111) and could not be 
used successfully for regulating work on the farm. Attempts to 
reform it seem to have been made under the earliest dynasties, 
but were abandoned, whether through incompetence or sacer- 
dotal opposition is unknown. But the true year was recognized 
side by side with the vague official year. 
An inscription, written about 2000 B.C., speaks of "offerings 
at the feast of the Beginning of the Year, at the feast of the 
New Year, of the Great Year, of the Little Year. . . ." The 
first year mentioned is the vague official year of the calendar. 
The N ew Year is determined astronomically by the rising of 
Sirius. The Great Year may be a Sothic cycle of 1461 years, 
the Little Year was perhaps a quadrennial cycle for the cor- 
rection of the calendar on the principle of our leap years. The 
regulation of this embarrassing number of conflicting reckon- 
ings was left to royal officials, ultimately to priests of the Sun. 
In Babylonia organized observation of the heavens was still 
more necessary. For the Babylonians never established a solar 
calendar for official purposes, but recognized always a lunar 
year of 354 days. Even the beginnings of the months were 
fixed empirically. In IGng Hammurabi's correspondence 
(about 1800 B.C.) we read the reports of officials whose duty 
it was to watch for the appearance of the new moon. The new 

THE REVOLUTION IN 'HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 171 
month began officially only when they had reported to the king 
the moon's reappearance. Charged with such a task, the royal 
astronomers were naturally trained in keen observation and, in 
fact, became surprisingly expert. 
The lunar calendar left to itself would, of course, cause com- 
plete chaos in the community's religious life, which was bound 
up with seasonal agricultural fesivals. It was in practice 
corrected by the periodical intercalation of an extra month. 
But no system of intercalation was officially extablished. It was 
left to the king to order the addition of an extra month to the 
official year when needed. He presumably acted on the advice 
of astronomers. The latter must have known the equivalent of 
the solar year, but it was determined, as in Egypt, by obser- 
vation of the stars. 
So in Egypt and Babylonia the movements of the heavenly 
bodies were systematically observed both for practical and for 
superstitious ends. To reduce such observations to material for 
an exact science it was essential to standardize the divisions of 
time and to devise instruments for measuring them. But such 
division and measurement were equally needed for life in an 
urban civilization. 
For work in factories and farms equal divisions of the day 
and of the night respectively would be the more useful. The 
Egyptians, in fact, recognized only such divisions. They di- 
vided daylight and darkness each into twelve equal watches 
(seasonal hours), which naturally varied in absolute length 
with the seasons. The Babylonians, on the other hand, divided 
day and night, i.e., the full period of the earth's rotation, into 
twelve double hours (biru). In each case the numbe: twelve 
was probably suggested by the twelve months of the year. 
For determining the hours of daylight both peoples used 
the movements of the shadows cast by fixed objects. The sur- 
viving Egyptian sundials (New Kingdom and later) use the 
width of the shadow of a block. The earlier examples do not 
seem to be corrected for the variation in the sun's altitude. In 
Babylonia the gnomon, the shadow of an upright staff, was 
utilized, but no specimens survive. 
For division of the night, water-clocks were employed in 
both countries. The periods of time were measured by the 
quantities of water that had run out from or into standardized 
and graduated vessels. In Egypt the vessels from which the 
water gradually flowed were conical in form, and therefore 
never gave accurate results; for only from a vessel whose walls 
follow a parabolic curve would the water level sink equal dis- 
tances in equal times. The instrument was further complicated 

172 THE. REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
by the seasonal inequalities of the "watches" they had to 
measure. 
At first the "clocks" were adjusted by the attachment of two 
or more outlets, presumably of different bores. An improve- 
ment was introduced between 1557 and 1541 B.C. A high offi- 
cial, Amenemhat, tells us in his epitaph that he had found in 
earlier writings that winter nights were to summer nights as 
14 to 12. He had then made his sovereign a clock with only 
one outlet, which gave correct divisions of the night at all 
seasons of the year. 
This remarkable inscription attests the existence and use 
of collected observations inherited from earlier generations. 
But it also records an invention that can only have been 
reached as the result of deliberate experiments, conducted with 
a specific end in view. It is striking that the invention should be 
due to an official not professionally concerned with measuring 
time, and that he should pride himself on it. It sounds like a 
piece of disinterested research carried on in leisure hours by 
Amenemhat. 
The Babylonian water-clocks were of cylindrical form. 
Problems in a mathematical tablet, already mentioned, are 
concerned with their graduation. Adjustment for seasonal 
variation was not needed (p. 171). But from Assyrian times 
we possess a table for the conversion of biru (double hours) 
into watches month by month. 
Inspired by the motives and armed with the equipment above 
mentioned, the Oriental astronomers were in a position to ap- 
preciate even the less cor.spicuous regularities in the move- 
ments of heavenly bodies and to accumulate data for the con- 
struction of a mathematical astronomy. 
The Egyptians mapped the heavens, drew up lists of stars, 
and grouped stars into constellations. The stars round the 
pole received special attention, and the knowledge gained 
seems very early to have found practical application. From the 
Old Kingdom the pharaoh performed a ceremony termed 
"stretching the cord." The traditional formula uttered by the 
king on this occasion has survived. 
"I have grasped the peg with the handle of the hammer. 
I took the measuring line with the Goddess Safekhabui. 1 
watched the advancing motion of the stars. My eye was 
fixed on the ?Bear. 1 reckon the time checking the hour, and 
determine the edges of thy temple. . . . 1 turn my face to 
the course of the stars. I direct my eyes upon the constella- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 173 
tion of the ?Bear. There stands the time pointer with the 
hour. I determine the edges of thy temple." 
The ceremony evidently concerns the orientation of a 
temple. Apparently its object was the determination of the 
meridian by observing the culmination of some equivalent of 
our "pole star." The success of such determinations may per- 
haps be judged by the Great Pyramid, whose sides deviate from 
true north by only 2' 30" and 5' 30" respectively! The ac- 
curately determined meridian was, of course, a base for further 
accurate observations. 
Before 2000 B.C. the Egyptians were experimenting with 
stellar clocks or calendars built on the diagonal principle. Such 
are known only from coffins, where they have been painted 
on the inside of the lid to enable the corpse to tell the time! 
The lid is divided into thirty-six vertical columns, each repre- 
senting a decade, i.e., a week of ten days, with a division be- 
tween columns 18 and 19 to represent perhaps the summer 
solstice. Horizontally there are twelve cases, representing the 
twelve night hours with the line between cases 6 and 7 for mid- 
night. The decans (constellations fulfilling the function of 
Signs of the Zodiac, but situated on the celestial equator), 
rising in the short summer hours between darkness and dawn, 
are entered in the appropriate cases in columns 18 and 19. 
They are repeated in the remaining columns in other cases 
lying along diagonals. 
Such tables, ignoring the five epagomenal days, the different 
lengths of seasonal hours, and other factors, were at best far 
from accurate. The coffin-decorators, not being astronomers, 
have caricatured the scheme. Still, the coffin-lids give a clue to 
the knowledge possessed by the Egyptians, and how they tried 
to apply it. Five centuries later the tomb of Senmut is 
decorated with a sort of planetarium. The astronomy it dis- 
closes is not fundamentally different from that of the coffin- 
lids. There are several pairs of holes to denote the pole. That 
looks like a provision for the precession of the equinoxes. The 
latitude of Thebes is taken as the altitude of the pole. 
Such funerary monuments are the only extant sources for 
Egyptian astronomy, since no astronomical texts have yet been 
found. They certainly embody the results of systematic obser- 
vations carried on and recorded over many centuries. But they 
give no hint of a mathematical astronomy capable of predict- 
ing with the aid of compJicated calculations. No records of 
eclipses survive from Egypt. Indeed, relatively little attention 
seems to have been paid to the movements of the moon and 
the planets, perhaps owin to the early adoption of a non-lunar 

174 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
calendar and the supreme importance of the sun god in the 
State religion. 
In Babylonia the stars were mapped as carefully as in Egypt, 
and with the zodiac as a plane of reference. But the lunar 
calendar and astrological preconceptions directed the astrono- 
mers' attention especially to the movements of the moon and 
the planets and to eclipses and occultations. The scrupulous 
observations of these phenomena, faithfully recorded, revealed 
to the Babylonians regularities that are far from obvious. For 
instance, soon after 2000 B.C., it had been noted that in about 
eight years Venus returned five times to the same place on the 
horizon. 
A thousand years or so later the Babylonians began to apply 
to astronomy the mathematics described on p. 160 fI., and 
then performed prodigies of measurement, calculation, and 
prediction. This mathematical astronomy lies outside the 
period surveyed in this book-fortunately, since it would take 
several chapters to explain it. Still, it must be insisted that, as 
in Egypt, all this research was undertaken primarily with false 
astrological ends in view. But it provided accurate data with- 
out which Greek and modern astronomy would be unthink- 
able. 
Attempts at curing diseases must have been made centuries 
before the urban revolution. Presumably, as among savages 
today, early medical theory was essentially magical, and medi- 
cal practice inextricably bound up with spells and prestidigi- 
tations; the account of paleolithic burial rites on p. 50 gives 
color to this assumption. Even so, the aid of liniments, potions, 
and manipulations would be invoked, and some really effective 
remedies thus discovered. As soon as specialists in magic 
arose in a society, they would be liable to monopolize the 
healing art. 
After the second revolution we accordingly find that doctors 
in Mesopotamia were also priests, and in Egypt sacerdotal 
and healing functions were closely allied. However, Imhotep, 
the first recorded name in the annals of medicine, had been 
architect to King Zoser, though he eventually became a god of 
healing. The Sumerian and Egyptian medicine men, being 
clerks, committed their observations to writing, as did astrolo- 
gers. In the Nile Valley medical books are mentioned as early 
as Dynasty III. Examples of such books have come down to 
us from a period shortly after 2000 B.C. In Mesopotamia the 
extant medical texts were drawn up after 1000 B.C., but some 
may be copies of tablets a thousand years older. 
In both countries the surviving medical texts have the form 
of casebooks, as explained on p. 153. No treatises on anatomy 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 175 
or physiology survive. Yet the Egyptians in particular must 
have acquired very accurate knowledge of human anatomy 
through the practice of mummification. Nevertheless, the 
hieroglyphic signs for bodily organs are derived from animal, 
not from human anatomy. The sign for "heart" is an ox's 
heart, that for uterus the organ of a cow. Hence medical 
literature in Egypt presumably goes back to a period before 
mummification was extensively practiced. 
Medicine was, in fact, little affected by the knowledge 
gained by embalmers, who formed a distinct and specialized 
I craft. Though the heart was recognized as the center of the 
vascular system, the physiological knowledge implied by the 
texts is rudimentary. The same remark applies to Babylonian 
medical literature. Even in Assyrian texts the functions of the 
organs are often misunderstood; the bladder is never men- 
tioned, and nerves are not distinguished from sinews. 
Discascs both in Egypt and in Mesopotamia were regarded 
essentially as the work of demons or vaguer magic powers. 
Medicine therefore consisted essentially in the expulsion of 
the evil spirit by incantations and ritual acts. The actions, how- 
ever, often took the form of the application or administration 
of liniments or potions. The nastier the potion, the sooner the 
demon would take flight; the excreta of men and of animals 
were particularly often prescribed. The tradition that medi- 
cines must be disgusting is a survival of the demoniacal theory 
of disease, traceable in the oldest extant medical texts! The 
same theory naturally approved of strong purges and emetics 
as means of expelling the maleficent agent. 
Dominated by the foregoing theory, the Egyptian and 
Babylonian physicians had no incentive to study the objective 
causes of disease or to investigate systematically the func- 
tioning of the bodily organs. The theory's maintenance was 
bound up with all the privileges of the priesthood, so that to 
challenge it would be treason as well as heresy. The attribu- 
tion of medical books to a god "placed medical lore outside 
the range of human observation as something of supernatural 
origin." It is hardly surprising that, beyond the discovery of 
 certain number of useful drugs and the recognition of a few 
obvious physiological truths, little of value can be attributed 
to Oriental medicine. 
Surgery was in a different position, approximating rather 
to a craft than to a branch of religion. The surgeon has to 
treat injuries inflicted by perfectly obvious physical agencies, 
and has no occasion to attribute them to supernatural powers. 
Surgery might accordingly be expected to be freer than medi- 

176 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
cine from the domination of magical ideas, and accordingly 
more objective and scientific. 
Hammurabi's law-code (1800 B.C.) prescribes fees for 
surgeons (2 to 10 shekels, where a mechanic's wage for the 
year was 8 shekels) and penalties for unsuccessful operations. 
But no surgical texts have come down to us from Mesopota- 
mia. Is this because surgery was a craft, and craft lore was not 
transmitted in writing? 
From Egypt we possess a valuable treatise known as the 
Edwin Smith Papyrus. In its present form it dates from the 
first half of the Ilnd millennium B.C., but Breasted has ad- 
vanced weighty arguments for thinking that it is based on an 
original going back to the Pyramid Age (2500 B.C.). It con- 
firms our expectations, in that it is free from magic formulas, 
records objective observations, and relies entirely on material 
remedies and manipulations for cures. 
Like the medical texts it is a collection of cases, but, unlike 
all Egyptian medical papyri, the cases are systematically 
arranged. They are grouped in accordance with the part 
affected, beginning with the head and going down to the feet, 
a system followed also by Assyrian medical texts and even 
medieval treatises. Each case gives first a classification of the 
wound, then an examination, by palpation where necessary, 
next a prognosis or verdict, and finally rules for treatment. 
What is most striking is that fourteen cases are described in 
detail which are nevertheless pronounced incurable, "a case 
not to be treated." The careful recording and description of 
injuries which the surgeon will not attempt to cure seem to 
disclose a more disinterested attitude to knowledge than is 
usual in early literature. Breasted, indeed, goes so far as to de- 
scribe the papyrus as "the earliest known recorded group of 
observations in natural science," and to call its author "the 
first natural scientist." 
Such a description exaggerates the disinterested character 
of the observations. It was plainly important to know when a 
case was incurable, especially if, as in Babylonia, operations 
resulting in death or permanent disablement were severely 
punished in Egypt. Still, the observations recorded are 
penetrating. It is noted how the dislocation of the cervical 
vertebrae is accompanied by paralysis and an erection of the 
penis. The following passage is worth quoting in full:- 
"Instructions concerning a smash in his skull under 
the skin of his head. If you examine a man having a 
smash in his skull. . . . Now as soon as you find that 
smash which is in his skull like those corrugations which 

THE RJtVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 177 
form on molten copper and something therein fluttering and 
throbbing beneath your fingers like the weak place of an 
infant's crown before it is knit, when it has happened that 
there is no throbbing, under your fingers. . . . Say of it 
'A case not to be treated.'" 
That is a very good and accurate description of the brain. 
The observations here recorded could not be made in the 
course of mummification, but must be due to the intelligent 
study of a wounded soldier or workman. 
So far the treatise produces a favorable impression of Egyp- 
tian surgery. But if it is based on an original going back to 
the Pyramid Age, as Breasted thinks, surgery in Egypt will 
appear in much the same plight as other learned sciences. We 
should have no evidence for any advances since 2500 B.C. 
There would have been no development of the scientific spirit 
displayed by our unknown author, but only a slavish copying 
down of old results and an appeal to "the wisdom of the an- 
cients." Of course, the absurdities of later medical papyri 
cannot be used as evidence for the state of contemporary 
surgery, but positive evidence for progress is equally lacking. 
On the whole an examination of Egyptian and Babylonian 
"scientific literature" does not disclose such an acceleration in 
progress after writing had revolutionized the methods of trans- 
mitting knowledge as might at first sight have been expected. 
The available documents are admittedly too scanty to serve 
as a basis for definite conclusions. They are at least not in- 
compatible with the forebodings expressed on p. 150. 
On the other hand, literary sources do give evidence for the 
pooling of knowledge, of diffusion, such as has been traced in 
previous chapters, affecting the learned sciences. As we have 
described them, mathematics, astronomy, and medicine cer- 
tainly assumed quite distinct forms and developed in general 
along autonomous lines in Egypt and Babylonia. That does 
not exclude the possibility of an interchange of ideas that did 
not affect the fundamental structure of the sciences in each 
country. Egyptian mathematicians, for example, could learn 
from Babylonians geometrical formulas without having to 
modify their system of notation, their terminology, or their 
conception of fractions. In fact, a ?Cretan medical prescription 
is quoted in one Egyptian medical papyrus and a recipe by 
an Asiatic from Byblos is included in the Ebers Papyrus. 
Interchanges of physicians, astrologers, and magicians be- 
tween the several courts are mentioned in the Foreign Office 
archives of Egypt (discovered at Tell el Amarna) about 1350 
B.C., and in those of the Hittites of Boghaz Keui about a 

178 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
century later. Soon after 1500 B.C. learned men were traveling 
as freely between the capitals of Egypt, Asia Minor, Syria, and 
Mesopotamia, as they did a thousand years later. The Foreign 
Office documents themselves are the results of diffusion. 
Akkadian was the diplomatic language of all the Oriental 
monarchies, and Babylonian cuneiform the script universally 
adopted. The Egyptian pharaohs and the Hittite kings must 
have imported Babylonian scribes to write it, or to train native 
clerks. 
And with language and script must have gone the ideas 
embodied in its literature. The Hittites in particular did their 
best to assimilate all the results of Babylonian science, and 
drew largely on Egypt too. And Babylonian and Egyptian 
concepts are reflected in the earliest Phoenician documents. 
If the Egyptians borrowed Cretan prescriptions, the Minoans 
must have been far more indebted to the Nile. Long before the 
Greeks emerged from their Dark Age the results of Babylonian 
and Egyptian science were familiar on the coasts of the Aegean. 
The possible range of diffusion is not thereby exhausted. 
The decorative art of the Indus cities, with its compass-drawn 
circles, circumscribing triangles, and squares, would illustrate 
"geometrical propositions" by 2500 B.C. Two thousand years 
later Sanskrit ritual manuals bear witness to extensive applica- 
tions of geometry. 
In the interval it is quite possible that India was contribut- 
ing to the development of Baby Ionian mathematics. There 
is, indeed, as yet no positive evidence for this or against it. 
But much later the numeral system with a sign for 0 which we 
use was borrowed by the Arabs from India. The three primary 
centers of urban civilization and of writing may therefore 
have been contributing continuously to the formation of the 
scientific tradition which the Greeks developed and passed 
on to us. 
NOTE ON MAGIC, RELIGION, AND SCIENCE 
On pp. 50-51 we spoke of a magic rite as inspired by the 
same sort of reasoning as would suggest a scientific experiment. 
We did not suggest that the logical process was conceived as 
it would be in a modern laboratory, but we accepted the 
account given by Tylor and Frazer of the origins of magic. 
That is a theory of origins only, and is not meant as a descrip- 
tion of the motives of the practitioner of magic. As a theory 
of origins it is not incompatible with the conclusions based on 
a tudy of modern savages-a man performs a magic rite be- 
cause he believes in magic, not to see what will happen. His 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 179 
society is convinced of the efficacy of magic; testing is un- 
thinkable. The attitude of the magician is diametrically op- 
posed to that of the experimental scientist. 
Again, it has been convenient to give simplified, and thus 
rationalized accounts of magic processes. We must then insist 
that neither modern medicine-men nor paleolithic artist- 
wizards nor Egyptian magicians did or could formulate a 
logical and coherent theory of magic. That is clear enough 
from inconsistencies of behavior which have been mentioned. 
For convenience only we distinguish magic in which im- 
personal mystic forces are directly controlled from religion in 
which the forces are personified, and can therefore be in- 
fluenced in the same way as men by entreaties or flattery. But 
really there is no sharp distinction. Most rituals are designed 
also magically to coerce, or at least assist, the gods. That is the 
sense, for instance, of the numerous ritual dramas and also 
of the meals and beer given to the gods. It is quite obvious 
that science did not, and could not, spring directly from either 
magic or religion. We have shown in detail that it originated 
in, and was at first identical with, the practical crafts. In so far 
as a craft like that of healing or astronomy was annexed to 
religion it was sterilized of scientific value. 

CHAPTER IX 
THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION 
OF PROGRESS 
BEFORE the urban revolution comparatively poor and illiterate 
communities had made an impressive series of contributions to 
man's progress. The two millennia immediately preceding 
3000 B.C. had witnessed discoveries in applied science that 
directly or indirectly affected the prosperity of millions of 
men and demonstrably furthered the biological welfare of 
our species by facilitating its multiplication. We have men- 
tioned the following applications of science: artificial irriga- 
tion using canals and ditches; the plow; the harnessing of 
animal motive-power; the sailboat; wheeled vehicles; orchard- 
husbandry; fermentation; the production and use of copper; 
bricks; the arch; glazing; the seal; and-in the earliest stages 
of the revolution-a solar calendar, writing, numeral notation, 
and bronze. 
The two thousand years after the revolution-say from 
2600 to 600 B.c.-produced few contributions of anything 
like comparable importance to human progress. Perhaps only 
four achievements deserve to be put in the same category as 
the fifteen just enumerated. They are: the "decimal notation" 
of Babylonia (about 2000 B.C.); an economical method for 
smelting iron on an industrial scale (1400 B.C.); a truly al- 
phabetic script (1300 B.C.); aqueducts for supplying water 
to cities (700 B.C.). 
The "decimal notation" enabled the Babylonians to deal 
effectively with fractional quantities and to establish a m:lth.. 
ematical astronomy. But place value died with their script 
though sexagesimal fractions survived to inspire "decima 1s" 
in A.D. 1590. Economical iron-smelting first made metal tools 
so cheap that they could be universally used for clearing forests 
and draining marshes. In temperate latitudes the new tools 
opened up to agriculture vast tracts of land hitherto uninhabit- 
able, and so made possible a great expansion in population. 
Yet the crucial discovery Vt'as not due to the rich and long- 
civilized communities of Babylonia or Egypt, but to a hitherto 
unknown community, dependent upon the Hittite Empire. 
180 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 181 
The alphabet brought reading and writing within the reach 
of all and made literature potentially popular . Yet again this 
revolutionary simplification of writing was not carried through 
in the old centers of learning, but in the relatively young com- 
mercial cities of Phoenicia. Aqueducts, bringing supplies of 
fresh water, must have reduced the mortality among city- 
dwellers, and so added to the total of humanity. The earliest 
example yet discovered was built by Sennacherib, King of 
Assyria, to supply his capital. 
Two of our four discoveries, therefore, cannot be credited 
to the societies that had initiated and first reaped the fruits of' 
the urban revolution. Technical improvements like the addi- 
tion of a fixed rudder to ships or the glazing of pottery may be 
neglected here, as being merely logical developments of proces- 
ses initiated before the revolution. For the same reason we may 
ignore some medical, astronomical, and chemical discoveries 
made in the Orient that, purified from the dross of magic 
surrounding them, were incorporated in Greek science. 
We are then left with only two first-rate discoveries made 
by societies equipped with all the advantages of the fifteen 
mutations that were unified in the urban revolution. Viewed 
in this light the achievements of Egypt, Babylonia, and their 
immediate cultural dependencies appear disappointing from 
the standpoint of human progress. Contrasting progress before 
and after it, the second revolution seems to mark, not the 
dawn of a new era of accelerated advance, but the culmina- 
tion and arrest of an earlier period of growth. Yet the Oriental 
societies had been equipped by the revolution with un- 
precedented resources and a new faculty of transmitting and 
accumulating knowledge. 
One partial explanation for such arrested growth may be 
detected in internal contradictions evoked within the societies 
by the revolution itself. The latter was made possible, it will 
be recalled, not only by an absolute accumulation of real 
wealth, but also by its concentration in the hands of gods or 
kings and a small class dependent on these. Such concentration 
was probably essential to ensure the production of the requisite 
surplus resources and to make these available for effective 
social use. 
None the less it meant in practice the economic degrada- 
tion of the mass of the population. The lot of the primary 
producers-farmers, herdsmen, fishers-may, indeed, have 
been ameliorated by the public works, promoted by the State, 
and by the security regular Government guaranteed. Yet 
materially their share in the new wealth was minimal, and 
socially they were sinking toward the status of tenants or even 

182 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION. OF PROGRESS 
serfs. The new army of specialized craftsmen and laborers 
could certainly have found no livelihood but for the expen- 
dit.ure of the surplus created by the revolution. But the frac- 
tion which came to them was again trifling. An unknown per- 
centage of the new craftsmen were actually slaves working for 
a bare living wage; the rest, though legally free, must have 
been impoverished by the competition of servile labor, and 
were ultimately reduced to the straits described by the Egyp- 
tian father quoted on p. 149. 
The substantial balance of the new surplus was retained by 
the few-the kings, the priests, their relatives, and favorites. 
Society is divided into economic classes. A "ruling class" of 
kings, priests, and officials is contrasted to the "lower classes" 
of peasants and manual laborers. The division is typified for 
the archaeologist by the contrast between the overpowering 
magnificence of royal tombs and the simplicity of private 
graves in Egypt or by that between the luxurious houses of 
merchants and the hovels of artisans in an Indus city. As com- 
pared to these the graves in a pre-dynastic cemetery or the huts 
in a neolithic village reveal equality, albeit equality in squalor. 
Now by the biological standard here adopted the urban 
revolution is amply justified in its effects, even if those effects 
include the class division just outlined. That does not mean 
that such a class division was itself likely to accelerate further 
progress. On the contrary, it should retard it. Progress before 
the revolution had consisted in improvements in productive 
processes made presumably by the actual producers, and 
made moreover in the teeth of superstitions that discouraged 
all innovations as dangerous. 
But by the revolution the actual producers, formerly so 
fertile in invention, were reduced to the position of "lower 
classes." The ruling classes who now emerged owed their 
power largely to the exploitation of just those hampering 
superstitions. The Egyptian pharaoh may have started as a 
magician; in any case, he did claim to be a god and spend 
much of his time performing magic rites. The first beneficiaries 
of the revolution in Sumer were the temple priests; the king, 
when he emerges there, is closely associated with the god 
whom he impersonates in periodical ceremonies. It is hardly 
to be expected that ruling classes with such affiliations should 
be patrons of rational science; they were too deeply implicated 
in the encouragement of hopes which experience was repeated- 
ly showing to be illusory, but which still deterred men from 
pursuing the harder road of sustained and intense thinking. 
And, in fact, such rulers had few incentives to encourage 
invention. Many of the revolutionary steps in progress-the 

THE J\CCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 183 
harnessing of animals' motive-power, the sail, metal tools- 
originally appeared as "labor-saving devices." But the new 
rulers now commanded almost unlimited reserves of labor 
recruited from subjects fired with superstitious faith and 
captives taken in war; they had no need to bother about labor- 
saving inventions. 
At the same time, the new middle class of scribes and 
learned men was firmly attached to the ruling class. They were 
in many instances actually "clerks in holy orders," and thus 
as closely identified as tLe rulers with the maintenance of vain 
superstitions. The learned professions were "respectable," and 
actually offered opportunities for advancement into the ruling 
class itself. Finally, the private interests of the "wise men" 
tempted them as a class to set undue store by mere book- 
learning as against experiment and observation in the living 
world. The new sciences for which the revolution gave scope 
were thus all too often fettered by subservience to supersti- 
tion and divorced from the applied sciences that produced 
results. 
The practical exponents of the latter were relegated to the 
lower classes. Escape from their position of inferiority was 
not offered by technical improvements that the ruling classes 
could hardly appreciate, but at best by joining the middle 
class in supporting "the established church." 
Thus, from the point of view of pro gress, Egyptian and 
Babylonian societies were involved by the urban revolution 
in a hopeless contradiction. And they bequeathed this con- 
tradiction to the various successor states-Hittites, Assyrians, 
Persians, Macedonians-that took them as models. The cre- 
ative work of the Greeks in applied and theoretical science 
begins long before the "golden age," when a nominal democ- 
racy had become rather a privileged minority, living largely 
on the labor of aliens and slaves and the tribute of subject 
states. It was when the Greeks were just emerging from the 
dark e after the fall of Minoan-Mycenaean civilization that 
the sClntific traditions of the Orient were transformed by a 
new spirit. At this time in cities already reorganized for trade 
and industry, the wealth from these pursuits balanced that of 
landed aristocracies but was not yet unduly concentrated, 
while a simple alphabetic script made learning accessible to a 
wide public. 
In addition to the internal contradiction just explained, the 
ancient Oriental civilizations were involved in an external con- 
tradiction of a similar nature. As we have seen, neither the 
Nile Valley nor Babylonia was self-sufficing. Even when united 
in a single political and economic system, each country was 

18 4 
c ., "". . 
THE ACCELERATION' AND RETARDATION OF' PRdGRSS 
forced to rely for essential raw materials on imports from 
regions occupied by different societies. The necessary imports 
had presumably once been obtained by a free exchange of 
surplus products. But reasons have been given for the belief 
that the supplies thus obtained did not suffice to meet the de- 
mands of Egyptians and Sumerians, enriched by the urban 
revolution. 
They accordingly attempted to expedite and regularize 
deliveries by force; armies followed the routes opened up by 
merchant caravans. Eventually attempts were made to annex 
the sources of supplies and to conquer the exporting countries. 
As the rulers of Sumerian cities had aimed at giving a political 
form to the geographical unity of Babylonia by subjugating 
neighboring cities, so they sought to extend their domains by 
annexing geographically distinct regions essential to the 
stability of their economy. They came thus to embark upon 
a course of imperialist conquest. The Empire founded by 
Sargon of Agade about 2500 B.C. is the first recorded realiza- 
tion of this endeavor. 
It is not, of course, asserted that the conqueror was con- 
sciously inspired by deliberate economic calculations. But his 
conquests did, in fact, tend to the results here indicated. And 
Sargon's empire, although transitory, became the model for 
all Oriental imperialisms. Throughout the Ancient East 
Sargon's conquests became an ideal and the conqueror himself 
a hero of romance. A thousand years after the disintegration 
of his empire, literary panegyrics on his prowess were circulat- 
ing throughout the Ancient World. Fragments of such com- 
positions have been dug up at the Egyptian capital of Tell el 
Amarna and at the Hittite capital of Boghaz Keui. Sargon set 
a standard which his immediate successors, the kings of Dr and 
then of Babylon, after 1600 B.C. the Egyptians, the Hittites, 
the Assyrians, the Lydians, the Medes, the Persians, and the 
Macedonians were fain to imitate. 
Now these successive but short-lived empires undoubtedly 
contributed to human progress. While they lasted, they 
guaranteed over wide areas internal peace and security 
favorable to the accumulation of wealth. They ensured for the 
great industrial centers adequate supplies of raw materials. 
They spread abroad the economic advantages of the urban 
revolution and the advances in appJied science that accom- 
panied it. The ways of communication essential to the main- 
tenance of an empire were channels for diffusion. It was along 
them that learned men traveled in the fifteenth and fourteenth 
centuries B.C. and that Greek physicians and geographers went 
to Babylon and Susa a thousand years later. The imperial 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 185 
generals themselves studied the botany and zoology of the 
conquered territories, and recorded their observations on re- 
turning home. Thus knowledge was accumulated and recorded. 
But the instability of these empires discloses a contradiction 
within them; the persistence with which the subject peoples 
revolted is a measure of their gratitude for the benefits just 
recited, and perhaps of the latter's value too. Presumably the 
benefits were more than outweighed by disabilities. In reality 
an empire of the Sargon type probably did directly destroy 
more wealth than it indirectly created. 
The first boast of an Oriental conqueror in his inscriptions 
is the booty in animals, metal, jewels, and slaves that he has 
brought home. Such plunder did not increase the total wealth 
available for human enjoyment. At best it effected a redistribu- 
tion of existing resources and released hoarded treasures. But 
mostly it meant transferring wealth from poorer societies to 
courts already glutted with a superfluity. Thereafter the 
victor's main concern was to exact a regular tribute from the 
vanquished peoples. 
In a general way the empires thus established were mere 
tribute-collecting machines. Normally the imperial govern- 
ment interfered in the internal affairs of subject peoples only 
in so far as was necessary to ensure obedience and the regular 
payment of taxes. The monarch was concerned with the 
prosperity and good government of his domains only if such 
conditions promoted the collection of revenue. And quite 
certainly Oriental monarchies were created by war, main- 
tained by continual war, and eventually destroyed by war. 
N ow warfare has undoubtedly served as a potent incentive 
to new discoveries that could be applied also to peaceful ends; 
we saw in the last chapter how its exigencies stimulated the 
ingenuity even of mathematicians. Admittedly, too, militarism 
was necessary both to protect the achievements of civilization 
against the envious attacks of slothful barbarians and to 
spread the blessings of civilization itself. But it did not even 
succeed in either direction. 
Despite all their standing armies and military equipment 
the Sumerian and Akkadian states were impotent to repel the 
assaults of less prosperous and less civilized peoples. Sargon's 
Empire fell before invaders from Gutium, and thereafter the 
land was overrun in turn by Elamites, Amorites, Hittites, 
Kassites, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and Macedonians. 
The punitive expeditions and elaborate frontier defenses of 
the Old and Middle Kingdoms could not permanently protect 
the Nile Valley from invasion. The New Empire was founded 
better to defend the frontiers by advancing them. It was over- 
! 

f 
1186 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 
\ thrown by the onslaughts of Philistines, Libyans, and other 
,barbarians who had been trained in "civilized warfare" as 
\mercenaries in the imperial armies. And thereafter the Nile 
!Valley itself was occupied by Libyans, Nubians, Assyrians, 
: Persians, and Macedonians. Such was the security obtained 
:by ever-increasing expenditure on armaments and application 
of the maxim "the best defense is attack"! 
As a civilizing force militarism's record is equally disap- 
pointing. Resistance to imperialist aggression did, as explained 
on p. 140, induce barbarians to adopt some arts of civilization, 
notably metallurgy. But in most cases they adopted only so 
much of the higher culture as was needed for military equip- 
ment. And that equipment was promptly turned against the 
imperialist apostles of civilization. The ultimate results of the 
"civilizing missions" undertaken by Sargon and his imitators 
were successful raids by barbarians on the centers of civiliza- 
tion; a few of these were mentioned above. And each raid 
and invasion destroyed men, squandered wealth, and at least 
temporarily put back the clock of progress. 
The apparent arrest of growth, already alluded to, may be 
partly due to these circumstances. The period after the urban 
revolution is certainly one in which organized warfare is re- 
peatedly attested both by written records and by the prominent 
place henceforth assumed by armaments in the achaeological 
record. Before the revolution unmistakable weapons of war 
were, as explained on p. 108, far from conspicuous. Yet it was 
just then that progress was proceeding most rapidly. Had 
organized warfare been such an essential spur to progress, a 
reversal of the above relations would have been expected. 
And biologically the slaughter of increasing numbers of 
members of the human species cannot well have promoted the 
multiplication of that species. Yet that has been our final test 
of pro gress. 
Almost from the outset of his career, it would seem, man 
used his distinctively human faculties not only to make sub- 
stantial tools for use upon the real world, but also to imagine 
supernatural forces that he could employ upon it. He was, that 
is, simultaneously trying to understand, and so utilize, natural 
processes and peopling the real world with imaginary beings, 
conceived in his own image, that he hoped to coerce or cajole. 
He was building up science and superstition side by side. 
The superstitions man devised and the fictitious entities he 
imagined were presumably necessary to make him feel at 
home in his environment and to make life bearable. Never- 
theless the pursuit of the vain hopes and illusory short cuts 
suggested by magic and religion repeatedly deterred man 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 187 
from the harder road to the control of Nature by understand- 
ing. Magic seemed easier than science, just as torture is less 
trouble than the collection of evidence. 
Magic and religion constituted the scaffolding needed to 
support the rising structure of social organization and of 
science. Unhappily the scaffolding repeatedly cramped the ex- 
ecution of the design and impeded the progress of the per- 
manent building. It even served to support a sham facade 
behind which the substantial structure was threatened with 
decay. The urban revolution, made possible by science, was ex- 
ploited by superstition. The principal beneficiaries from the 
achievements of farmers and artisans were priests and kings. 
Magic rather than science was thereby enthroned and in- 
vested with the authority of temporal power. 
It is as futile to deplore the superstitions of the past as it 
is to complain of the unsightly scaffolding essential to the 
erection of a lovely building. It is childish to ask why man did 
not progress straight from the squalor of a "pre-class" society 
to the glories of a classless paradise, nowhere fully realized as 
yet. Perhaps the conflicts and contradictions, above revealed, 
themselves constitute the dialectics of progress. In any case, 
they are facts of history. If we dislike them, that does not mean 
that progress is a delusion, but merely that we have under- 
stood neither the facts nor progress nor man. Man made the 
superstitions and the institutions of oppression as much as h 
made the sciences and the instruments of production. In both 
alike he was expressing himself, finding himself, making him- 
self. 
The word "race," the reader will note, has hardly been 
mentioned in this book. In particular, in an attempt to ex- 
plain, even briefly, the rise of agriculture, the foundation of 
States, or the growth of sciences, it was found unnecessary to 
invoke peculiar psychological endowments, inherited along 
with bodily characteristics by the human groups active in those 
directions. A popular theory attributes an innate "capacity for 
leadership" to a hypothetical "Nordic race." It would have 
been easy to "explain" in this way the progress of mathematics 
in Babylonia as due to a "mathematical talent" inborn in 
Sumerians or Semites. ("The Egyptians' genius for . . ." is 
an too often mentioned in quite serious works.) But such a 
procedure would not have been scientific explanation. In 
practice it is only a restatement in pompous language of the 
fact that some Sumerians were actually good accountants. 
At best it might mean that some inexplicable and undemon- 
strable mutation in the germ plasm of hypothetical ancestors, 

188 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 
transmitted to the Sumerrans, produced a brain and nervous 
system that facilitated the processes of reckoning. 
High-sounding terms that give confusion the semblance of 
logic and un demonstrable postulates have alike been avoided 
here. We have instead tried to show how certain societies in 
the process of adjusting themselves to their environments 
were led to create States and mathematical sciences by apply- 
ing distinctively human faculties, common to all men. Under 
certain conditions, a State and mathematics were necessary to 
enable men to live, prosper, and multiply. No change in germ 
plasm, introduced by unknown non-human agencies, had to 
be assumed. 
At the same time, the achievements we have sought to ex- 
plain were not automatic responses to an environment, not 
adjustments imposed indiscriminately on all societies by forces 
outside them. All the adjustments we have considered in detail 
were made by specific societies, each with its own distinctive 
history. In the course of its history, the society had built up 
traditional rules of behavior and a stock of craft lore or practi- 
cal sciences. It was the application of these rules and sciences 
to the particular environment that determined the form of 
the adjustment under examination. 
The differences between Egyptian and Sumerian political 
organizations and mathematical techniques are explicable by 
the divergent histories of the two societies, not simply by the 
contrast between the Nile Valley and the Tigris-Euphrates 
plain, still less by hereditary disparities in nervous mechanisms. 
Now it is the social traditions, shaped by the community's 
history, that determine the general behavior of the society's 
members. The differences in behavior exhibited by members 
of two societies, viewed collectively, are due to the divergent 
histories of the two societies. But it is just this average be- 
havior that a science of racial psychology might study; only by 
a perversion from its scientific aims could it deduce therefrom 
"innate faculties." 
Actually, we have seen (p. 117 fI.) that this behavior is 
not innate. It is not even immutably fixed by the environment. 
It is conditioned by social tradition. But just because tradition 
is created by societies of men and transmitted in distinctively 
human and rational ways, it is not fixed and immutable: it is 
constantly changing as society deals with ever new circum- 
stances. Tradition makes the man, by circumscribing his be- 
havior within certain bounds; but it is equally true that man 
makes the traditions. And so, we can repeat with deeper in- 
sight, "Man makes himself." 

Note on Chronology 
DATES in years before 3000 B.C. are just guesses, and are rarely 
given. For the next thousand years several systems of chro- 
nology are in vogue both for Egypt and Mesopotamia. I have 
adopted in each country what is usually called a short chro- 
nology: in Egypt I accept the reductions in the Berlin system 
proposed by Scharff, and in Mesopotamia I have followed 
Sidney Smith and Frankfort. The dates here given accordingly 
differ by from 200 to 450 years from those given by Breasted, 
Hall, or Peet for Egypt, and Contenau or Woolley for Mesopo- 
tamia. It makes not the slightest difference to any argument in 
this book whether a long or a short chronology be adopted, 
provided it be applied both to Egypt and Mesopotamia. That 
the relative dates are correct for both countries I feel fairly 
confident. 
It has been convenient in each case to follow the native 
annalists of both countries in dividing up history on a political 
basis into dynasties. In Egypt the modern practice of desig- 
nating the periods of greatness as Old, Middle, and New 
Kingdoms has also been followed. The following table will ex- 
plain tbe usage of these terms and dates. All dates are given in 
round figures. 
189 

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE FOR 
EGYPT AND MESOPOTAMIA 
EGYPT 
 'raSian 
Badarian 
Prehis- Amratian 
toric ) Gerzean 
 Semainian 
2950 to . 
2750 \ Dynasties I-II 
 I)vnastv III } 
2750 O)'nasty IV OLD 
2100 (Pyrmids) KInO'f 
,Dynasties V-VI 
2300 to} Dvnasties VII- 
2000 l "XI 
2000   
to Dvnast XII MIDDLE 
1750 ., Y KINGDOM 
1750 Dynasties XIII- 
to XVI I (i ncl. 
1600 H yksos) ) 
NEW 
1600 to Dvnasties ( KINGDOM 
1100 XVIII-XX J 
MESOPOTAMIA 
al Ubaid ) 
Prehis- 
( toric 
J emdet N asr ) 
Uruk 
 2850 
Early Dynastic to 
2350 
Dynasty of 2350 to 
Agade (Sargon) 2250 
Dynasties of 2250 to 
Dr, Isin, etc. 1900 
Dynasty I of 1900 
Babylon to 
(I-Iammurabi) 1600 
Kassi te 
Dynasty 
1600 to 
1150 
GEOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
Egypt is the Nile valley from the first cataract to the Medi- 
terranean. The part south of Cairo is roughly Upper Egypt, 
that lying to the north, Lower Egypt. 
Mesopotamia is taken as equivalent to the modern Iraq; it 
includes: 
Assyria-roughly the triangle between the Tigris and the 
Zab round Mosul-and 
Babylonia-the region between the Tigris and Euphrates 
south of Samarra. It is subdivided into: 
Akkad, north of Diwaniyeh, and 
Sumer, south thereof. 
190 

INDEX 
ABSTRACT THINKING, 32, 57, 154 
accounts, 118-119,143,146,151 
agriculture, 100 (d. garden culture, 
cultivation) 
alphabetic writin. 146, 180 
amulets, 93-94, 170 
anatomy, 56-57, 174-175 
areas, calculation of, 120, 156, 163-164, 
164 ff. 
army, see soldiers 
art, 54, 74, 85, 120, 132-133, 166 
asses, 103 
astronomy, 48, 86, 104, 111-112, 170, 
172 ff. 
Aurignacians, 33-34, 43, 53 
BANKS, 124 
barley, 60-61, 65 
batter, calculations of, 132, 162 
behavior, 25 
boats, 13, 30, 99, 120, 129, 137 
brain, 24, 27, 29 
bricks, 91 
Bronze Age, 14, 34 
bronze, discovery of, 120 
burials, 49-50, 73, 85, 122, 130-131 
Byblos, 129, 137 
CALENDAR, 48, 86, 110-111, 126, 127, 
152 
capital, 69, 89, 106 
cave dwellings, 22, 47, 53, 61 
cereals, cultivation of, 59 ff. 
chemistry, 13, 34, 46, 76-77, 81, 98, 
120, 152 
children, 23, 29-31, 61-62 
cities, 35, 133-134 
clans, 84, 127 
classes, 116, 12 5, 12 6, 129, 13 5, 13 7, 
149-150, 181-182 
clocks, 168, 171 ff. 
coercive powers, 90, 114, 127 
collective enterprises, 49, 67, 81, 88-89, 
91 
concentration of wealth, 107, 119, 124, 
125, 126, 135 
conquest, 105, 106, 128 
conservatism, see laziness 
convention in language, writing, and 
ciphering, 29-31, 144-145, 147, 
154, 162 
copper, 14,35,95-97,115,121,125, 
129, 138, 142 
core industries, 48 
corporation, 107, 118, 124, 143, 148 
crafts, see specialization of labor 
cultivation, see cereals, garden culture, 
etc. 
DEATH, views of, 50, 128 
decimal notation, 155 
defense, 129-130, 186 
determinatives. 145 
dictionaries, 145, 152 
diffusion of culture, 30, 65-66, 74-75, 
82-83, 102-103, 104, 114, 135-136, 
141-142, 177, 185 
division, 159-160 
domestication of animals, 59, 67-69, 103 
dramas, 86, 123-124, 127 
ECLIPSES, 174 
education, 23-24, 29, 81, 145, 152-153, 
187 
See also schools 
environment, adaptation to, 16, 24, 26, 
43, 53, 57-60, 105, 186-187 
Eoanthropus, see Piltdown man 
Erech, 39, 89, 11 7 -122, 144, 1 55 
experiment, 68, 120-121, 172,183 
FAMILY, 29, 48, 61 
farming (mixed), 69, 87, 91-92 
Fayum, 62, 71, 73, 75 
figurines, female, 56, 85 
fire, control of, 23, 27,45,46-47 
, production of, 47 
fishing, 13, 54, 63, 70, 89, 92, 103, 114, 
133-134, 137 
fitness, 15, 17, 20 
flake industries, 48 
flood, Nile, 65-66, 88, 110, 127 
fossil men, 26, 33 
fractions, 156-157, 180 
GARDEN CULTURE, 64, 73, 82, 88, 114 
geology, 13, 34, 119 
, relation to prehistory, 11, 15 
geometry, 162 ff. 
gods, 118, 123-124, 128 
HAMMURABI, 126, 150, 170 
heredity, 20, 22, 25, 26 
hieroglyphics, 147 
hoe-cultivation, see garden culture 
horse, 103 
hunting, 49, 51, 53-54, 63, 71, 87, 92, 
114, 133 
ICE AGES, 22, 24,33,40,47,59 
ideograms, 145-146, 162 
ideology, 82, 106 
immorta1ity, 127-128 
imperialism, 138, 141-143, 184 
Indus civilization, 116, 121, 134, 141. 
177 
Indutrial Revolution, 15 
instinct, 20, 25, 29, 30-31 
interest, 124, 161 
Iron Age, 14, 34 
iron workin, 35,98-99, 120-121, 181 
irrigation, 65, 69, 88, 115 
JAVA man, 28 
191 

Jemdet Nasr, 117, 119, 124, 144, 155 
Jewels, magic of, 93-94 
KINOS, 84, 86, 90, 109, 111, 122, 124- 
125, 126-127, 134, 182 
Kish, 11 7, 122 
LANGUAGE, 29-33 
law codes, 126 
laziness, mental, 31, 105 
loans, 124, 143 
loom, 80 
lore, 46 fi. 
MACHINES, 51, 53-54, 80, 100, 101-102 
Magdalenians, 33, 43, 53, 57 
magic, 32, 43, 50-51, 54, 55, 81, 84, 
93, 127, 130, 174, 175, 182 
manufactures, exported, 121, 135, 137, 
138 
manuring, 64, 68-69 
ma the matics, 91, 1 54-170 
measurement, 132, 153 
Medicine, 174-176 
l\1enes, 126-30, 137, 147 
Mesolithic Age, 42 
metallurgy, 95 ft., 108-109, 141, 142 
milk, 68-69, 71, 103 
mining, 35, 97-99, 129 
multiplication, 158-160 
music, 120, 125 
NATUFIANS, 61. 76 
nomadism, 63, 70, 87, 108 
numerals, 119-120, 135, 160 
OMAN. 121, 125 
organization of knowledge, 143, 150- 
151,167,175-176 
PASTORALISM, 70, 92, 105, 114 
peace, 129, 185 
Pekin man, 28, 45 
pictographic writing, 119, 124, 142, 
144, 147 
Piltdown man, 26, 27, 28, 29 
Pithecanthropus, see Java man 
place value, 160 
planning, 118, 125, 131, 133, 134 
population, growth of, 16, 17-18, 26.27, 
34-36, 49, 51, 61, 71, 100, 116, 
133-134, 137, 186 
pottery, 76-79,101-102,117,139 
precession of equinoxes, 173 
Pr
most, 51, 52, 56 
pyramids. 131, 164, 166 
Pythagoras' theorem, 165-166 
QUADRATIC EQUATIONS, 169 
RACES, 51, 187 
resea
ch, 151. 159, 167, 172 
riding, 102-103 
SAIL, 104 
Sargon of Agade, 126, 139-140, 185 
schools, 56, 145, 149, 150, 152-153, 
159, 161 


science, applied, 13, 34, 45, 51, 80, 
104, 120-121, 131, 135, 136, 149, 
178-179 
scribes, 115, 147, 149, 152, 183 
seals, 94, 130, 135, 138, 142 
self-sufficing communities, 14, 72, 74" 
81, 92, 94, 97, 137, 140 
Semitic languages, 123, 146, 151 
serfs, 70, 107, 182 
sexagesimal notation, 155, 161 
sexes, division of labor between, 81, 
100, 102, 138 
Shuruppak, 117, 145 
Sinai, 92, 129, 138 
Sinantkropu$, see Pekin man 
slaves, 109, 122, 182 
soldiers, 35, 115, 125, 129, 141 
speciaJization of labor, 13, 35, 56, 71, 
80, 87, 92, 97, 100, 102, 115, 118, 
126, 134, 137, 182-183 
specialization of organisms, 24 
speech, 28, 29, 49 
standardization of weights, etc., 154 
State enterprises. 125, 129 
Stone Age, 13, 34, 41-42, 75 
stone tools, significance of, 13, 75, 96, 
99, 108-109, 138, 140, 142 
Sumerian language, 123, 146, 151 
surgery, 175-177 
surplus (of food), 13, 14, 71, 90, 92, 
97, 100, 107, 110, 118, 125, 126, 
131, 133-134, 137, 138, 140, 182 
Tabu. 94 
tell, 39, 117 
temples, 116, 123, 137, 140 
terminology, mathematical, 161 
textiles, 80 
time, archeological, 39, 41 
, division of, 171 ff. 
, geological, 39 
tin, 98, 120, 139 
totems, 43, 84, 127-128 
trade, 14, 35, 54. 74, 87, 92, 94, 11
, 
126, 134, 137, 142, 155, 159, 183 
tradition, 21, 24, 27, 30, 47, 81, 97 
transport, 102-105 
transubstantiation, 77 


UR, 116, 117, 120, 122 
VEHICLES, 100, 121, 139 
volume, calculation of. 91, 164 


WAGES, 124, 132, 176 
war, 85, 108, 126, 139, 185 
weights, 134, 153 
wheat, 60-61 
wheel, 100 fi., 117, 138, 140, 142 
wool, 65 
writing, 27, 120, 123, 131, 138, 139, 
144-151,177,180 


ZERO, sign for, 156, 178 
ziggurat, 117, 119 
zoology, 47, 56-57 




