SIXTH PRINTING, DECEMBER, 1958 
MENTOR BOOKS are published by 
The New American Library of World Literature, Inc. 
501 Madison Avenue, New York 22, New York 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

Preface 


THIS book is not intended to be a manual of 
archaeology, still less of the history of science. 
It is meant to be readable to those who are 
not concerned with the detailed problems about 
which specialists argue heatedly. It must there- 
fore ignore such problems, and avoid, more- 
over, the technical terms and outlandish names 
that make textbooks on prehistory (including 
my own) scientific, but hard to follow. But to 
simplify the argument and the vocabulary I have 
had to sacrifice accuracy. Almost every state- 
ment in prehistory should be qualified by the 
phrase: "On the evidence available today the 
balance of probability favors the view that." 
The reader is hereby requested to insert this or 
some similar reservation in most of my state- 
ments. Not all my assertions would be generally 
accepted even with that qualification; but it has 
been impossible to cumber the text with detailed 
arguments irrelevant to the main thesis. I still 
contend that the facts are stated accurately 
enough for the purposes of this book, and that 
acceptable amendments would not affect the 
argument in any way. And finally I confess 
that, while Chapters IV to VII are based on 
first-hand study of the original objects, and re- 
ports, Chapter VIII uses exclusively translations 
and commentaries by competent authorities 
cited in the notes. 




Contents 


CHAPTER PAGE 
Preface v 
I. Human and Natural History 9 
II. Organic Evolution and Cultural 
Progress 20 
III. Time Scales J7 
IV. Food Gatherers 45 
v. The Neolithic Revolution 59 
VI. Prelude to the Second Revolution 87 
VII. The Urban Revolution 114 
VIII. The Revolution in Human 
Knowledge 143 
IX. The Acceleration and Retardation 
of Progress 180 
Note on Chronology 189 
Chronological Table for Egypt 
and Mesopotamia 190 
Index 191 




Illustrations 
FIGURE PAGE 
An Egyptian Sailing Ship of the 
Old Kingdom viii 
1. Graph of the Estimated Population 
of Great Britain, 1500-1800 18 
2. Engraving of a Mammoth by Con- 
temporary Artist in a French Cave 23 
3. Archers and Arrows in a Stone Age 
Painting from Southeast Spain 52 
4. Neolithic Hoes 62 
5. Plowing, Milking, and Hoeing in 
Ancient Egypt 101 
6. Early Sumerian War Chariot 102 
7. Sketch Map of the Cradles of 
Civilization 113 
8. Goldsmith's Workshop from an Old 
Kingdom Tomb Painting 133 
9. Diagram to Illustrate the Formula 
for "Batter" 162 
10. Babylonian Field Plan 163 
11. Exact Copy of Figure from Mosco\v 
Papyrus, Reversed and with Sym- 
bols Transliterated 165 

AN EGYPTIAN SAILING SHIP OF THE OLD KINGDOM. 

CHAPTER I 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
LAST century "progress" was accepted as a fact. Trade was ex- 
panding, the productivity of industry was increasing, wealth 
was accumulating. Scientific discoveries promised a boundless 
advance in man's control over Nature, and consequently un- 
limited possibilities of further production. Growing prosperity 
and deepening knowledge inspired an atmosphere of unprec- 
edented optimism throughout the Western world. Now that 
optimism has received a rude shock. World War I and subse- 
quent crises, producing even in the midst of horrible poverty 
an apparent surplus of goods, have undermined its economic 
foundations. Doubts as to the reality of "progress" are widely 
entertained. 
To settle their doubts men should turn to history. But his- 
torians themselves are not unaffected by the economic situa- 
tion of their day. As Professor Bury has shown, the idea of 
progress was itself a novelty, entirely foreign to medieval or 
ancient writers on history. Today in history, as in natural 
science, a pessimistic or mystical attitude is conspicuous in the 
writings of many popular authors. Some are inclined, like the 
Ancient Greeks and Romans, to look back wistfully to a 
"golden age" of primeval simplicity. The German "historical 
school" of Roman Catholic missionaries and their archaeologi- 
cal and anthropological instructors have revived and reclothed 
in scientific terms the medieval doctrine of the "Fall of Man" 
through tasting of the tree of knowledge. A similar outlook is 
implicit in some writings of the English diffusionists. On the 
other hand, the Fascist philosophy, expounded most openly by 
Herr Hitler and his academic supporters, but sometimes mas- 
querading as eugenics in Britain and America, identifies prog- 
ress with a biological evolution no less mystically conceived. 
One purpose of this book is to suggest that, viewed from an 
impersonal scientific standpoint, history may still justify a 
belief in progress in days of depression as well as in the hey- 
day of last century's prosperity. But to achieve the necessary 
scientific attitude we must be prepared to modify our concep- 
tions both of progress and of history. The essence of the 

]0 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
scientific attitude is, indeed, the abandonment of personal 
prejudices and the subordination of private likes and dislikes. 
"The function of science is the classification of facts, the 
recognition of their sequence and relative significance." The 
scientific attitude is shown in the habit of forming judgments 
on the facts unbiased by personal feeling. "The scientific man," 
says Karl Pearson, "has to strive at self-elimination in his 
judgments." Incidentally the importance attached by scien- 
tists to number and measurement is not unconnected with the 
obligation to adopt an impersonal attitude. "The results of 
measurement," as Professor Levy remarks, "will be entirely 
independent of any religious, ethical, or social bias. Whether 
you like or dislike the words on this page, you will agree that 
the number is 322." 
To approach history in this humble and objective spirit is 
not so easy. As scientists we cannot ask History: "Have we 
progressed? Does the multiplication of mechanical devices 
represented by airplanes, hydroelectric stations, poison gas, 
and submarines constitute progress?" A question so formulat- 
ed can have no scientific meaning. There is no hope of any 
agreement upon its answer. That would depend entirely upon 
the caprice of the inquirer, his economic situation at the time, 
and even on the state of his health. Very few people will come 
to the same conclusion. 
If you like rapid movement and the freedom from limita- 
tions on time and space provided by modern facilities for 
locomotion and illumination, you may answer in the affirma- 
tive. But not unless you are in an economic position to enjoy 
such facilities, not if your lungs have been filled with mustard 
gas, or your son has just been blown to pieces with a shell. If 
you have a romantic affection for the "unspoiled countryside" 
and no passion for roaming far abroad or turning night into 
day for study, you will query the reality of a progress thus 
attested, and look back regretfully upon the "more peaceful" 
days of a century or two ago. You will conveniently forget the 
drawbacks to the simple life-the vermin in the picturesque 
thatch, the disease-germs swarming in contaminated wells and 
open middens, the bandits and the press-gangs lurking in the 
woods and alleys. Dumped down in a village in Turkestan, 
you might revise your opinion. A pickpocket must regard 
from his professional standpoint electric light, the telephone, 
and automobiles (if used by the police) as signs of regression. 
He will sigh for the dark and narrow alleys of a previous 
century. Persons devoted to the grosser forms of cruelty will 
not accept the suppression of legal torture and the elimination 
of public executions as signs of progress, but of the reverse. 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
II 
It is unscientific to ask, "Have we progressed?," if only be- 
cause no two people need give the same answer; the personal 
equation can hardly be eliminated. But it may be legitimate to 
ask, "What is progress?," and the answer may even take on 
something of the numerical form that science so rightly prizes. 
But now progress becomes what has actually happened-the 
content of history. The business of the historian would be to 
bring out the essential and significant in the long and complex 
series of events with which he is confronted. But to distinguish 
and unpick the thread of progress, if such there be, running 
through history requires a view of history very different from 
that set out in the formal textbooks in my schooldays. In the 
first place, a long and wide view is essential. When short 
periods or confined regions alone are surveyed, the multiplicity 
of separate events is likely to obscure any underlying pattern. 
Before 1914, at least, history meant to most people "British 
history." It began with the Anglo-Saxons, or even with the 
Norman Conquest, and so embraced a period of at most 1500 
and often 800 years. Quite a number of people were acquaint- 
ed with another volume of history labeled "ancient history." 
It dealt with the fortunes of the Greeks (or more precisely of 
two Greek cities, Athens and Sparta) and of the Romans. It 
was generally presented and taught as if it had no vital con- 
nection with British history, from which it was separated by a 
mysterious gap. Many people are now aware that these two 
still popular volumes are not really self-contained and inde- 
penden t, but form a small part of a connected series. Such 
have at least heard of earlier volumes in which Minoans, Hit- 
tites, Egyptians, and Sumerians figure. The period covered by 
the whole series is now fully four times that of British history 
in the fullest sense. Quite recently prehistory has become 
familiar as an introductory volume. It traces the fortunes-or 
some aspects thereof-of peoples who kept no written records. 
In particular, it deals with the period before the earliest writ- 
ten documents begin in Egypt and Babylonia. By the inclusion 
of prehistory the purview of history is extended a hundredfold. 
\Ve survey a period of over 500,000 years, instead of a beggar- 
ly 5000. And at the same time human history joins on to 
natural history. Through prehistory history is seen growing 
out of the "natural sciences" of biology, paleontology, and 
geology. 
As long as history is restricted in its scope to comparatively 
brief periods like those of British history or ancient history, 
ups and downs seem much more conspicuous than any steady 
progress. In ancient history we learnt about the "Rise and Fall" 
of Athens and Sparta and Rome. I confess I was not quite sure 

12 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
what was a "rise" and what a "fall." The history of Athens 
from 600 to 450 B.C. was presented as a rise, the next century 
as a fall. The subsequent centuries, omitted altogether from 
schoolbooks, were presumably an age of darkness and death. 
It was disconcerting to notice that Aristotle flourished near 
325 B.C. and that some of the greatest Greek scientists-doc- 
tors, mathematicians, astronomers, and geographers-worked 
in the supposedly dead hinterland of "classical" Greek history. 
Greek civilization was not dead, though Athens had declined 
in political power; and Athens' contributions to a wider Hel- 
lenism survived. The "rise" of Rome was represented by the 
period during which, by ruthlessness and even fraud, a group 
of obscure villages on the Tiber became the capital of an em- 
pire embracing the whole Mediterranean basin, France, Eng- 
land, and a large slice of Central Europe. But eventually this 
vast domain was pacified, and Rome secured to her subjects 
two centuries of comparative peace, unprecedented in Europe. 
But these centuries, discreetly omitted from schoolbooks, we 
were left to imagine as an era of "decline." 
In British history the ups and downs are only slightly less 
glaring or more rational. The age of Elizabeth was "golden" 
because the English were successful as pirates against the 
Spaniards, burned chiefly Catholics at the stake, and patron- 
ized Shakespeare's plays. The seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies were comparatively inglorious, though Newton adorned 
the former and J ames Watt the latter. 
In fact, ancient history and British history tended to be 
presented exclusively as political history-a record of the 
maneuvers of kings, statesmen, soldiers, and religious teach- 
ers, of wars and persecutions, of the growth of political institu- 
tions and ecclesiastical systems. Incidental allusions were in- 
deed made to economic conditions, scientific discoveries, or 
artistic movements in each "period," but the "periods" were 
defined in political terms by the names of dynasts or party 
factions. That sort of history could hardly become scientific. 
No standard of comparison is manifest in it independent of 
the prejudices of the individual teacher. The age of Elizabeth 
is "golden" primarily to a member of the Church of England. 
To a Roman Catholic periods when Protestants were burned 
inevitably seem preferable. And such history restricts its own 
field hopelessly. Prehistory can find no place in it. For, since 
prehistory lacks all written evidence, it can never recover the 
names of its actors or discern the details of their p,rivate lives. 
It can seldom give names even to the peoples whose wander- 
ings some prehistorians try to trace. 
Fortunately the exclusive claim of political history to the 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
13 
title is no longer unchallenged. Marx insisted on the prime 
importance of economic conditions, of the social forces of 
production, and of applications of science as factors in histori- 
cal change. His realist conception of history is gaining accept- 
ance in academic circles remote from the party passions in- 
flamed by other aspects of Marxism. To the general public 
and to scholars alike, history is tending to become cultural 
history, greatly to the annoyance of fascists like Dr. Frick. 
This sort of history can naturally be linked up with what is 
termed prehistory. The archaeologist collects, classifies, and 
compares the tools and weapons of our ancestors and forerun- 
ners, examines the houses they built, the fields they tilled, the 
food they ate (or rather discarded). These are the tools and 
instruments of production, characteristic of economic systems 
that no written document describes. Like any modern machine 
or construction, these ancient relics and monuments are ap- 
plications of contemporary knowledge or science existing 
when they were fashioned. In a liner results of geology (oil, 
metal-ores), botany (timbers), chemistry (alloys, oil-refin- 
ing), and physics (electrical equipment, engines, etc.) are 
combined, applied, and crystallized. That is equally true of 
the dugout canoe fashioned by Stone Age man from a single 
treetrunk. 
Again, the ship and the tools employed in its production 
symbolize a whole economic and social system. The modern 
ship requires the assemblage at one centre of a variety of raw 
materials brought from many places, often distant; it presup- 
poses an extensive and efficient system of communications. Its 
production involves the co-operation of large bodies of work- 
ers, each specialized in distinct crafts, but all acting together 
in accordance with a common plan and under centralized 
direction. Moreover, none of these workers are producing 
their own food by hunting, fishing, or farming. They are 
nourished by the surplus produced by other specialists devoted 
exclusively to the production or collection of foodstuffs, and 
again often living far away. The canoe, the lineal ancestor of 
our liner, also implies an economy, a social organization, but 
a very different and far simpler one. The only tool required is 
a stone adze that can be made at home by the worker out of a 
pebble from the nearest brook. The ship's timbers are provided 
by a local tree. In felling the tree, hewing it out, and dragging 
the result to the water, the co-operation of several workers 
may be necessary. But the numbers required are quite small, 
and need not exceed the bounds of a family group. Finally, a 
canoe may perfectly wen be made by fishermen or peasants in 
the intervals of their primary avocation of getting food for 

14 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
themselves and their children. It does not presuppose imported 
foodstuffs, nor even an accumulated communal surplus, but 
is a symbol of an economy of self-sufficing communities or 
households. Such an economy can be seen at work today 
among barbarous tribes. Archaeologists can define a period 
when it was apparently the sole economy, the sole organiza- 
tion of production ruling anywhere on the earth's surface. 
History, extended backwards by prehistory, can thus compare 
the systems of production in vogue at widely separated points 
in the great space of time it surveys. 
Again, archaeology can observe changes in the economic 
system, improvements in the means of production, and exhibit 
them in a chronological sequence. The archaeologist's divi- 
sions of the prehistoric period into Stone, Bronze, and Iron 
Apes are not altogether arbitrary. They are based upon the 
materials used for cutting implements, especially axes, and 
snch implements are among the most important tools of pro- 
duction. Realistic history insists upon their significance in 
molding and determining social systems and economic organ- 
ization. Moreover, the stone axe, the tool distinctive of part 
at least of the Stone Age, is the homemade product that could 
be fashioned and used by anybody in a self-contained group 
of hunters or peasants. It implies neither specialization of 
labor nor trade beyond the group. The bronze axe which re- 
places it is not only a superior implement, it also presupposes 
a more complex economic and social structure. The casting of 
bronze is too difficult a process to be carried out by anyone 
in the intervals of growing or catching his food or minding 
her babies. It is a specialist's job, and these specialists must 
rely for such primary necessities as food upon a surplus pro- 
duced by other specialists. Again, the copper and tin of which 
the bronze axe is composed are comparatively rare, and very 
seldom occur together. One or both of the constituents will 
almost certainly have to be imported. Such importation is pos- 
sible only if some sort of communications and trade have been 
established and if there is a surplus of some local product to 
barter for the metals (for details see p. 35). 
To this extent the changes on which archaeologists are wont 
to insist do correspond to the changes in forces of production, 
in economic structure and social organization, which are 
recorded in written documents and appreciated as fundamen- 
tal by realist history. In fact, archaeology can and does trace 
out radical changes in human economy, in the social system 
of production. These changes are similar in kind to those upon 
which the realist conception of history insists as factors in 
historical change. In their effect upon humanity as a whole 

HUMAN A.ND NATURAL HISTORY 
15 
some prehistoric changes at least are comparable to that 
dramatic transformation which is familiarly known as the 
Industrial Revolution of eighteenth-century Britain. Their 
significance must be estimated by the same criteria, their re- 
sults judged by like standards. Indeed, an unbiased judgment 
may be easier in the case of prehistoric revolutions just be- 
cause their effects have ceased to oppress us individually. 
But not only does prehistory extend written history back- 
wards, it carries on natural history forwards. In reality, if one 
root of prehistoric archaeology is ancient history, the other is 
geology. Prehistory constitutes a bridge between human his- 
tory and the natural sciences of zoology, paleontology, and 
geology. Geology has traced the building up of the earth we 
inhabit; under the aspect of paleontology it follows the emer- 
gence of various forms of life through several vast periods of 
geological time. In the last era prehistory takes up the tale. 
Prehistoric anthropology, which is concerned with the bodily 
remains of early "men," is just a branch of paleontology or 
zoology. But prehistoric archaeology is concerned with what 
men made. It traces changes in human culture. Such changes, 
as will be shown in detail shortly, take the place of the physi- 
cal modifications and mutations by which new species arise 
among the animals and which are studied in paleontology. 
Hence the historian's "progress" may be the equivalent of 
the zoologist's evolution. It may be hoped that the standards 
applicable to the latter discipline may help the historian to 
attain the same impersonality and objectivity of judgment as 
characterize the zoologist or any other natural scientist. Now 
to a biologist progress, if he used the term, would mean suc- 
cess in the struggle for existence. Survival of the fittest is a 
good evolutionary principle. But fitness means just success in 
living. A provisional test of a species' fitness would be to count 
its members over several generations. If the total numbers turn 
out to be increasing, the species may be regarded as success- 
ful; if the total is dwindling, it is condemned as a failure. 
Biologists have divided the organic world into kingdoms 
and sub-kingdoms. The latter are subdivided into phyla, phyla 
into classes and families, families into genera, genera into 
species. Paleontology traces the order in which the several 
phyla, genera, etc., emerge upon our planet. They are arranged 
in a sort of evolutionary hierarchy. In the animal kingdom the 
phylum chordata is ranked above the phyla protozoa (includ- 
ing germs, certain shellfish, and so on) and annulata (earth- 
worms). Within the phylum, vertebrates occupy the highest 
place, and among the vertebrates mammals (warm-blooded 
animals that suckle their young) rank above fishes, birds, and 

16 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
reptiles. Rank here depends purely upon order of appearance. 
"Higher" means appearing later in the record of the rocks; in 
an ideal geological section the oldest forms of life would ap- 
pear in the deepest layers, the last to emerge would be nearest 
the surface. Any departure from this purely chronological 
ranking is liable to involve the biologist in metaphysical con- 
troversies upon which, as a scientist, he is loath to embark. 
The historian might do well to follow his example. 
Yet it may perhaps be permissible to suggest that values do 
in some cases attach to evolutionary rank and that these values 
are capable of numerical expression. They may help to an 
appreciation of the significance of cultural change, if not to a 
vindication of progress in any metaphysical sense. The idea of 
fitness can scarcely be excluded altogether from biological 
rank, even though such fitness means just success in surviving. 
Of course, many lower forms still survive-all too successfully 
in the case of germs, very fortunately in the case of earth- 
worms. On the other hand, the rocks reveal countless species, 
genera, and even families which have failed to survive, though 
in their day they would have ranked at the head of the evolu- 
tionary hierarchy. The gigantic reptiles like dinosaurs and 
ichthyosaurs, that swarmed during the Jurassic era, are now 
extinct. They flourished under particular geographical condi- 
tions. The Jurassic was an age of moist warm climate and wide 
expanses of sea and swamp; no more intelligent beasts existed 
to compete with the huge lizards. To these conditions, to this 
environment, the reptiles were successfully adapted. The same 
environment lasted for a time so long that estimates in years 
have no meaning. But eventually the areas under water be- 
came more restricted, the climate grew drier and colder, and 
new genera and species emerged. Comparatively few of the 
reptiles succeeded in surviving in the new environment. They 
could not adjust themselves to the changed conditions, and 
perished. When the old Jurassic environment passed, the very 
qualities which had ensured their success and constituted their 
"fitness" proved a handicap. They were too much specialized, 
too closely adapted for living under one limited set of condi- 
tions. With the passing of those conditions they succumbed. 
In the long run, too, excessive specialization is biologically 
disadvantageous. Its ultimate result is not survival, not in- 
crease in numbers, but extinction or stagnation. 
Very tentatively, too, we might draw attention to the idea 
of economy in the means whereby survival is secured. Many 
of the lower organisms only survive, only maintain their num.. 
bers, by a prodigious fecundity. Each individual or pair pro.. 
duces millions of offspring. Yet the species is so poorly fitted 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
17 
to survive that only one or two out of every batch live to 
maturity. Cod, ling, and some other fish, for instance, have 
succeeded in keeping their numbers fairly constant over a vast 
period of time. To that extent they are successful. But to pur. 
chase this precarious balance a pair of cod produces 6,000,000 
eggs, a pair of ling 28,000,000! If any substantial proportion 
of these eggs came to maturity, the sea would soon be a solid 
mass of ling. Actually only two or three Iing hatch out and 
come to maturity from each batch. The individual egg's chance 
of survival or prospect of life is about 1 in 14,000,000. Rabbits 
are much more economical. A doe rabbit may produce seventy 
offspring annually. As the total rabbit population keeps fairly 
constant in the long run, the individual's chance of survival is 
clearly of the order of 1 in 70. A human pair does not produce 
more than one child a year, and families exceeding 10 are un- 
common. Yet the human species is still increasing in numbers. 
The human child's chance of survival is incomparably greater 
than that of a young rabbit. 
Within certain limits, economy in reproduction, the indi- 
vidual's chance of surviving, increases as we ascend the evolu- 
tionary scale. And these concepts-fitness, chance of survival 
-are essentially numerical. In so far as they apply, they con- 
stitute criteria invested with a11 the objectivity of numbers for 
biological ranking. Unfortunately this argument must not be 
pressed. While some "lower organisms" secure survival by ex- 
travagant fecundity, others no less humble in the evolutionary 
scale exhibit as strict economy in reproduction as men or ele- 
phants, and yet maintain their numbers. 
It would be unwise to pursue such discussions further, for 
fear of introducing ideas of value foreign to pure science. They 
have at least indicated that the continuity between natural his- 
tory and human history may allow numerical concepts to be 
introduced into the latter. Historical changes can be judged by 
the extent to which they have helped our species to survive 
and multiply. That is a numerical criterion expressible in fig- 
ures of population. In history we encounter events to which 
this numerical criterion is directly applicable. The most ob- 
vious instance is the "Industrial Revolution" in Britain. Esti- 
mates of the island's population indicate a quite gradual 
growth in the population rom the Black Death in the four- 
teenth century. Reliable calculations put the population at 
4,160,221 in 1570,5,773,646 in 1670, and 6,517,035 in 1750. 
Then with the Industrial Revolution begins the dramatic in- 
crease to 16,345,646 in 1801 and 27,533,755 in 1851! 
The effect of these figures is still more impressive if they be 
plotted out on squared paper to give a graph or "population 

18 
HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
curve." The general direction of the line is almost straight 
down to 1750, and unaffected by the political revolutions 'and 
religious movements of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
that bulk so large in the old history books. Between 1750 and 
1800 the line has turned through an angle of about 30°! The 
sweeping changes in material culture and equipment, the new 
Millions 
....\ 
'.{..,. 
1500 
1600 
00 
1800 
FIG. I.-GRAPH OF THE ESTIMATED POPULATION OF 
GREAT BRITAIN J 1500-1800. 
social forces of production, the economic reorganization that 
is termed the Industrial Revolution, reacted upon the whole 
mass of the British people as no ,political or religious event had 
done. One effect obviously was to render possible a gigantic 
increase in their numbers. The people multiplied as never be- 
fore since the arrival of the Saxons. Judged by the biological 
standard suggested above, the Industrial Revolution was a suc- 
cess. It has facilitated the survival and muliiplication of the 
species concerned. 
The figures provide an objective criterion by which such an 
event may be judged. It is useless to insist either on the lustre 
of the intellectual achievements in science which the new sys- 
tem of production alone made possible, or on the horrors of 
child-labor, slums, and oppression which accompanied it. The 
former may be cancelled by the latter. But the evils cannot be 

HUMAN AND NATURAL HISTORY 
19 
seen in their true perspective for lack of standards of com- 
parison. \Ve happen to be wen informed about the misery, 
disease, and uglines imposed upon the proletariat by the 
factory system. \Ve know surprisingly little of the real position 
of the bulk of the peasantry, of miners, and of laborers in 
previous centuries. While we know a good deal about the guilds 
of urban artisans-really a relatively small and privileged 
class-we dare not picture faithfully the life of a serf in the 
Middle Ages, still less that of a slave in ancient Rome or 
Greece. When a gleam of the truth. shines from the page of a 
medieval charter or an ancient oration, the sentimentalists 
wisely close their eyes in utter horror. So on the whole we may 
rely upon our figures. 
And remembering the lesson of those figures and curves, we 
shall be able to discern in earlier ages of human history other 
"revolutions." They manifest then1selves in the same way as 
the "Industrial Revolution"-in an upward kink in the popu- 
lation curve. They must be judged by the same standard. The 
chief aim of this book is to examine prehistory and ancient 
history from this angle. It is hoped that a consideration of 
revolutions, so remote that it is impossible to get angry or en- 
thusiastic about them, may help to vindicate the idea of prog- 
ress against sentimentalists and mystics. 

CHAPTER II 
ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL 
PROGRESS 
IT HAS been suggested that prehistory is a continuation of 
natural history, that there is an analogy between organic evolu- 
tion and progress in culture. Natural history traces the 
emergence of new species each better adapted for survival, 
more fitted to obtain food and shelter, and so to multiply. 
Human history reveals man creating new industries and new 
economies that have furthered the increase of his species and 
thereby vindicated its enhanced fitness. 
The wild sheep is fitted for survival in a cold mountain 
climate by its heavy coat of hair and down. Men can adapt 
themselves to life in the same environment by making coats 
out of sheeps' skins or of wool. With claws and snouts rabbits 
can dig themselves burrows to provide shelter against cold and 
enemies. With picks and shovels men can excavate similar 
refuges, and even build better ones out of brick, stone, and 
timber. Lions have claws and teeth with which to secure the 
meat they need. Man makes arrows and spears for slaying his 
game. An innate instinct, an inherited adjustment of its rudi- 
mentary nervous system, enables even the lowly jellyfish to 
grasp prey that is actually within its reach. Men learn more 
efficient and discriminating methods of obtaining nourish- 
ment through the precept and example of their elders. 
In human history, clothing, tools, weapons, and traditions 
take the place of fur, claws, tusks, and instincts in the quest 
for food and shelter. Customs and prohibitions, embodying 
centuries of accumulated experience and handed on by social 
tradition, take the place of inherited instincts in facilitating 
the survival of our species. 
There certainly is an analogy. But it is essential not to lose 
sight of the significant distinctions between historical progress 
and organic evolution, between human culture and the animal's 
bodily equipment, between the social heritage and the biologi- 
cal inheritance. Figurative language, based on the admitted 
analogy, is liable to mislead the unwary. We read, for instance: 
20 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 21 
"In the Jurassic epoch the struggle for life must have been 
very severe. . . . Triceratops covered its head and neck with 
a kind of bony bonnet with two horns over the eyes." The 
passage suggests the sort of thing that happens conspicuously 
in wartime. Between 1915 and 1918, finding themselves 
threatened from the air, the belligerents devised shrapnel-hel- 
mets, anti-aircraft guns, bombproof shelters, and other pro- 
tective contrivances. Now that process of invention :3 not in 
the least like the evolution of Triceratops as conceived by the 
biologists. Its bony bonnet was part of its body; it was in- 
herited from its parents; it had been developed very slowly as 
a result of small spontaneous modifications in reptiles' body- 
covering that had been accumulating over hundreds of genera- 
tions. It survived not because Triceratops liked it, but because 
those of his ancestors who possessed its rudiments had in actual 
practice succeeded better in acquiring food and eluding 
dangers than those that lacked this bodily equipment and 
protection. Man's equipment and defenses are external to his 
body; he can lay them aside and don them at will. Their use 
is not inherited, but learned, rather slowly, from the social 
group to which each individual belongs. Man's social heritage 
in a tradition which he begins to acquire only after he has 
emerged from his mother's womb. Changes in culture and 
tradition can be initiated, controlled, or delayed by the con- 
scious and deliberate choice of their human authors and ex- 
ecutors. An invention is not an accidental mutation of the germ 
plasm, but a new synthesis of the accumulated experience 
to which the inventor is hei:-- by tradition only. It is well to be 
as clear as possible as to the sort of differences subsisting be- 
tween the processes here compared. 
The mechanism of evolution as conceived by biologists 
need not be described in detail. It has been outlined else- 
where in accessible and readable books by experts. The current 
view seems to be briefly something like this. The evolution of 
new forms of life and of new species among animals is sup- 
posed to result from the accumulation of hereditable changes 
in the germ plasm. (The exact nature of these changes is as 
obscure to scientists as are the words germ plasm to the 
ordinary reader.) Such changes as facilitated the life and 
reproduction of the creature would become established by 
what is termed "natural selection." The creatures not affected 
by the changes in question would simply die out or become 
confined to some corner, leaving the new species in possession 
of the field. A concrete and partly fictitious example will 

22 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
iIIustrate the meaning better than several pages more of ab- 
stract terms. 
About half a million years ago Europe and Asia were visited 
by periods of intense cold-the so-called Ice Ages-that lasted 
thousands of years. By that time there were in existence several 
species of elephant ancestral to modern African and Indian 
elephants. To meet the rigors of the Ice Age some elephants 
developed a shaggy coat of hair, becoming eventually what 
we term mammoths. This statement does not mean that an 
ordinary elephant said one day, "I fell horribly chilly; I will 
put on a shaggy coat," nor yet that by continually wishing for 
a coat it mysteriously made hairs to sprout out of its hide. 
What is supposed to hilYe happened would be more like this: 
The germ plasm is liable to change, and is constantly chang- 
ing. Among the elephant calves born as the Ice Age was be- 
coming severe were some that, as a result of such a change in 
the germ plasm, were born with a :endency to hairy skins, and 
as they grew up actually became hairy. In the cold latitudes 
the hairy elephants would thrive better and rear larger families, 
also hairy, than the more normal type. They would according- 
ly increase at the expense of the rest. Moreover, similar 
mysterious changes in the germ plasm might result in some of 
their offspring being still more hairy than their ancestors and 
other contemporaries. These in their turn, being the best 
fitted to endure the cold, would thrive better and multiply 
faster than any others. And so, after many generations, a 
breed of hairy elephants or mammoths would be established as 
the result of the accumulation of the successive hereditary 
variations described. And such alone would be able to with- 
stand the glacial conditions of northern Europe and Asia. The 
mammoth thus got his permanent shaggy coat, but as the 
result of a process extending over many generations and 
thousands of years-for elephants of all species are slow 
breeders. 
During the Ice Ages several species of man already existed, 
contemporary with the mammoth: they hunted the beasts and 
drew pictures of them in caves. But they did not inherit shaggy 
coats and did not develop such to meet the crisis; some of the 
human inhabitants of Europe during the Ice Age would pass 
unrecognized in a crowd today. Instead of undergoing the slow 
physical changes which eventually enabled the mammoths to 
endure the cold, our ancestors found out how to control fire 
and to make coats out of skins. And so they were able to face 
the cold as successful1y as the mammoths. 
Of course, while the mammoth-calf was born with a tend- 
ency to a hairy coat, which inevitably grew as the calf 

c- 
 
 
 
; 
, ' 
<'E-IrJ 
z> 
0E-4< 
uu 
o <  
N IX! u 
cifJ 
 
< 
<Z 
f-4H 

24 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
matured, the human infant was not born as a fire tender or 
coat maker. The parent mammoths transmitted their coats to 
their progeny by heredity. Each generation of human children 
had to be taught the whole art of keeping fires going and mak- 
ing coats from the very rudiments. The art was transmitted 
from parent to child only by precept and example. It was an 
"acquired characteristic," and acquired characteristics, zoolo- 
gists agree, are not hereditary. An infant by himself on his 
natal day is no more a fire tender than when, half a million 
years ago, man first began to cherish the flames instead of 
fleeing from them like other beasts. 
The foregoing narrative could be translated into technical 
terms as follows: certain members of the genus Elephas be- 
came adapted to the environment of the Ice Ages, and evolved 
into the species Elephas primigenius. The species Homo sapiens 
was enabled to survive in the same environment by improving 
his material culture. Both evolution and cultural change may 
be regarded as adaptations to the environment. Environment, 
of course, means the whole situation in which a creature has to 
live: it embraces not only climate (heat, cold, moisture, wind) 
and physiographical features like mountains, seas, rivers, and 
marshes, but also factors such as food suppEes, animal 
enemies, and, in the case of man, even social traditions, cus- 
toms, and laws, economic status, and religious beliefs. 
Both men and mammoths were successfully adjusted to the 
environment of the Ice Ages. Both flourished and multiplied 
under those peculiar climatic conditions. But their ultimate 
histories diverged. The last Ice Age passed, and with its passage 
the mammoth became extinct. Man has survived. The mam- 
moth was too well adapted to a particular set of conditions; it 
was overspecialized. When, with the onset of more temperate 
conditions, forests covered the wide tundras on which the 
mammoth had roamed and temperate vegetation replaced the 
Arctic scrub on which the mammoth browsed, the beast was 
helpless. The bodily characters-hairy coat, digestive system 
adjusted to consume dwarf willows or mosses, hoofs and trunk 
constructed for rooting in the snow-which had enabled him 
to thrive in the Ice Ages, all proved to be handicaps in tem- 
perate climates. Man, on the other hand, was free to leave off 
his coat if he was too hot, to invent other tools, and to choose 
beef instead of mammoth steaks. 
The last paragraph drives home a lesson already indicated. 
In the long run exclusive adaptation to a peculiar environ- 
ment does not pay. It imposes severe, and in the end perhaps 
fatal, restrictions on the possibilities of living and breeding. On 
a long view what is profitable is the capacity for adaptation to 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 25 
changing circumstances. Such adaptability is bound up with 
the growth of a nervous system, and ultimately of a brain. 
Even the lowest organism is equipped with a rudimentary 
nerve apparatus enabling it to make one or two simple move- 
ments in response to c anges in the surrounding world. The 
external changes excite or stimulate what serves the creature as 
an "organ of sense," and this stimulation sets going certain de- 
termined movements or changes in the creature's body. The 
approach of a predatory bIrd-or of any other object-when 
impinging on the sense organ of an oyster stimulates its nerve 
in such a way as to cause a contraction of the muscles closing 
its shell. The oyster's nervous system provides it with a sort of 
automatic device for self-protection, but it has no power to 
vary the movement in accordance with differences in the ex- 
ternal changes which promote it. The nervous system is ad- 
justed to make oe set of muscular movements whenever any 
external object affects its se:'1sory ends. All automatic responses 
that an organism is adjusted to make to any changes in its en- 
vironment may be termed instincts. 1 They are, of course, in- 
herited in precisely the same way as the creature's physical 
form. They are necessary and inevitable consequences of the 
structure of its nervous system, which is part of its bodily 
mechanism. 
The higher we go in the evolutionary scale, the more com- 
plicated the nervous system is found to be. Organs become 
specialized to detect different sorts of changes in the environ- 
ment-pressures upon the creature's body, vibrations in the 
air, rays of light, and so on. Thus arise the distinct senses of 
touch, hearing, vision, and the rest and appropriate bodily or- 
gans connected therewith. At the same time the number and 
variety of the movements that the creature can make are in- 
creased by the development and specialization of motor nerves 
controlling muscles or sets of muscles. In higher organisms a 
mechanism develops connecting, \\-ith increasing delicacy, the 
sensory nerves, affel.. '.ed by changes in the environment, and 
the motor nerves controlling movements of muscles. 
The result of such development is to enable a creature to 
vary its movements, its "behavior," in accordance with minute 
differences in the external changes which affect its nerves. It 
can adjust its reactions. The greater part of the mechanism for 
adjustment is located in the brain. Lower organisms possess 
mere nodes or knots where different sensory and motor nerves 
meet. Prom such rudiments a brain begins to develop higher up 
the scale. A complex web of paths grows up to connect the 
1 A distinction ought to be made between instincts and reflex actions; but 
that would involve subtleties irrelevant to our immediate argument. 

26 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
various sensory nerves and to transmit impulses affecting them 
to the appropriate motor nerves. Sensations, which must at 
first have been nothing but fleeting impressions, could thus be 
permanently connected with one another and with movements, 
and so "remembered." 
At last, instead of a couple of very simple movements, made 
indiscriminately to any change in its surroundings, the mam- 
mal can make different responses, appropriate to a very wide 
variety of external things and conditions affecting it. It is thus 
enabled to cope successfully with a greater diversity of circum- 
stances. It can obtain its food more regularly and certainly, 
avoid its enemies more successfully, and propagate its kind 
more economically. The development of a nervous system and 
a brain made life possible under more varied conditions. And 
as conditions are constantly changing, such adaptability mani- 
festly facilitated survival and multiplicc.tion. 
Man appears very late in the geological record. No fossil 
skeleton worthy of the name of "man" is older than the last 
volume but one of the earth's history, the volume labelled 
"Pleistocene." Even then fossil remains are exceptionally rare 
till the concluding chapters, and fossil "men" of lower pleisto- 
cene age can be counted on the fingers. Whereas today all men 
belong to one species, Homo sapiens, and can all interbreed 
freely, the earlier pleistocene "men" belong to several distinct 
species. Some, indeed, diverge in bodily structure so widely 
from ourselves that anthropologists are inclined to assign them 
to distinct genera. The early members of the human family in 
question, the fossil hominids that are often termed palean- 
thropic, were not our direct evolutionary ancestors; in the 
pedigree of Homo sapiens they represent side branches from 
the main stem. And yet their bodies were better equipped 
than ours for certain physical functions, such as fighting. The 
canine teeth of Eoanthropus or Piltdown man, for instance, 
would be formidable weapons. But for the moment the dis- 
tinctions within our family may be ignored. 
Man is now, and was apparently even at his first appearance 
in the pleistocene, inadequately adapted for survival in any 
particular environment. His bodily equipment for coping with 
any special set of conditions is inferior to that of most animals. 
He has not, and probably never had, a furry coat like the polar 
bear's for keeping in the body's heat under cold conditions. His 
body is not particularly well adapted for escape, self-defense, 
or hunting. He is not, for instance, exceptionally fleet of foot, 
and would be left behind in a race with a hare or an ostrich. He 
has no protective coloring like the tiger or the snow leopard, 
nor bodily armor like the tortoise or the crab. He has no wings 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 2' 
to offer escape and give him an advantage in spying out and 
pouncing upon prey. He Jacks the beak and talons of the hawk 
and its keenness of vision. For catching his prey and defend- 
ing himself, his muscular strength, teeth, and nails are incom- 
parably inferior to those of the tiger. 
In the comparatively short evolutionary history documented 
by fossil remains, man has not improved his inherited equip- 
ment by bodily changes detectable in his skeleton. Yet he has 
been able to adjust himself to a greater range of environments 
than almost any other creature, to multiply infinitely faster 
than any near relative among the higher mammals, and to 
beat the polar bear, the hare, the hawk, and the tiger at their 
special tricks. Through his control of fire and the skill to make 
clothes and houses, man can, and does, live and thrive from 
the Arctic Circle to the Equator. In the trains and cars he 
builds, man can outstrip the fleetest hare or ostrich. In air- 
planes he can mount higher than the eagle, and with telescopes 
see farther than tle hawk. With firearms he can lay low ani- 
mals that a tiger dare not tackle. 
But fire, clothes, houses, trains, airplanes, telescopes and 
guns are not, we must repeat, part of man's body. He can leave 
them and lay them aside at will. They are not inherited in the 
biological sense, but the skill needed for their production and 
use is part of our social heritage, the result of a tradition accu- 
mulated over many generations, and transmitted, not in the 
blood, but through speech and writing. 
Man's compensation for his relatively poor bodily en- 
dowment has been the possession of a large and complex brain, 
forming the center of an extensive and delicate nervous sys- 
tem. These permit a great variety of accurately controlled 
movements being adjusted exactly to the impulses received by 
keen organs of sense. It is only so that man has ben enabled 
to make himself protections against climate and weather, arms 
and weapons of attack and defense that, because they can be 
adapted and adjusted, are really superior to furs, or teeth, or 
claws. 
In a sense the possibility of making artificial substitutes for 
bodily defenses is a consequence of their absence. As long, for 
instance, as the bones of the brain-case have to support the 
powerful muscles needed to snap together a heavy jaw, like 
the chimpanzee's, and wield the fighting teeth it holds, the 
brain could get little room to expand; for the bone of the brain- 
case must be thick and solid. If the forelegs and forefeet have 
normally to carry the weight of the body, whether in walking 
or climbing, the fine and delicate movements of human fingers 
in grasping and making things would be inlpossible. At the 

28 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
same time, without hands to grasp food and handmade tools 
and weapons to secure food and repel attack, heavy jaws and 
fighting teeth such as are possessed by our ape relatives could 
scarcely be lightened or reduced in size. Thus the evolutionary 
changes which have contributed to the making of man are very 
intimately connected one with another and with the cultural 
changes which man himself has made. It is not surprising that 
in some early attempts at man they have progressed at different 
relative rates. Piltdown man (Eoanthropus), for example, 
possessed a brain-case comparable in size to our own, but pre- 
served the heavy lower jaw and the projecting canines proper 
to an ape. 
Man then is endowed by nature with a brain, big in com- 
parison with his body, but this endowment is the condition 
enabling man to make his own culture. Other natural endow- 
ments are associated therewith and contribute towards the 
same result. Elliot Smith has brilliantly expounded the signi- 
ficance of "binocular vision" inherited from very remote and 
humble primate ancestors. Dorothy Davidson has given such 
a handy summary of the argument that recapitulation here is 
unnecessary. It means roughly that we and our evolutionary 
ancestors see with our two eyes a single picture where other 
mammals see two. Unobserved muscular sensations of the 
focusing requisite to unify the imags received by the two eyes 
are an important factor in judging distance and seeing objects 
as solid (stereoscopically) instead of just fiat. In man and 
higher primates the association of stereoscopic images with 
sensations of touch and muscular activity renders possible the 
perfect estimation of distances and depths. Without the latter 
the delicacy of hands and fingers would not suffice for tool 
making. It is the perfectly adjusted, but subconscious, co- 
operation of hand and eye that allows man to make tools from 
the roughest eolith to the most sensitive seismograph. Such 
co-operation is possible owing to the delicacy of the nervous 
system and the complexity of association paths in the big brain. 
But the nervous mechanism has become so established now 
that it works without attracting our attention. 
Speech is made possible by similar endowments-a delicate 
and precise control by the motor nerves over the muscles of 
the tongue and the larynx, and an exact correlation of the mus- 
cular sensations due to movements of these organs with the 
sense of hearing. The establishmen of the necessary connec- 
tions between the several sensory and motor nerves concerned 
are effected in well-defir ed areas of the brain, especially those 
just above the ears. The impressions of rudimentary swellings 
of this part of the brain are visible on the brain-cases of very 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 29 
early attempts at men like Pithecanthropus (Java man), Sinan J 
thropus (Pekin man), and Eoanthropus (Piltdown man). 
Even these early members of our family could "speak." 
But in Homo sapiens these developments in the brain and 
nervous system go hand in hand with modifications in the 
arrangement for the attachment of the tongue muscles which 
are not found in other genera or species of "men" any more 
than in apes. As a result man is enabled to utter a much greater 
variety of sounds than any other animal. 
The mechanism whereby visual, muscular, auditory, and 
other sensations and movements are so smoothly co-ordinated 
that we are normally unconscious of the separate elements, 
grows in the brain mostly after birth. But it can only do so be- 
cause the bones of the infant's skull are comparatively soft and 
loosely knit, so that the brain can expand under them. But 
during this process the infant is quite helpless and easily in- 
jured. It is, in fact, wholly dependent upon its parents. The 
last statement would be true of the young of any mammal and 
of most birds. But in the case of human infants the condition 
of dependence lasts exceptionally long. The hardening and 
solidification of the human skull are retarded longer than in 
other animals, to allow of the greater expansion of the brain. 
At the same time, man is born with relatively few inherited 
instincts. There are, that is to say, comparatively few pre- 
cise movements and responses which our nervous system is ad- 
justed to promote automatically; man's instincts are for the 
most part very generalized tendencies. 
Like any other young animal, the human child has there- 
fore to "learn by experience" the appropriate response to a 
specific situation. It must find out the right movements to make 
in relation to any external event, and build up in its brain the 
appropriate connections between sensory and motor nerves. 
And, as in the case of youpg mammals, the process of learning 
is assisted by the example of the parents. Even a young rabbit 
will try to imitate its mother, and thus win learn how to choose 
its food and avoid dangers that actually threaten it. Such edu- 
cation is common to human and animal families. But in the 
case of man the process of education is transformed. The hu- 
man parent can teach not only by example, but also by precept. 
The faculty of speech-that is, the physiological constitution 
of the human tongue, larynx, and nervous system-endows 
prolonged infancy with a unique importance. 
On the one hand, prolonged infancy involves family life, the 
continued association of parents and children for several years. 
On the other hand, physiological conditions, as already indi- 
cated, allow man to emit a great variety of distinct articulate 

30 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
sounds. And a particular sound or group of sounds, a word, 
may be associated with a particular event or group of events in 
the external world. For instance, the sound or word "bear" 
may conjure up an image of a particular sort of dangerous but 
edible furry animal, together with readiness for the actions ap- 
propriate to an encounter with such. The first words may, of 
course, have in themselves to some extent suggested the ob- 
ject thus denoted. "Morepork" roughly resembles the cry of a 
certain Australian owl which is so named. But even in such a 
case there is a large element of convention in restricting the 
meaning and giving it precision. It is only the result of a tacit 
agreement, accepted by the early white settlers in Australia, 
that "morepork" has come to mean a sort of owl rather than, 
say, a gull. Generally, the conventional element is absolutely 
dominant. The extent to which sounds can of themselves sug- 
gest or imitate things is obviously very limited indeed. Really 
language is essentially a social product; words can have mean- 
ings and suggest things and events only in a society and by tacit 
agreement betwee:l its members. But the human family is a 
necessary social unit (not necessarily or probably the only 
original one). 
Now an integral part of human education consists in teach- 
ing the child to speak. That means teaching it to utter in the 
recognized way certain sounds or words and to connect them 
with objects or events to which, it is agreed, the sounds should 
refer. Once this has been done, parents can, with the aid of 
language, instruct their offspring how to deal with situations 
which cannot conveniently be iltustrated by actual concrete 
examples. The child need not wait till a bear attacks the family 
to learn how to avoid it. Instruction by example alone in such 
a case is liable to be fatal to some of the pupils. Language, 
however, enables the elders to forewarn the young of the 
danger while it is absent, and then demonstrate the appropriate 
course of action. 
And, of course, speech is not only a vehicle by which 
parents can convey their own experience to their children. It 
is also a means of communication between all members of a 
human group that speaks the same language, i.e., observes 
common conventions as to the pronunciation of sounds and the 
meanings attached to tl1 ...m. One member can tell his fellows 
what he has seen and done, and all can compare their actions 
and reactions. Thus the experien.ces of the whole group can be 
pooled. What parents impart to their offspring is not simply 
the lessons of their own personal experience, but something 
much wider: the collective experience of the group. This is the 
tradition which is handed on from generation to generation, 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 3 I 
and the method of its transmission with the aid of language 
seems a peculiarity of the human family. It constitutes the last 
vital difference between organic evolution and human progre.;s. 
A member of an animal species inherits, in the form of in- 
stincts, the collective experience of that species. Dispositions to 
particular reactions in particular situations are innate in it just 
because they have furthered the survival of the species. Ani- 
mals of its kind endowed with different instincts have been less 
successful, and so have been weeded out by natural selection. 
The establishment of hereditary instincts, beneficial to the 
species, may be regarded as a slow and rather wasteful process, 
comparable to that by which the mammoth acquired a hairy 
coat. The human child is taught rules and precepts for action 
that members of his group and their ancestors have found 
beneficial. 
Now, at least theoretically, the body of traditional rules is 
not fixed and immutable. Fresh experiences may suggest to 
individuals additions and modifications. These, if found use- 
ful, will be communicated to, discussed, and tested by, the 
community as a whole, and eventually incorporated in the 
collective traditi03. In reality, of course, the process is not 
nearly so simple as it sounds. Men cling passionately to old 
traditions and display intense reluctance to modify customary 
modes of behavior, as innovators at all times have found to 
their cost. The dead-\veight of conservatism, largely a lazy and 
cowardly distaste for the strenuous and painful activity of real 
thinking, has undoubtedly retarded human progress even more 
in the past than today. Nevertheless, for the human species 
progress has consisted essentially in the improvement and ad- 
justment of the social traditio:1, transmitted by precept and 
example. 
The discoveries and inventions .vhich to the archaeologist 
appear as the tangible proofs of progress are, after all, just 
concrete embodiments and expressions of innovations in social 
tradition. Each is rendered possible only by the accumulated 
experience handed on by tradition to the inventor; each means 
the addition to the tradition of new rules for action and be- 
havior. The inventor of the telegraph had already at his dis- 
posal a body of traditional knowledge accumulated from pre- 
historic times onwards as to the production and transmission of 
electricity. So, much earlier, the inventor of the sailboat had 
already learned to make anj navigate a dugout canoe and how 
to manufacture a mat or weave a cloth. At the same time, the 
new movements needed for working the telegraph and the sail- 
boat will have to be taught as soon as the device becomes es- 
tablished. The approriate rules will be added to the social 

32 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
tradition to be learned by subsequent generations. 
Another implication of language in general and speech in 
particular here calls for remark. But in parenthesis it should 
first be noted that language is not confined to articulate sounds 
or their written reproduction. It includes also gestures, and 
ultimately picture writing. Gestures, like words, to some ex- 
tent imitate and suggest the object intended, but they too are 
largely conventional; their meanings, like those of spoken 
sounds, have to be restricted by a tacit agreement between 
members of a society. You may indicate "bird" by flapping 
your arms, but only a convention could restrict the gesture to 
indicate a special sort of bird, or even "bird" as against say, 
"tree-shaken-by-wind." Gesture symbolism, probably very im- 
portant in the infancy of human intercourse, has not lent itself 
to fruitful developments as has spoken language. We shall see 
later that picture writing suffers from the S:::1me dis hi1 ities as 
ges ticula tion. 
The capacity for what is termed "abstract thinking" -prob- 
ably a prerogative of the human species-depends largely upon 
language. To name a thing at all is an act of abstraction. The 
bear, on getting its name, is thereby picked out and isolated 
from the complex of sensations-trees, caves, twittering birds, 
etc.-with which it may be accompanied when actua]]y con- 
fronting a man. And it is not only isolated, but also general- 
ized. Actual bears are always individual; they may be big or 
little, black or brown, sleeping or climbing a tree. In the word 
"bear," such qualities, some of which would apply to any 
actual bear, are ignored, and attention is drawn to one or two 
common elements, characteristics that have been found to be 
common to a number of distinct individual animals. The later 
are grouped together in an abstract class. In very primitive 
Janguages like those of the Australian aborigines, anything so 
abstract or general as bear or kangaroo would lack a name. 
There would be different and unrelated words for "male kan- 
garoo," "female kangaroo," "young kangaroo," "kangaroo 
jumping," and so on. 
Some degree of abstraction is, however, a feature of any 
language. But having thus abstracted the idea of bear from its 
concrete actual surroundings and stripped it of many particu- 
lar attributes, you may combine the idea with other similarly 
abstracted ideas or endow it with attributes, though you have 
never encountered a bear in such surroundings or with such 
attributes. You may, for example, endow your bear with 
speech, or describe him playing a musical instrument. You can 
play with your words, and that play may contribute to mythol- 
ogy and magic. It may also lead to inventions if the things 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGkESS 33 
you are talking or thinking about can be actually made and 
tried. Talk of winged men certainly preceded by a long time 
the invention of a workable flying machine. 
Combinations, such as those just described, can, of course, 
be made without the use of words, of sounds standing for 
things. Visual images (or mental pictures) will do instead. 
Such actually play a large part in the thinking of mechanical 
inventors. Still, in the beginnings of human thinking visual 
images may have played a less important part than might be 
expected. Thinking is a sort of action, and with many persons 
(including the writer) the power of forming mental pictures 
is limited by their capacity to draw or make models of the 
thing imagined. It was a long time before man learned to draw 
or model, but, as soon as he became man, he could make artic- 
ulate sounds. 
Be that as it may, words and mental images of sounds or of 
the muscular movements required for uttering them can be 
used for functions to which visual images are inapplicable. 
Words can stand for abstractions-electricity, force, justice- 
which cannot possibly be represented by any visual picture. 
For thinking of this high degree of abstraction spoken (or 
written) language would seen almost indispensable. Much of 
the thinking embodied in this book is of such a kind. Let the 
reader try to imagine this page translated into a series of pic- 
tures or imitative gestures. He will then grasp the part played 
by speech, one of man's physiological endowments, in the dis- 
tinctively human activity of abstract thinking. 
The evolution of man's body, o his physiological equip- 
ment, is studied by prehistoric anthropology, a branch of 
paleontology. Beyond the points already considered, its results 
have little bearing upon the subject of this book. Within our 
species improvements in the equipment which men make for 
themelves-i.e. in culture-have taken the place of bodily 
modifications. Prehistoric anthropology does not at present 
even dispose of concrete documer:ts that illustrate accurately 
the evolutionary processes that must be regarded as necessary 
preliminaries to the intelligent creation of culture. None of the 
rare fossil "men" whose skeletons have survived from the 
earlier (pleistocene) Ice Ages can be classed among our direct 
ancestors. They do not represent stages in Nature's process of 
man-making, but abortive experiments-genera and species- 
that have died out. 
The earliest skeletons of our own species belong to the 
closing phases of the last Ice Age and to the cultural periods 
termed, in France, Aurignacian, Solutren, and Magdalenian. 
They are already so like our own skeletons that differences can 

34 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
be demonstrated only to expert anatomists. These late pleisto- 
cene men are already differentiated into several distinct vari- 
eties or races. There must obviously be a 10n evolutionary 
history behind them, but no reliably dated fossil illustrates it. 
And since the time when skeletons of Homo sapiens first ap- 
pear in the geological record, perhaps 25,000 years ago, men's 
bodily evolution has come virtually to a standstill, though his 
cultural progress was just beginning. "The physical difference 
between men of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian cultures on 
the one hand, and present-day men on the other. is negligible, 
while the cultural difference is immeasurable." 1 Progress in 
culture has, indeed, taken the place of further organic evolu- 
tion in the human family. 
It is archaeology that studies this progress in culture. Its 
documents are the tools, weapons, and huts that men of the 
past made in order to secure food and shelter. They illustrate 
improving technical skill, accumulating knowledge, and ad- 
vancing organization for securing a livelihood. Obviously a 
finished tool, fashioned by human hands, is a good gauge of 
the manual dexterity of its maker. Rather less obviously is it 
the measure of the scientific knowledge of his period. Yet any 
tool does really reflect, albeit rathr imperfectly, the science at 
the disposal of its makers. That is really self-evident in the case 
of a wireless valve or an airplane. It is equally true of a bronze 
axe, but a word of explanation may be useful. 
Archaeologists have divided the cultures of the past into 
Stone Ages (Old and New), Bronze Age, and Iron Age, on the 
basis of the material generally and by preference employed for 
cutting implements. Bronze axes and knives are tools distinc- 
tive of a Bronze Age as contrasted with stone ones, indicating 
an earlier Stone Age, or iron ones, marking the subsequent 
Iron Age. Now a great deal more science has to be applied in 
the manufacture of a bronze axe than in making a sto one. 
The former implies a quite consider'lble working knowledge of 
geology (to locate and idt;ntify the ores) and chemistry (to 
reduce them), as well as the mastery of compJicated technical 
processes. A "Stone Age" folk, using exclusively stone imple- 
ments, presumably lacked that knowledge. So the criteria used 
by archaelogists to distinguish his several "ages" serve also as 
indexes to the state of science. 
But when the tools, hut-foundations, and other archaeologi- 
cal remains of a given age and locality are considered not in 
isolation, but in their totality, they may reveal much more. 
They disclose not only the level of technical skill and science 
1 Leakey, Adam's Ancestors, p. 224. 

ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 35 
attained, but also the manner in which their makers got their 
livelihood, their economy. And it is this economy which deter- 
mines the multiplication of our species, and so its biological 
success. Studied from this angle, the old archaeological divi- 
sions assume a new si.;nificance. The archaeologist's ages 
correspond roughly to economic stages. Each new "age" is 
ushered in by an economic revolution of the same kind and 
having the same effect as the "Industrial Revolution" of the 
eighteenth century. 
In the "Old Stone Age" (paleolithic period) men relied for 
a living entirely on hunting, fishing, and gathering wild berries, 
roots, slugs, and shellfish. Their numbers were restricted by 
the provsion of food made for them by Nature, and seem 
actually to have been "ery small. In the "New Stone Age" 
(neolithic times) men control their own food supply by culti- 
vating plants and breeding animals. Given favorable circum- 
stances, a community can now produce more food than it 
needs to consume, and can increase its production to meet the 
requirements of an expanding population. A comparison of 
the number of burials from the Old Stone Age with that from 
the New in Europe and the Near East shows that, as a result of 
the neolithic revolution, the population had increased enor- 
mously. From the biological standpoint the new economy was 
a success; it had made possible a multiplication of our species. 
The use of bronze always involves specialized industries, 
and generally organized trade. To secure bronze tools a com- 
munity must produce a surplus of foodstuffs to support bodies 
of specialist miners, smelters, arid smiths withdrawn from 
direct food production. Nearly always part of the surplus will 
have to be expended on the transportation of the ore from 
comparatively remote metalliferous mountains. Actually in the 
Near East the Bronze Age is characterized by populous cities 
wherein secondary industries and foreign trade are conducted 
on a considerable scale. A regular army of craftsmen, mer- 
chants, transport workers, and also officials, clerks, soldiers, 
and priests is supported by the surplus foodstuffs produced 
by cultivators, herdsmen, and hunters. The cities are incom- 
parably larger and more populous than neolithic villages. A 
second revoution has occurred, and once more it has resulted 
in a multiplication of our species. 
Particularly in Europe, probably also in tropical countries, 
the discovery of an economical pr 1cess for producing iron in 
quantity-that is the mark of the Iron Age-had a similar 
result. Bronze had always been an expensive material because 
its constituents, copper and tin, are comparatively rare. Iron 

36 ORGANIC EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PROGRESS 
ores are widely distributed. As soon as they could be smelted 
economically, anyone could afford iron tools. But cheap iron 
tools allowed men to open up for cultivation fresh lands by 
clearing forests and draining clay soils that stone tools were 
impotent, bronze tools too rare, to tackle effectively. Once 
more population could and did expand, as the prehistory of 
Scotland or the early history of Norway dramatically demon- 
strates. 
The cultural advances forming the basis of archaeological 
classification have then had the same sort of biological effect as 
mutations in organic evolution. In subsequent chapters the 
earlier advances will be considered in greater detail. It will be 
shown how economic revolutions reacted upon man's atti- 
tude to Nature and promoted the growth of institutions, 
science, and literature-in a word, of civilization as currently 
understood. 

CHAPTER III 
TIME SCALES 
BEFORE proceeding to describe the content of the "ages" just 
defined, it is desirable to attempt to give some indication as to 
their duration. Without some such attempt no fair estimate of 
the tempo of human progress nor even of its reality is obtain- 
able. But a very serious effort of the imagination is necessary. 
The drama of human history occupies a period measurable not 
in years so much as in centuries and even millennia. Geologists 
and archaeologists speak glibly of these great periods of time, 
as if t.hey did not realize that they are of the same kind as 
periods we have ourselves lived through. 
A year seems a long time to most of us; we took back upon 
it, crowded with more or less exciting events affecting our own 
lives, our town, our country, and the world at large. A decade, 
or ten years, can be visualized only slightly less vividly. We re- 
call the last decade, filled with outstanding events, be it the 
records in fly-catching, murders, rapes, and divorces which 
alone are "featured" in the popular press, or personal experi- 
ences of equal historical significance, or even really impor- 
tant events like the discovery of heavy hydrogen or of the 
Royal Tombs of Dr. Our picture of longer periods is more at- 
tenuated. It is thirty-four years since the Boer War, which 
many of us can remember. In the interval we shall have wit- 
nessed all sort of events that have left a permanent impression 
on our minds. We shall recall the first flying-machines, the 
multiplication of automobiles, the beginnings of wireless com- 
munication with ocean liners, suffraettes. a world war, the 
Russian revolution, a general strike, and so on. 
But thirty-four decades would take us right back to the 
spacious days of Queen Elizabeth. The period is ten times as 
long as that we have just been trying to remember. But we are 
not, as a rule, aware that it contained ten times as many events 
which to their witnesses were presumably just as important as 
those we have been recalling from our own lifetimes. Only a 
few, like the beheading of Charles I, America's declaration of 
independence, Waterloo, come at once to the mind of the 
average man. Some with an effort recall that during the period 
37 

38 
TIME SCALES 
Newton formulated his law of gravity, that electricity and 
chemistry were first scientifically studied and applied, that 
Linnaeus classified the kingdom of living matter, and Darwin 
enunciated the doctrine of natural selection. But to realize that 
each of those 340 years, each of those thirty-four decades, was 
actually just as crowded with events as the year or the decade 
we have just experienced ourselves is much harder. But the 
effort should be made. 
A greater strain is to follow; let us go back not thirty-four 
decades, but ten times as far-thirty-four centuries. In Britain 
we shall then have stepped back into a period when no written 
records were kept, when tools were made exclusively of stone, 
bone, and wood, iron or b-'onze being unknown or unobtain- 
able, and when men spent more time on building the gigantic 
tombs known as barrows than on necessities like houses and 
roads. Three thousand focr hundred years ago written records 
were being kept only in Crete, Egypt, Hither Asia, and per- 
haps India and China. It is particularly hard to realize that in 
those unstoried centuries events crowded upon the barbarian 
inhabitants of Britain as thick and fast as last year, though no 
rumor of those events reached the civilized Egyptians or 
Babylonians. Yet to the actors the unrecorded (but not un- 
remembered) events they assisted in or witnessed, such as the 
erection of a barrow or the laying out of Stonehenge, were just 
as exciting and memorable as those of the century now draw- 
ing to a close. For the beginning of humanity, however, we 
must go back much further-not 3400 years nor even ten times 
as long, but nearly 340,000. 
In fact, in dealing with the remote beginnings of progress, a 
year or even a century is too small a unit. We must be accus- 
tomed to count in millennia-thousands of years. Yet each 
millennium was ten centuries or a hundred decades. And each 
day, year, decade, or century was as crowded with events as the 
last to be recorded in the newspapers, yearbooks, or histories. 
To get accustomed to this method of reckoning, try putting 
recorded history in terms of millennia (fractions are now con- 
veniently disregarded). Half a millennium ago Columbus was 
discovering America. A millennium back the Normans had 
not yet landed in England, and Alfred sat upon the Saxon 
throne. Two millennia take us beyond the bounds of British 
history altogether. The British Isles were known to literate 
people only by the tales of travelers and merchants, but Cicero 
was making and writing speeches in Rome. Three millennia 
ago, and we have to go outside Europe to find any written 
records: Rome had not been founded, Greece was plunged in 
a dark age of barbarian invasion, literature flourished only in 

TIME SCALES 
39 
Egypt and Hither Asia. It is the time of Solomon in Palestine. 
Finally, five millennia take us back to the very beginnings of 
written history in Egypt and Babylonia. Beyond that there are 
no written historical records to lighten the darkness or to help 
us to realize the multiplicity of events happening every year. 
Yet civilization was already mature. 
To obtain some idea of archaeological time let us consider 
the ruins of cities in Mesopotamia. The dead level of the 
alluvial plain between the Tigris and Euphrates is broken by 
tells or mounds, rising 60 feet or more above the surrounding 
ground. They are not natural hillocks, but each marks the 
site of an ancient settlement, and is composed entirely of the 
debris of ruined houses, temples, and palaces. In Iraq houses 
are still built of mud-bricks, not baked in a kiln, but simply 
dried in the sun. Such a house may with luck stand for a 
century. But eventually the rain will penetrate under the 
eaves or reach the foundations and disintegrate the plastic 
mud. The whole edifice will then flop down, a shapeless mass 
of mud or crumbling dust. The owner will not bother to cart 
away the debris. He will just level it down and build on the old 
site a new house with its foundations a couple of feet higher 
than the floor of the previous dwelling. The repetition of this 
process over successive centuries is responsible for the tells 
that break the monotony of the Mesopotamian plain. 
At Warka, the biblical Erech, the Germans explored the 
center of such a tell by means of a deep shaft. The top of the 
shaft is the floor level of a temple that is itself prehistoric and 
about 5500 years old. From this level you may descend by a 
winding path cut in the walls of the shaft for a depth of over 
60 feet! At every stage of the dizzy descent you can pick from 
the shaft's sides bits of pottery, mud bricks, or stone imple- 
ments. The shaft is actually cutting through a mound, 60 feet 
high, composed entirely of the debris of successive settlements 
in which men had lived. The mound has grown up in the 
manner described above, but even the latest of the component 
settlements traversed in descending the shaft is more than 
five millennia old! 
At the bottom we reach virgin soil-the soil of a marsh 
that had just emerged from the Persian Gulf. The lowest settle- 
ment represents the remote beginnings of human life in South- 
ern Mesopotamia. But when we have descended to it, we are 
as far as ever from the beginning of human progress. To reach 
that we must plunge into geological time. But now figures 
become almost meaningless (and mainly guesswork). To 
grasp man's antiquity we must consider the vast changes in 

4° 
TIME SCALES 
the earth's surface that our species had witnessed before ever 
the first settlers reached the site of Erech. 
Large sheets of ice had spread over the greater part of 
Britain and Northern Europe, and glaciers from the Alps and 
the Pyrenees had filled the river valleys of France. In Britain 
the ice sheets had radiated from the Highlands and, sometimes 
joined with ice sheets from Scandinavia, had spread over the 
Lowlands and extended into Ireland and as far south as Cam- 
bridge. Round Edinburgh the ice is believed to have been 
over 1000 feet thick. It filled up the valleys and rode over the 
tops of the Pentland Hills. In France the Rhone glacier, that 
can be seen in the distance above the Lake of Geneva today, 
spread down the Rhone valley to Lyons. 
The formation and spread of these glaciers and ice sheets 
must have taken a stupendous time. A glacier is a river of ice, 
not a frozen river. The extension of the Rhone glacier to 
Lyons does not mean that the Rhone was suddenly frozen 
over, but that the glacier flowed down from the high Alps to 
the level of Lyons. But a glacier flows very slowly: its motion 
is scarcely perceptible to the naked eye. The fastest rate of flow 
observed is only 100 feet per day, and often the flow is much 
slower. The great sheets of ice that flowed over the plains of 
East Anglia and North Germany did not move at anything 
like the above rate. In Greenland such ice sheets are now mov- 
ing only a few inches a day; in Antarctica the rate of flow is 
about one-third of a mile per annum. How long must it have 
taken for the Rhone glacier to reach Lyons and the Scottish 
ice sheets to have spread to Suffolk! 
And then the melting of the vast ice sheets must have been 
equally slow. A really big mass of ice takes a lot of fusing. 
An iceberg in midsummer can float south of New York. But, 
huge though it be, such a detached island of ice is immeasur- 
ably smaller and more fusible than the vast ice sheets and 
glaciers under consideration. Their melting must have been so 
gradual that the difference in the position of the ice edge 
between one summer and the next can hardly have been per- 
ceptible to contemporary men. 
Yet humanity witnessed the advance and the disappearance 
of the ice sheets over Europe long before history began. Not 
only so. Many geologists believe that there were four distinct 
Ice Ages or glaciations during the pleistocene epoch. Four 
times glaciers and ice sheets would have spread slowly over 
Europe, and four times they would have imperceptibly melted 
away or dried up. And between each glacial episode there 
would have been a warm temperate interglacial epoch of un- 
crtain duration. "Men" were living in Europe and elsewhere 

TIME SCALES 
4 1 
throughout these gradual changes. A consideration of their 
gradualness and vastness is a better guide to the length of 
prehistoric time than any piling up of monstrous numbers. 
During the Ice Ages other equally slow changes were in 
progress, and a reference to these may reinforce the lesson 
provided by glaciations. Great Britain, for instance, became 
attached by land-bridges to the Continent, and then separated 
again while men were living on her territories. The movements 
involved were as slow as those which are occurring unnoticed 
before our eyes today. It is notorious that the coast of England 
is being devoured by the sea. Occasionally the spectacular 
collapse of a piece of cliff near Brighton or the destruction 
of a promenade calls attention to this erosion. But on the whole 
the process is imperceptible. Even in half a century its effects 
are too small to be reflected in a map even on a scale as large as 
one inch to the mile. Equally gradual is the building up of land 
by the discharge of rivers forming deltas or silting up estuaries. 
At the beginning of the pleistocene a great deal of East 
Anglia was under the sea. The so-called crags of Norfolk are 
sediments laid down in the shallow sea that covered the county 
at that time. Gradually the accumulation of such silts, coupled 
with equally gradual upheavals of the earth's crust, joined 
Britain to the Continent, and ultimately made dry land of the 
North Sea basin. The Thames then joined the Rhine as a 
tributary and flowed out over a vast plain into the Arctic Ocean 
north of the Dogger Bank. The re-submergence of this area 
had not been completed when the ice sheets disappeared. A 
land-bridge to England may have still existed when the 
pleistocene period ended, and the sinking that destroyed it is 
still in progress. Its progress is no more perceptible today than 
in the earlier stages and in the previous stages of elevation. 
That again should emphasize the stupendous duration of the 
pleistocene. 
The foregoing remarks are intended to help the reader to 
gauge the lengths of time which may be denoted by the 
archaeologists' "ages." But now a warning must be inserted a'S 
to the meaning of such "ages." The Old Stone Age, the New 
Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age must not be 
mistaken for absolute periods of time like the epochs of the 
geologist. In anyone locality-say Southern England or Egypt 
-each age does indeed really occupy a definite period of 
historical time. And in all regions the severa] ages follow one 
another in the same order. But they did not begin nor end 
simultaneously all over the world. It must not be imagined that 
at a given moment in the world's history a trumpet was blown 
in heaven, and every hunter from China to Peru thereupon 

42 
TIME SCALES 
flung aside his weapons and traps and started planting wheat 
or rice o.r maize and breeding pigs and sheep and turkeys. 
On the contrary, the Old Stone Age, at least in the economic 
sense given to the term on p. 35, lasts till today in Central 
Australia and in Arctic America. The neolithic revolution had 
initiated the New Stone Age in Egypt and Mesopotamia about 
7000 years ago. In Britain or Germany its effects are first per- 
ceptible three and a half millennia later, say about 2500 B.C. 
By the time the New Stone Age was established in Britain, 
Egypt and Mesopotamia had been in the Bronze Age for 
about a thousand years. The New Stone Age in Denmark 
did not end before 1500 B.C. In New Zealand it had not ended 
when Captain Cook landed; the Maori were still using polished 
stone tools and practicing a neolithic economy when England 
was in the throes of the Industrial Revolution. The Australians' 
economy was then still "paleolithic." 
It is just as important to remember the relative character 
of archaeological "ages" as it is to grasp the great lengths of 
time they may denote in certain areas. The Old Stone Age 
was indeed so enormously long that it may almost be treated 
as a universal period, equivalent to the geologists' pleistocene. 
But in considering its end the time lag between different areas 
is of crucial importance. The equivalence between pleistocene 
and paleolithic is preserved by many archaeologists through 
the insertion of a Mesolithic Age, to which are assigned some 
post-glacial archaeological remains from countries, like Britain 
and Northwestern Europe in general, which were only affected 
by the neolithic revolution long after the end of the Ice Age. 
To the mesolithic would then be assigned those remains that 
are later than the geological pleistocene but older than the 
beginnings of the New Stone Age locally. Since economically 
the Mesolithic Age was a mere continuance of the Old Stone 
Age mode of life, it has seemed needless in this book to 
complicate the picture with a Mesolithic. Provided the reader's 
mind is free of preconceptions, identifying "ages" with periods 
of universal time, the treatment in the subsequent chapters 
should not prove misleading. 
Perhaps one final warning is desirable. Contemporary 
savages have just been described as living in the Stone Age 
today. They have not, in fact, progressed beyond a Stone Age 
economy. That does not justify the assumption that Stone 
Age men, living in Europe or the Near East 6000 or 20,000 
years ago, observed the same sort of social and ritual rules, 
entertained the same beliefs, or organized their family rela- 
tionships along the same lines as modern peoples on a com- 
parable level of economic development. It is true that the 

TIME SCALES 
43 
Bushmen of South Africa, the Eskimos of Arctic America, 
and the Arunta in Central Australia get their food in the same 
sort of way as the men of the Ice Age in Europe. Their ma- 
terial equipment and even their art are sometimes strikingly 
like those left by A urignacians or Magdalenians in glacial 
Europe. A study of the processes by which these modern 
savages make tools and of how they use them is an illuminating 
and probably reliable guide to the techniques and skills of our 
remote ancestors. An examination of the habits of the Eskimos 
is the best way of seeing how men can live under conditions 
such as ruled in Europe in the Ice Ages. 
But we may be invited to go further and seek in savages' 
institutions, rituals, and beliefs the living counterpart of that 
aspect of prehistoric life and culture upon which archaeology 
is inevitably silent. The prospect is alluring, but the reader 
must not be misled by its enticements. Because the economic 
life and the material culture of these tribes have been 
"arrested" at a stage of development Europeans passed through 
some 10,000 years ago, does it follow that their mental 
development stopped dead at the same point? 
The Arunta are satisfied with a very simple equipment that 
does, however, suce to provide them with food and shelter 
in the Australian environment. Their material equipment is 
very much on the same technical level as, and in some points 
identical with, that of Old Stone Age hunters in Europe and 
North Africa. But the Arunta observe (to us) most com- 
plicated rules for the regulation of marriage and reckoning of 
kinship, they perform very elaborate and sometimes very pain- 
ful ceremonies for magico-religious ends, they profes3 a med- 
ley of puzzling and incoherent beliefs about totems, animals, 
ancestors, and spirits. It would surely be rash to regard such 
social rules, ceremonies, and beliefs as an uncontaminated 
heritage from a "primitive condition of man." 
Why should we attribute such ideas and practices to Stone 
Age men of 20,000 years ago? Why assume that, when the 
Arunta had created a material culture adapted to their en- 
vironment, they at once stopped thinking altogether? They 
may have gone on thinking just as much as our own cultural 
ancestors, although their thoughts followed different lines and 
did not lead them to the same practical results, applied 
sciences, and arithmetic, but alor..6 what we regard as blind 
alleys of superstition. Moreover, they may have been exposed 
to influences from the great civilizations the commerce of 
which has been percolating to the uttermost corners of the 
earth for the last 5000 years. Some ethnographers at least 
claim to recognize in the material culture, social organization, 

44 
TIME SCALES 
and religion of the Australians, elements and ideas taken over 
and adapted from more advanced peoples in the Old World. 
Other very primitive 1ribes seem to have lost elements of 
culture that they once enjoyed. The Bushmen of South Africa 
would be an unfortunate stock that has been driven into poor 
and arid wastes by stronger peoples, like the Bantu. In their 
new and unfavorable environment, arts once practiced may 
have been neglected and forgotten. Finds from old refuse 
heaps, for instance, suggest that th Bushmen's ancestors once 
manufactured pottery which is no longer made. Social institu- 
tions and religious beliefs may have been disintegrated and 
distorted at the same time. Such a group is impoverished, not 
primitive. 
The assumption that any savage tribe today is primitive in 
the sense that its culture faithfully reflects that of much more 
ancient men is gratuitous. We shall frequently invoke the 
ideas and practices of conten1porary savages to illustrate how 
ancient peoples, known only to archaeology, may have done 
things or interpreted them. But save in so far as such modern 
practice and beIief are used as a mere gloss or commentary on 
actually observed ancient objects, constructions, or operations, 
the usage is illegitimate. The thoughts and beliefs of prehistoric 
men have perished irrevocably save in so far as they were ex- 
pressed in actions the results of which were durable and can be 
recovered by the archaeologist's spade. 

