CHAPTER VI 
PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
THE neolithic revolution, just described, was the climax of a 
long process. It has to be presented as a single event because 
archaeology can only recognize the result; the several steps 
leading up thereto are beyond the range of direct observation. 
A second revolution transformed some tiny villages of self- 
sufficing farmers into populous cities, nourished by secondary 
industries and foreign trade, and regularly organized as States. 
Some of the episodes which ushered in this transformation can 
be discerned, if dimly, !Jy prehistory. The scene of the drama 
lies in the belt of semi-arid countries between the Nile and the 
Ganges. Here epoch-making inventions seem to have followed 
one anothef with breathless speed, when we recall the slow 
pace of progress in the millennia before the first revolution or 
even in the four millennia between the second and the Indus- 
trial Revolution of modern times. 
Between 6000 and 3000 B.C. man has learnt to harness the 
force of oxen and of winds, he invents the plow, the wheeled 
cart, and the sailboat, he discovers the chemical processes 
involved in smelting copper ores and the physical properties of 
metals, and he begins to work out an accurate solar calendar. 
He has thereby equipped himself fOf urban life, and prepares 
the way for a civilization which shall require writing, processes 
of reckoning, and standards of measurement-instruments of 
a new way of transmitting knowledge and of exact sciences. In 
no period of history till the days of Galileo was progress in 
knowledge so rapid or far-reaching discoveries so frequent. 
The neolithic revolution left the whole area from the Nile 
and the East Mediterranean across Syria and Iraq to the 
Iranian plateau and to the Indus valley beyond sprinkled with 
neolithic communities. It may be assumed that great diversity 
in culture reigned throughout this vast zone, just as it does to- 
day. We may suspect many scattered groups of hunters and 
fishers, survivals of the pre-neolithic economy, migratory horti- 
culturists, and still more nomadic pastoralists. But none of 
these communities is as yet direcdy known; archaeologists have 
concentrated their attention upon more settled communities, 
87 

88 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
upon the sites of villages which have often grown into cities. 
Even these exhibit great diversity in crafts, in art, and in gen- 
eral economy, but a few abstract traits are common to all. 
The populations are essentiaily sedentary. The favored sites 
remain continuously occupied right into historical times. 
Daughter colonies may be planted as the community grows, 
but as far as possible the village itself expanded till it became 
a town. The geographical and economic factors favoring 
permanent settlement can easily be guessed. 
In the first place, really desirable sites are limited in a zone 
of countries which were becoming increasingly arid and 
afflicted with ever worse droughts. Permanent water supplies- 
perennial springs and streams that would supply the needs of 
large assemblages of men and livestock, and supplement the 
scanty rainfall by irrigating fields and gardens-were diminish- 
ing. As the human race multiplied under the stimulus of the 
first revolution, such became rare and valuable possessions. 
Then the profitable exploitation of these natural oases was a 
particularly laborious task requiring the collective effort of a 
large body of workers. Precisely as the ultimate yield in food- 
stuffs was to be abundant, so the preliminary exertions in pre- 
paring the land were heavy and irksome. The Nile, whose 
annual flood provides both water and soil, offered a certain 
and abundant livelihood. But the valley bottom that is reached 
by the flood was originally a series of swamps and reedy 
jungles. Its reclamation was a stupendous task: the swamps 
had to be drained by channels, the violence of floodwaters to 
be restrained by banks, the thicket to be cleared away, the wild 
beasts lurking in them to be exterminated. No small group 
could hope to make headway against such obstacles. It needed 
a strong force capable of acting together to cope with recurrent 
crises that threatened drainage channels and banks. The few 
original patches of habitable and cultivable land had to be 
extended with sweat and blood. The soil, thus hardly con- 
quered, was a sacred heritage; no one would willingly abandon 
fields so laboriously created. And there was no need to aban- 
don them, since the river itself renewed their fertility every 
year. 
Lower Mesopotamia, the region termed Sumer at the dawn 
of history, presented a like task. Beween the main channels of 
the Tigris and the Euphrates was a vast tract of swamps, only 
recently raised by the river silt above the waters of the Persian 
Gulf. The swamps were covered with a tangle of gigantic reed- 
brakes interspersed with groves of date-palms. They were inter- 
rupted only by low ridges of rocky outcrop or banks of sandy 
silt. But they swarmed perpetually with animal life while on 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 89 
either side the steppes above flood level were parched and 
barren throughout the long blazing summer and the bitter 
winter. Attracted perhaps by the game, wild fowl, and fish, and 
by the groves of date-palms, the proto-Sumerians tackled the 
stupendous task of taming the Tigris-Euphrates delta and 
making it fit for habitation. 
The land on which the great cities of Babylonia were to rise 
had literaIJy to be created; the prehistoric forerunner of the 
bibHcal Erech was built on a sort of platform of reeds, laid 
crisscross upon the al1uvial mud. The Hebrew book of Genesis 
has familiarized us with much older traditions of the pristine 
condition of Sumer-a "chaos" in which the boundaries be- 
tween water and dry land were still fluid. An essential incident 
in "The Creation" is the separation of these elements. Yet 
it was no god, but the proto-Sumerians themselves who created 
the land; they dug channels to water the fields and drain the 
marsh; they built dykes and mounded platforms to protect 
men and cattle from the waters and raise them above the 
flood; they made the first clearings in the reed brakes and ex- 
plored the channels between them. The tenacity with which 
the memory of this struggle persisted in tradition is some 
measure of the exertion imposed upon the ancient Sumerians. 
Their reward was an assured supply of nourishing dates, a 
bounteous harvest from the fields they had drained, and per- 
manent pastures for flocks and herds. 
But they would naturally be attached to fields so laboriously 
won and to settlements so carefully protected: they would not 
willingly desert them to find new dwellings. And it was easier 
from the original mound and the nuclear clearing to extend the 
area of habitable land and cultivate mud than to found fresh 
settlements in the heart of the undrained swamp. Additional in- 
habitants were a positive advantage to a marsh village. With 
their labor, drainage channels could be extended and em- 
bankments enlarged to provide more land for cultivation and 
more room for settlement. Even more than in Upper Egypt, 
natural conditions in Sumer favored a large community and 
required organized social co-operation on an ever-increasing 
scale. But the same conditions must have prevailed also in the 
Nile Delta (as contrasted with the narrow valley above Cairo). 
In adjacent regions-in the valleys of Syrian or Iranian 
torrents, for instance-conditions were rather Jess exacting. 
But even there permanent improvements had to be effected in 
the way of irrigation canals and drainage channels, and such 
would enhance the attraction of the site affected. 
So aU through the Near East the best sites were reclaimed 
with toil. Capital in the form of human labor was being sunk 

90 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
in the land. Its expenditure bound men to the soH; they would 
not lightly forgo the interest brought in by their reproductive 
works. And all the works in question were collective under- 
takings, they benefited the community as a whole, and were 
beyond the power of any individual. And generally their ex- 
ecution required capital in the form of a stock of surplus 
foodstuffs, accumulated by and at the disposal of the com- 
munity. The workers engaged in draining and embanking 
must be fed; but while so employed they were not directly 
producing the food they consumed. As the reproductive works 
of a community became more ambitious, so the need for an 
accumulated stock of surplus foodstuffs would increase. Such 
an accumulation was a pre-condition of the growth of the 
village into a city, by conquering ever more of the territory 
surrounding it from marsh and desert. 
Incidentally, conditions of life in a river vaHey or other 
oasis place in the hanus uf society an exceptional power for 
coercing its members; the community can refuse a recalcitrant 
access to water and can close the channels that irrigate his 
fields. Rain falleth upon the just and the unjust alike, but 
irrigating waters reach the fields by channels that the com- 
munity has constructed. And what society has provided, 
society can also withdraw from the unjust and confine to the 
just alone. The social solidarity needed by irrigators can thus 
be imposed owing to the very circumstances that demand it. 
And young men cannot escape the restraint of their elders by 
founding fresh villages when all beyond the oasis is waterless 
desert. So when the social will comes to be expressed through 
a chief or a king, he is invested not merely with moral 
authority, but with coercive force too; he can apply sanctions 
against the disobedient. 
A third stabilizing factor in the Near East was the enlarge- 
ment of the farmer's diet: dates, figs, olives, and other fruits 
were added to barley and wheat-flour. Such fruits are nourish- 
ing and easy to preserve and transport. At first they would be 
gathered from wild trees. A grove of wild date-paln1s in 
Sumer or of fig-trees in Syria would enhance the value, and 
even determine the choice, of a site for settlement. Now fruit- 
trees go on bearing year after year, but are unmovable. 'ro 
enjoy their fruits you must abide in their vicinity, or at least 
return to them every year. 
And soon fruit trees and vines were being cultivated. That, 
of course, involved an entirely new technique of husbandry. 
Men had to learn by experience the secrets of pruning for 
wood or for fruit, of grafting, and of artificial fertilization. 
The stages of this education are unknown, the beginnings 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 91 
of fruit-growing and viticulture have still to be elucidated. 
They certainly go back to prehistoric times. Their conse- 
quences are obvious. A palm grove or an orchard is a per- 
manent possession in a different sense from a wheatfield. 
Your sown grain returns you a yield after a few months, but 
only one crop for each sowing. A date-palm, an olive tree, 
or a vine returns no fruit for five or more years, but will then 
go on bearing for perhaps a century. Such permanent planta- 
tions inevitably attach their owners to the land far more firmly 
than fields of wheat or barley. The orchardist is as deeply 
rooted in the soil as his own precious trees. 
Sedentary life gave opportunities for improved housing 
accommodation and paved the way for architecture. The 
earliest Egyptian farmers had been content with simple wind- 
screens of reeds plastered with mud. The proto-Sumerians dwelt 
in tunnel-like houses of growing reeds or of mats hung upon 
bundles of reeds. But soon houses built of mud or terre pisee 
were being erected both in Egypt and in Asia. And long before 
3000 B.C. the brick was invented in Syria or Mesopotamia. It 
is essentially just a lump of mud mixed with straw, that has 
been shaped by pressing into a wooden mold and then dried in 
the sun. But its invention made free construction and monu- 
mental architecture possible. 
Like pottery, brick put into men's hands a medium of free 
expression, scarcely restricted as to form or size by the 
material itself. You have a free choice as to how you shall 
put your bricks together, just as you have in building up a 
pot. But the product may now be on a monumental scale. And 
as such it is no longer an individual creation, but essentially 
the collective product of many hands. 
As in the case of pottery, the first brick buildings kept close 
to the form of structures in older materials. But even so, in 
copying in brick the tunnel-like roof of the reed hut, some 
people in Sumer or Assyria stumbled upon the principle of 
the true arch; they were applying complicated mechanical 
laws of thrusts and strains many millennia before these laws 
had been formulated. 
Incidentally, brick architecture quite soon made a contribu- 
tion to applied mathematics. A brick-stack admirably 
illustrates the formula for the volume of a parallelepiped. Even 
though ancient bricks wer hardly ever cubes, it was easy to 
see that the number of bricks in a stack could be found by 
counting the numbers in three adjacent sides and multiplying 
these quantities together. 
The prosperous farmers settled in the oases and rive:- val- 
leys of the Near East appear to have been much more prone 

92 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
to surrender their economic self-sufficiency than the poor 
communities that in Europe are styled neolithic. Their read- 
iness to make the sacrifice is a corollary of the variety of 
economies practiced in the area. As already remarked, besides 
the prosperous villages of settled farmers, communities of 
fishers, hunters, and seminomadic pastoralists must be as- 
sumed in the intervening spaces. Now the farming com- 
munities could easily produce more grain than was needed for 
home consumption. Very likely they would be glad to part 
with the surplus in exchange for fish, game, or pastoral 
products. And the poorer nomads, for their part, would be 
glad to barter their takings for corn. A certain interdependence 
between farming villages on the one hand and groups of 
fishers, hunters, or herdsmen on the other could very easily 
arise. Such interdependence exists today in a marked degree. 
The nomad Arab camel-breeders, for instance, depend for 
grain and manufactures upon settled cultivators. How early 
the economic specialization of different groups developed 
into that sort of interdependence is uncertain. It is presupposed 
in the earliest historical narratives; it may be inferred much 
earlier. The earliest Egyptian farmers had also been huntsmen, 
and their weapons were buried with them. In later graves, 
belonging to the same village, hunting implements are missing. 
One explanation for their absence would be that the later 
villagers found it more convenient to barter surplus farm 
produce for game than to hunt it themselves, as their fore- 
fathers had done. 
Positive evidence for the gradual breakdown of isolation 
is afforded by the increasing abundance of imported materials 
in prehistoric cemeteries and vil1ages. Red Sea and Mediter- 
ranean shells have already been recorded in neolithic villages 
in Egypt. Rather later Egyptian graves contain in addition 
first malachite and resin, then also lapis lazuli and obsidian; 
later still amethysts and turquoise appear, and appear in in- 
creasing quantities. Now malachite must have been brought 
from Sinai or the Eastern Desert of Nubia, resin from the for- 
ested mountains of Syria or Southern Arabia, obsidian from 
Melos in the Aegean, Arabia, Armenia, or possibly Abyssinia; 
lapis lazuli probably from the Iranian plateau. 
In Sumer obsidian is found in the oldest settlements, to- 
gether with beads of amazonite that may have been brought 
from India or at least Armenia. In North Syria and Assyria 
obsidian was being imported as early as in Sumer, and lapis 
lazuli and turquoise soon appear. Foreign substances are found 
as imports very early also at Anau in Russian Turkestan and 
at Susa in Elam. east of the Tigris. 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION' 93 
The transmission of foreign substances over such great 
distances in the Orient is best explained by the assumption 
of more mobile populations living alongside the permanent 
agricultural villages; it v'ould indicate contact between the 
nomads and the farmers. In any case, it is the beginning of 
trade, the prerequisite of metallurgy. 
The gums and semi-precious stones imported into Sumer 
and Egypt might be thought to be just luxuries, unessential 
adjuncts to the toilet. But that would probably be an incorrect 
judgment; very soon, in any case, these substances came to be 
regarded as necessities. The Egyptians used malachite for 
painting their eyelids, and a whole complex of devices grew up 
around it, as round tobacco-smoking with us. It was carried in 
richly ornamented leather pouches and ground up on palettes 
carved into the likeness of animals. The green color coun- 
teracted the sun's glare, and copper carbonate acted as a 
disinfectant against the eye diseases carried by flies in hot 
countries. But to the Egyptians these effects seemed magical; 
they valued malachite for the mystic property or mana 
resident in it. That is why its preparation was a ritual, why 
the pouches were decorated with amulets and the palettes 
carved into the shape of animals. It was the same with other 
"imports"-all were regarded as possessing some magic virtue. 
The cowrie shell resembles the vulva. To wear a cowrie there- 
fore ensured fertility. The shell became a charm. The sanctiy 
thus earned for it has made cowrie shells substitutes for money 
in parts of Africa and Asia. Native gold and the bright pebbles 
of the desert-carnelian, opal, and agate-as well as rarer 
stones, like turquoise and lapis, were again valued not only 
because they were pretty, but also because magic potencies 
reside in them. The magic virtues of jewels are frequently 
mentioned in ancient literatures, and tee old ideas persisted 
throughout the Middle Ages even in Europe. Jewels were 
thus desired not as mere ornaments, but as practical means to 
the attainment of success, wealth, long life, offspring. From 
this standpoint they were not luxuries, but necessaries. 
The magic virtue inherent in the substance would be en- 
hanced if it were carved into the likeness of something itself 
possessing mana. If a piec of lapis lazuli were carved in the 
Iikeness of a bull, its wearer communicated to himself not 
only the clarity of the blue sky, but also the potency of a bull. 
Thus arose the practice of making amulets. It inspired the 
development of the new and difficult craft of the gem-cutter; 
the perforation and carving of hard stones for beads and 
amulets are conspicuous traits common to nearly all the 
ancient cultures of the Orient, from Crete to Turkestan. It 

94 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
led to the exploitation of glazes. Blue fayence was apparently 
discovered before the dawn of history. It was not regarded as 
a substitute for turquoise, but as the result of a magic trans- 
mutation of sand and alkali into turquoise-as we might say, 
synthetic turquoise. It possessed the practical advantage that 
it could be molded. 
Instead of carving the gem into an amulet, its virtue could 
be enhanced by scratching upon it the representation of some 
object, or just a magic symbol, like the swastika. Such en- 
graved beads had one peculiar merit: if they were pressed on 
soft clay, the designs engraved on them would be transferred 
to the plastic material. This procedure was, of course, a magic 
operation. Some of the mana inherent in the stone was im- 
parted with the symbol. You put your magic on the stamped 
object. That had the effect of what ethnographers term putting 
a tabu on it; whoever violated it, would be in peril from your 
magic. And so the engraved stone became a seal. The wad of 
clay over the mouth of a jar, when stamped with the seal, be- 
came a magic guardian of the jar's content. It warned anyone 
that in breaking the seal he would break a tabu and incur 
magic penalties. Sealing became thereby a means of securing 
property and asserting ownership. \Vhen writing was invented, 
it would take the place of a signature. 
The use of engraved stones as seals is attested from the 
very earliest neolithic settlements in Assyria. In early times 
seals were current from the Euphrates eastwards across Iran, 
while amulets were used instead in Egypt and the Mediter- 
ranean coasts. But the two devices quite early began to inter- 
penetrate one another, and a rigid frontier scarcely separated 
them. 
The desire for gold, stones, and shells on account of magic 
properties supposedly resident in them had important practical 
consequences. It was a potent factor in breaking down the 
economic isolation of peasant communities. To obtain magic 
substances, needed to ensure the fertility of his fields and his 
own good luck, the thrifty peasant would be ready to part 
with grains and fruit to the nomads of the desert. To the 
latter, gems and malachite offered portable articles to barter 
for agricultural produce. Beads must have formed a staple of 
the earliest regular trade. 
The high estimation of magic substances may wen have 
led to an active search for them. For a later date W. J. Perry 
has envisaged a worldwide quest for gold, precious stones, 
amber, and other supposedly magical substances to have been 
undertaken by the Ancient Egyptians. It would have been a 
principal factor in the diffusion of civilization. Even though 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 95 
his contention must be regarded as exaggerated, the desire for 
such substances may well have prompted a sort of geological 
exploration of regions otherwise uninviting. And one fact is 
outstanding: malachite is a carbonate of copper, turquoise a 
phosphate of aluminum tinged with copper; and both occur 
in connection with copper ores; many of these ores are them- 
selves brightly colored and presumably magical. The collection 
of malachite, turquoise, and other colored stones accordingly 
caused men to frequent metalliferous regions and put copper 
ores into their hands. To this extent the rise of metallurgy 
that was a dominant factor in the second revolution would be 
an indirect result of the magical ideas just considered. 
Metal working involved two groups or complexes of dis- 
coveries: (1) that copper, when hot, melts and can be cast 
into any desired shape, but on cooling becomes as hard, and 
will take on as good an edge, as stone, and (2) that the tough, 
trenchant, reddish metal can be produced by heating certain 
crystalline stones or earths in contact with charcoal. Copper, 
indeed, occurs naturally, though only rarely, in the metallic 
state as native copper. The pre-Columbian Indians of the 
Great Lakes region in U.S.A. utilized extensive local deposits 
of native copper for industrial ends. They treated the metal 
as a superior sort of stone, and even discovered its mal- 
leability, producing objects of beaten copper. But they never 
tried melting and casting it. Their procedures did not lead 
on to intelligent metallurgy, and it is unlikely that native 
copper played any significant part in the rise of the industry 
in the Old World. That depended from the outset on the 
reduction of copper ores. 
The discovery involved might easily be made. A prehistoric 
Egyptian may have dropped some malachite on the glowing 
ashes of his hearth and seen the gleaming globules of metallic 
copper run out. A campfire, lit by some jewel-seeker in a met- 
alliferous district against the outcrop of a surface lode, might 
reduce some of the ore. In the Katanga district prospectors 
have noticed beads of copper, thus accidentally smelted, among 
the ashes of Negroes' campfires. The reduction of copper 
might be discovered more than once, but its significance need 
not have been immediately appreciated. Small objects of 
copper-pins and even harpoon-heads-turn up sporadically 
in very early Egyptian graves. But they disclose no intelligent 
realization of the potentialities of metal. The copper has been 
hammered into thin rods, and bent or beaten into strips, and 
cut; it has, in fact, been subjected to the processes familiarly 
pplied to bone, stone, and fibers-cutting, hammering, bend- 
Ing. 

96 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The real superiority of metal is that it is fusible and can be 
cast. Fusibility confers upon copper some of the merits of 
potter's clay. In working it the intelligent artificer is freed 
from the restrictions of size and shape imposed by bone or 
stone. A stone axe-head, a flint spear-point, or a bone harpoon 
can only be made by grinding, chipping, or cutting bits off the 
original piece. Molten copper is completely plastic, and ,\fill 
adapt itself to fill any desired form; it can be run into a mold 
of any shape and will assume, and on cooling retain, precisely 
the form outlined by the mold. The only limit to size is the 
capacity of the mold; you can run into it as much copper as 
you like. And the molds themselves can be made of potter's 
clay, the potentialities of which were considered on p. 76. 
On the other hand, though so plastic when hot, the metai 
on cooling possesses the essential virtues of stone and bone; 
it is as solid, and will take as sharp an edge or as fine a point. 
Yet it has the additional advantage of being malleable. And 
finally, it is more permanent than stone or bone. A stone axe 
may easily be splintered by hard usage, and is then done for; 
at best its edge will often need regrinding, and it will soon be 
reduced to a useless size. But a copper axe can be remelted 
again and again, and will come out as good as new. The in- 
telligent use of metal-let us say, simply metallurgy-begins 
when these advantages have been realized. 
But that realization required a readjustment of the forms 
of thought. The change from tough solid copper to molten 
metal and back to the solid state again is dramatic, and must 
have seemed mysterious. The sameness between the shapeless 
lump of raw copper, the liquid in the crucible, and the well- 
formed casting, must at first have been difficult to grasp. Man 
was here controlling a remarkable process of physical change. 
He would have to adjust whatever naive ideas of substance 
he entertained in order to recognize identity through its sev- 
eral stages. 
Moreover, the control of the process was only possible by 
means of a whole complex of discoveries and inventions. A 
temperature in the neighborhood of 1200 0 C. is requisite to 
melt copper. That requires a blast. Some device had to be 
invented for forcing a current of air upon the flame; bellows 
are the correct solution, but are not directly attested till 1600 
B.C. Furnaces, crucibles, and tongs had to be invented. Casting 
requires molds. It is easy enough to reproduce by casting an 
object that is flat on one side by impressing it on clay and 
pouring molten metal in the hollow left by the pattern. But 
that is useless for making a stout dagger with a ridge on both 
faces to strengthen it. Such an implement required a two-piece 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 97 
mold, the halves of which must correspond exactly and must 
be bound or clamped together. By 3000 B.C. the ingenious cire 
perdue process was employed in Mesopotamia. A model of the 
desired object is first made in wax and then coated in clay; 
the clay is heated, becoming pottery, while the wax is allowed 
to run out; metal is then poured into the cavity, and finally the 
clay mold is broken, disclosing the metal casting reproducing 
the form of the wax model. 
These few words may suggest how intricate the course of 
casting really is. But the actual operations are much- more 
tedious and intricate than a page of print can indicate. For 
instance, precautions must be taken to prevent the liquid 
metal from oxidizing or sticking to the mold. In a closed mold 
there is a danger of air bubbles forming, which would cause 
a fatal weakness in the casting. Again, after casting, the tool 
has to be hammered and smoothed down with a file or an 
abrasive. 
Evidently the .smith must dispose of a formidable body of 
industrial lore; his craft traditions embody the results of long 
experience and many deliberate experiments. They represent 
a new branch of applied science--elements carried over into 
modern chemistry and physics-but blended with a tangle of 
magic that we have happily forgotten. The transmission of this 
lore need not differ in kind from that of potter's lore. But the 
smith's task was more complicated and exacting than hers, the 
knowledge he required more specialized. It is very doubtful 
whether metallurgy could be practiced as a domestic industry 
in the intervals of agricultural work. Among modern barba- 
rians smiths are normally specialists, and metal-working has 
probably always been a fuB-time job. The smith's may there- 
fore be the oldest specialized craft save the magician's. But a 
community can afford a smith only if it possess a surplus of 
foodstuffs; the smith, being withdrawn from food-production 
himself, must be fed from the unconsumed surplus of the 
farmers. The industrial use of metal may thus be treated as a 
sign of the specialization of labor, that a community's food 
supply exceeds its normal needs. 
But it generally means more; it usually means the final 
sacrifice of economic independence. Copper is far from com- 
mon; its ores are not found on the alluvial and loss plains 
preferred by neolithic farmers, but among wooded or stony 
ranges. Very few farming communities can have possessed 
copper mines on their home territory; the great majority had 
always to import the metal or its ore. In the end it had to b 
obtained by the production of a surplus of foodstuffs above 
what was needed for home consumption. 

98 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The scientific and economic implications of the extraction 
of metal from its ores are perhaps more far-reaching than 
those of metal-working. Copper ores are crystalline or pow- 
dery minerals generally occurring as veins in hard ancient 
rocks. The transformation of the ores into copper is a fairly 
simple chemical change. But what an astonishing one to early 
man! The ore does not look the least like the metal. The 
change it undergoes in contact with glowing carbon is mirac- 
ulous-surely a change of substance, a transubstantiation! The 
recognition of a continuity of substance must have been been 
very difficult, and a rational account was achieved only by 
modern chelnistry; till then alchemical ideas about transmuta- 
tion could subsist. But, whatever his theories, man learned 
enough practical chemistry to distinguish what sorts of stone 
would yield copper when heated with carbon. 
The right sorts of stone are, as remarked, far from common. 
Once alive to the value of metal and the possibility of trans- 
muting stones into it, men must have sought deliberately for 
suitable ores and made numerous experiments, trying first one 
stone and then another. Many were fruitless, but other metals 
were discovered in the quest. Silver and lead both occur in 
prehistoric graves in Egypt, and were extensively used in 
Mesopotamia before 3000 B.C. Beads of meteoric iron occur 
in Egyptian graves shortly before 3000 B.C., and a little later 
iron ores were occasionally smelted in Mesopotamia. But on 
an industrial scale iron was not smelted nor worked anywhere 
before 1400 B.C. Tin was known to the metallurgists of Sumer 
and the Indus valley soon after 3000 B.C., being employed 
chiefly as an alloy of copper to simplify the process of casting. 
The first copper ores to be exploited were presumably de- 
rived from surface deposits. Many such lodes must once have 
existed, but have been exhausted long before modern geologi- 
cal surveys were started. Eventually, however, men had to 
follow the vein beneath the ground and begin mining. The 
copper miner had to learn how to split hard rocks by kindling 
fires against them and throwing water on the heated surfaces. 
Systems of propping and timbering had to be devised to sup- 
port the walls and roofs of the galleries. The ore had to be 
broken up, separated from the rock by washing, and trans- 
ported to the surface. No records, however, survive to illus- 
trate the steps by which the science of mining was founded; 
but by 1000 B.C. copper miners, even in still-barbarous Eu- 
rope, were applying a science that a layman today can admire, 
but cannot attempt to expound. 
The art of smelting is no less abstruse. As in casting, some 
sort of a blast is essential. And for production on a large scale 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 99 
a furnace had to be devised. And only surface ores of copper 
can be directly reduced by heating with charcoal; deeper ores 
are generally sulphides, and have to be roasted in the open to 
oxidize them before they can be smelted. Other metals require 
different treatment. Lead, for example, will volatilize and 
vanish with the smoke if its ore be heated in the sort of open 
furnace used for smelting copper. 
Prospectors, miners, and smelters must therefore command 
a body of knowledge even more abstruse than that demanded 
of the smith. They must have classified the different kinds of 
ore, learned the outward signs for their diagnosis, the appro- 
priate techniques for their treatment. The requisite knowledge 
could only be gained by experimentation and comparison of 
results on an even larger scale than was demanded by metal- 
working. Mining must have been an even more specialized 
trade than that of the smith. Miners as a rule cannot have been 
food-producers, but must have relied on a surplus of food.. 
stuffs produced by those who consumed their products. 
Intelligent metallurgy must have been widely understood in 
the Ancient East soon after 4000 B.C. But metal ousted stone 
very slowly. The advantages, stressed above, must not be 
exaggerated. For hoeing up the soil, stone blades serve the 
cultivator well; he will often have to replace them, but nor- 
mally that is easy. A flint blade works excellently for cutting 
up carcasses, for reaping grains, for trimming leather, and 
even for shaving; it wears out quickly, but a new knife or 
razor can be fashioned in a few minutes where flint is abun- 
dant. Stone axes or adzes will fell trees, shape posts, or hew 
out a canoe almost as quickly and neatly as copper ones; only 
you will have to pause periodically and make a new axe from 
a convenient pebble. The chief defect of stone tools was that 
they wore out so quickly. But when the raw materials were 
Iying about and time was not absurdly precious, it was not an 
intolerable hardship to have to make new tools from time to 
time. It needed the special geographical conditions of an allu- 
vial plain, where suitable stones were rare, to drive home the 
value of the new and more permanent material and to create 
an effective and general demand for metal. And to make the 
satisfaction of that demand possible, improved methods of 
transport were needed. That meant the harnessing of animal 
motive power and of the winds. Both were, like the discovery 
of metal and the invention of metallurgy, preconditions of the 
second revolution and achieved before it. 
Harnessing the strength of oxen or asses and the forces of 
the wind was man's first effective essay in making natural 
force work for him. When he had succeeded, he found him- 

100 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
self for the first time controlling and even directing continuous 
forces not supplied by his own muscles. He was on the right 
road to releasing his body from the more brutal forms of 
physical labor-the road that leads to the internal-combustion 
engine and the electric motor, the steam hammer and the 
mechanical navvy. And at the same time he was learning new 
principles in mechanics and physics. 
Mixed farmers had a suitable motive power ready to hand 
in the cattle they had already domesticated. Perhaps the ox 
was first set to drawing a plow. But, of course, a plow had to 
be invented-the long-bladed hoe of the prehistoric Egyptians, 
the draw-spade such as is still used in Japan, or a foot-plow 
like those used in the Hebrides last century may have pro- 
vided the model. And the plow heralded an agricultural revo- 
lution. Plowing stirs up those fertile elements in the soil that 
in semi-arid regions are liable to sink down beyond the reach 
of plant roots. With two oxen and a plow a man can cultivate 
in a day a far larger area than can a woman with a hoe. The 
plot gives place to the field, and agriculture (from Latin ager, 
"a field") really begins. And all that means larger crops, more 
food, and expanding population. And incidentally men re- 
place women as principals in cultivation. When this revolution 
was accomplished is quite unknown. In Hither Asia, Egypt, 
and the Aegean it had been completed long before the dawn 
of history. But in Germany the cultivation of small plots with 
hoes was still the sole economy down to about 2000 B.C. 
In open desert and steppe country the ox could be made 
to draw a sledge or travoise such as primitive hunting tribes 
still use for the transport of tents and furniture from camp to 
camp. (The dog having attached himself to man long before 
cattle or sheep were domesticated, dog-sleighs nlay be older 
than ox-carts and sledges.) Ox-drawn sledges were still being 
used about 3000 B.C. at Dr to convey to their final resting 
place royal corpses. But long before that date the sledge had 
been transformed by an invention that revolutionized locomo- 
tion on land. The wheel was the crowning achievement of pre- 
historic carpentry; it is the precondition of modern machinery, 
and, applied to transport, it converted the sledge into a cart 
or wagon-the direct ancestor of the locomotive and the auto- 
mobile. 
It is easy enough to make guesses as to how the wheel might 
have been invented, but reliable data on the subject are hard 
to obtain. As wooden objects cannot normally last many 
centuries, the archaeologist can only learn about vehicles from 
people who happen to have left drawings or models of them 
in some durable material like pottery or stone. Their admit- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 101 
tedly defective and one-sided testimony justifies the following 
positive statements: Wheeled vehicles are represented in Su- 
merian art as early as 3500 B.C., and in North Syria perhaps 
even earlier. By 3000 B.C. carts, wagons, and even chariots 
were in general use in Elam, Mesopotamia, and Syria. In the 
Indus valley wheeled carts were in use when the archaeological 
record begins about 2500 B.C., and at about the same date in 
Turkestan too. Some five centuries later, at least, they are 
attested in Crete and Asia Minor. On the other hand, the 
device was definitely not used by the Egyptians till about 1650 
B.C., when it was forced upon them by Asiatic invaders, the 
Hyksos. 
FIG. S.-PLOWING, MILKING, AND HOEING IN ANCIENT EGYPT. 
The earliest wheeled vehicles were naturally clumsy affairs. 
Even by 3000 B.C. the Sumerian chariots and wagons had 
solid wheels composed of three pieces of wood clamped to- 
gether and bound with leather tires studded with copper nails. 
The wheels turned in one piece with the axle, which was fas- 
tened underneath the car's body with leather straps. The vil- 
lage ox-carts in Sindh today faithfully repeat this structure. 
The wheel not only revolutionized transport, it was already 
applied in manufacturing industry by 3500 B.C., and a brief 
digression is needed to explain this. With a horizontal wheel, 

102 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
at the center of which he can set his lump of clay spinning, 
the potter can shape in a couple of minutes a vessel that it 
would take several days to build up by hand. And the product 
will be more symmetrical. Pot-making was the first mecha- 
nized industry, the first to apply the wheel to manufacturing 
machinery. And the craft was transformed as a result. Eth- 
nography shows that among the simpler people today the 
making of pots by hand is a domestic craft plied by the 
women, whereas manufacture on the wheel is a specialized 
trade reserved to men. The available evidence suggests that 
the same was true of antiquity. And so the introduction of 
the wheel into the ceramic industry marks another step in the 
specialization of labor; the potters are now specialists, with- 
drawn from the primary task of food-production and exchang- 
ing their wares for a share in the communal surplus. 
These two primary uses of the wheel may just possibly 
have arisen independently, though that is scarcely credible. In 
any case, they do not always go together. In Hither Asia and 
FIG. 6.-EARLY SUMERIAN WAR CHARIOT. 
India, indeed, wheel-made pots are certainly as old as wheeled 
vehicles. But in Egypt the potters' wheel was adopted before 
the wheeled car, whereas in Crete models of wagons are .1 
couple of centuries older than the earliest wheel-turned pots. 
In Europe the potters' wheel was not employed north of th 
Alps till after 500 B.C., though wheeled vehicles had been in 
use perhaps a thousand years earlier. But this is, after all, a 
digression. 
The introduction of wheeled vehicles drawn by oxen or 
other beasts accelerated communications and enormously 
simplified the transportation of goods. Vehicles do not, how- 
ever, represent the sole method of employing animal motive 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 103 
power in transportation. Goods can be loaded directly on a 
beast's back and men can sit there. About 2000 B.C. merchan- 
dise was normally carried between Babylonia and Asia Minor 
on donkey-hack. The history of this sort of transport is even 
harder to decipher in the archaeological record than is that 
of vehicular traffic. The donkey is native to Northeast Africa, 
and must have been domesticated there long before 3000 B.C., 
presumably to act as a beast of burden. Tame asses are record- 
ed in Egypt by the date just mentioned, and at the same time 
were being employed to draw plows in Mesopotamia. There- 
after the ass remains the commonest beast of burden and 
riding-animal in the Near East. 
The horse too, Forde thinks, may have been domesticated 
first for milking and riding. But apart from some dubious 
models of saddles from the Indus valley, dating round about 
2500 B.C., there is no really satisfactory evidence for horse- 
riding much before 1000 B.C. The beast is supposed to be a 
native of the steppes of Central Asia and Europe. In Hither 
Asia horses certainly appear about 2000 B.C., and were intro- 
duced thence into Egypt by the Hyksos about 1650 B.C. But 
in all cases they appear exclusively as draught animals har- 
nessed to war-chariots. And at a still earlier date, 3000 B.C. or 
before, some sort of equid is depicted drawing chariots on 
Sumerian monuments. The identity of these beasts is, however, 
disputed. Some authorities, such as Frankfort, say the animal 
is meant for a horse; others say a mule; the majority, including 
Hilzheimer and Woolley, now contend that an onager-the 
Asiatic wild ass-is intended. It should be remarked in paren- 
thesis that the harness used in connection with the Sumerian 
and all other ancient chariots seems to be modeled on that 
originally devised for attaching the bullock to a cart. And 
owing to the anatomical differences between bovids and 
equids, this ancient harness was very burdensome to horses 
and consequently very inefficient. 
None the less the domestication of horses must have sub- 
stantially increased the range and speed of communication. 
Even though this acceleration would seem, on the available 
evidence, to fall largely outside the period surveyed in this 
chapter, horse transport has to be reckoned with as a possi- 
bility before the second revolution: there may have been 
peoples on the edge of the well-explored valley tracts, already 
endowed with the mobility that the control of horses guaran- 
tees. Such hypothetical peoples may have acted as agents in 
the diffusion of ideas and inventions over distances and with 
speeds inconceivable if bullock-carts and donkeys had been 
the fastest means of conveyance available. And another possi- 

104 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
bility must be remembered: camels or dromedaries may have 
been tamed before 3000 B.C. But, given camels, deserts cease 
to be barriers to intercourse and become, like seas, links be- 
tween centers of population. 
Parallel with the foregoing improvements in land transport 
went developments in navigation. But the evidence is even 
more scanty than that just surveyed. Dugout canoes and skin- 
boats must have been used by fishers before the first revolu- 
tion. Soon after it paintings on prehistoric Egyptian vases dis- 
close substantial boats made of bundles of papyrus lashed 
together, propelled by forty or more rowers or paddlers, and 
equipped with a sort of cabin near the center. But sailboats 
are not depicted in Egypt till a little after 3500 B.C., and 
seem to belong to a type foreign to the Nile. Yet it is almost 
certain that by 3000 B.C. at latest sailboats were freely navi- 
gating the eastern Mediterranean. Though there is even less 
direct evidence, the same statement would surely apply to 
the Arabian Sea too. 
Thus men have begun to overcome the mechanical diffi- 
culties in the way of marine transport (they have, that is, 
learned to build plank boats and to rig sails), and have ac- 
quired sufficient topographical and astronomical knowledge 
to utilize the highways of the sea. By water, as by land, the 
people of the Orient were now in a position to pool their 
natural resources and the experience they were severally build- 
Ing up. 
The arts, processes, and contrivances just enumerated are 
outward expressions of a body of science and applications of 
accumulated experience. Their diffusion means also the pool- 
ing of that practical knowledge. It equipped the peoples of the 
Orient with the technical control over Nature requisite for the 
completion of a second revolution, the establishment of a new 
type of economy and society. But other factors intervened be- 
fore the knowledge thus acquired was applied in actual 
practice. 
The vast area between the Nile and the Ganges has in the 
foregoing pages been treated very much as a unit, despite 
insistence on diversity of economies within it; the develop- 
ments just traced have been presented as a continuous and 
peaceful process. But such an account hardly corresponds to 
the archaeological facts. Radical and sometimes catastrophic 
changes in pottery and domestic architecture, in art and burial 
rites, are in reality discernible in the settlement mounds of 
Iran, Mesopotamia, and Syria, and in the cemeteries of Egypt. 
Such changes are generally held to indicate displacements of 

PRELUDE ,TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 105 
population, the conquest or invasion by and infiltration of new 
peoples. 
In a region exposed to droughts and floods, migrations are 
liable to happen, especially when its inhabitants are utterly 
dependent on Nature for crops and fodder. A sudden drought 
then may mean starvation for peasants relying on dry cultiva- 
tion and for pastoralists grazing their herds on the steppe. And 
the specter of famine may drive its victims to seek food in the 
river valleys where grain for men and fodder for stock are 
still obtainable; they may enter as suppliants, like the "Chil- 
dren of Israel," and accept some sort of servitude in exchange 
for life, or they may find refuge in force of arms and arrive 
as conquerors. In any case, the steppe-folk thus set in motion 
will mix with, replace, or dominate the older valley population. 
The changes in material culture, art, and religion reflected 
in the archaeological record of the Orient must in many cases 
have been due precisely to immigrations and conquests of the 
sort just adumbrated, and books on Oriental prehistory are 
largely preoccupied with the attempt to define and trace the 
movements of peoples thus revealed. But here it is enough to 
remind the reader that evidence for such migration actually 
exists, and then to suggest certain consequences for the growth 
of human economy. 
It is believed that the "clash of cultures" set up by invasion 
and immigration facilitates the spread of new ideas by break- 
ing down the rigidity of established societies. To survive, any 
society must attain an adjustment to its environment; it lives 
by exploiting the natural resources of its territory. But just in 
so far as the adjustment achieved is successful, the commu- 
nity concerned will tend to become conservative. When a 
group are enjoying a sufficiency of food in simple comfort 
with spells of rest, why should they change their behavior? 
They have painfully learned the tricks and dodges, the arts 
and crafts necessary to coax this modicum of prosperity out of 
Nature; why do more? Indeed, change may be dangerous. The 
success of simply equipped societies depends on everyone 
doing what has proved to be the right thing at the right time 
and in the proper way; it imposes a complete pattern of be- 
havior on all the community's members. This pattern finds 
expression in social institutions and in traditional rules and 
prohibitions. It is sanctified by magico-religious beliefs and 
fears. Just as the practical acts of life are accompanied by 
appropriate rites and ceremonies, so mystical forces are sup- 
posed to watch over the traditional rules and avenge any trans- 
gression of them. The established economy is reinforced by 
an appropriate ideology. 

106 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
The force of superstitions that consolidate and maintain 
established social institutions and economic arrangements is 
enormous in the simpler societies of today. It must have been 
so too in the Ancient East. The adjustment then achieved by 
even the most favored communities was, after all, very pre.. 
carious. An insufficient or an excessive flood, an untimely 
hailstorm, a plague of locusts, might imperil the whole com.. 
munity; for its resources were restricted, its reserves were 
small. But the disasters threatening its life are mysterious and 
even today incalculable. They might very easily be regarded 
as supernatural interventions, inflicted to avenge transgres- 
sions of customary rules of behavior. Any divergence from 
established practice, any departure from behavior that had 
been found safe and effective, might theoretically provoke 
such punishments. Any innovation was therefore dangerous, 
and public opinion would frown upon change. 
But if an immigrant community mingle with the old, this 
complacent and timid conservatism will be disturbed. The 
new arrivals have ex hypothesi grown up under different con- 
ditions; they will accordingly have created for themselves an 
economy appropriate to their own environment. They feel 
needs different from, and perhaps complementary to, those 
experienced by the older inhabitants. For instance, if pastoral- 
ists, they may be accustomed to eat more meat than is usually 
consumed by peasants. They may have come to prize obsidian 
for the manufacture of knives, and so be dissatisfied with flint 
which is less delicate. Or they may regard substances-lapis 
lazuli, for instance-that had been easily obtainable in their 
original territory, as indispensable. New demands will thus be 
added to the old by the new arrivals. 
Again the newcomers will bring their own institutions and 
their own ideology. The prescriptions and prohibitions, the 
rites and ceremonies, regarded as essential to life in their 
former environment, are not likely to coincide entirely with 
those respected by the original inhabitants of the occupied 
territory. Two patterns of behavior, two sets of institutions, 
two bodies of ideas will thus be operating side by side and 
competitively. It may thus be demonstrated to both parties 
that departures from traditional modes of action, regarded by 
one or other as obligatory, are not so dangerous, after all. The 
land still yields its fruit, though turned over with a plow guided 
by men instead of a hoe wielded by women. 
Finally, it has been suggested that conquest is an essential 
prerequisite to the accumulation of communal capital needed 
for the accomplishment of the second revolution. The latter 
required that a substantial proportion of the community 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 107 
should be permanently withdrawn from the primary business 
of getting food to be employed by reproductive works, in 
secondary industries, in transportation, commerce, and ad- 
ministration. That is possible only if there is a surplus of food- 
stuffs already available to support those members of the 
community who are no longer themselves producing their 
o\vn food. Moreover, in practice a surplus is needed to barter 
for raw materials not available locally. 
Now the farmers in the Nile Valley or Mesopotamia could 
easily produce the requisite surplus. They would, indeed, 
doubtless produce so much above their immediate needs as to 
provide against bad seasons. But why should they do more? 
Man, it is argued, is a lazy beast and prefers a simple life to 
luxuries earned by unremitting toil. Conquest would certainly 
constitute one means of overcoming this natural inertia. A 
tribe of pastoralists, for instance, may conquer the land of a 
peasant community. 'fhey will leave the peasants on the land, 
and even protect them from other enemies, on condition that 
they pay a tribute of farm produce. The peasant is thereby 
obliged to exert himself to produce more than he needs for 
the support of his own household; he must provide a sub- 
stantial share, perhaps more than he retains himself, for his 
new "masters." These form a sort of landed "aristocracy," a 
class living off the tribute of peasants. The system is familiar; 
it survives in a very simple form in East Africa; it was charac- 
teristic of medieval Europe and was widespread in antiquity. 
Now such an "aristocracy" is generally also an oligarchy; 
its members are far less numerous than the peasants who 
remain the primary producers. Yet the landlords can extort 
from these far more farm produce than they can themselves 
consume. They thus dispose of an abundant surplus of food- 
stuffs, part of which they will employ for the support of work- 
ers producing manufactured articles, which aristocrats can 
consume, and for foreign trade. 
N ow it must be admitted that the realization of the second 
revolution did require an accumulation of capital in the form 
primarily of foodstuffs, that the accumulation had to some 
extent to be concentrated to make it effectively available for 
social ends, and that in Egypt the first accumulation and con- 
centration was apparently the result of conquest. But it is not 
demonstrable that such conquest was in all cases the effective 
cause for the necessary accumulation and concentration of 
capital. In Mesopotamia we shall see that it was nominally a 
native god (in practice, of course, the corporation of his self- 
appointed priests) that administered the accumulated wealth 
of a Sumerian city; there are only the vaguest and most am- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
biguous hints of an aristocracy owing its wealth to conquest 
rather than to religious prestige and home-grown social tradi- 
tion. And in the oldest Indian cities we simply do not know 
how the communal surplus was accumulated or controlled. 
Military conquest is one means of assuring the accumulation 
of a surplus of wealth. But theories that regard it as an essen- 
tial precondition of the second revolution must be regarded 
with reserve. 
Other corollaries to the disturbances of peaceful develop- 
ment at which the archaeological record hints are better at- 
tested. On the site of one village we find another, the arrange- 
ment, architecture, and furniture of which are so different 
from those of its predecessor as to indicate a real break in the 
social tradition; that must mean the arrival of a new people 
to replace or dominate the former settlers. But such replace- 
ment or domination can hardly have taken place peacefully. 
It must surely have been achieved by force, i.e. by war. In that 
case some sort of warfare must have been waged before the 
second revolution was consummated. 
This has, of course, been denied by Elliot Smith and Perry, 
and it is not easy to prove warfare by archaeological evidence. 
Weapons are, of course, found in graves and settlements that 
are older than the revolution. But it is not easy to distinguish 
weapons of war from implements of the chase, arms for kill- 
ing men from those for dispatching game. Again, very early 
settlements-for instance at Susa-were certainly protected 
by some sort of ramparts. Most probably these were defenses 
against human foes, but they might conceivably have been 
designed merely to keep out marauding wild beasts. On the 
whole, warlike raids by nomadic or uprooted peoples have to 
be admitted. And if so, it is equally necessary to admit some 
degree of organized defenses against such raiders on the part 
of the prosperous settled communities. In a word, warfare has 
to be admitted though only on a small scale and of a spasmodic 
kind. Yet it might be an industry. Cattle and grain stolen from 
peasants supported life just as well as those you reared or grew 
yourself. The protection of crops and herds against marauders 
was just as vital a part of the communal economy as sowing 
the fields and breeding cattle. 
Now, warfare must have economic repercussions. More 
than anything else, perhaps, it stimulated the demand for 
metal. It does not matter much if a flint knife breaks in skin- 
ning an animal. It is a much more serious matter if the acci- 
dent happens in hand-to-hand combat with an enemy. It was 
battle, above all, that manifested the superiority of tough dura- 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOI4L"TION log 
ble copper or bronze over brittle flint and stone. Again, war- 
fare gave exceptional opportunities for outstanding individuals 
to display courage and capacity for leadership, and thus to 
earn prestige and authority. It thus became a contributory 
factor in the rise of chiefs invested with effective temporal 
power, and ultimately of monarchs. 
Finally, war helped to a great discovery-that men as well 
as animals can be domesticated. Instead of killing a defeated 
enemy, he might be enslaved; in return for his life he could 
be made to work. This discovery has been compared in im- 
portance to that of the taming of animals. In any case, by early 
historic times slavery was a foundation of ancient industry 
and a potent instrument in the accumulation of capital. Bound 
captives, presumably doomed to servitude, are depicted on 
some of the oldest figured documents (sealings) from Meso- 
potamia, and are as ancient as scenes of battle. 
But war was not necessarily the sole source of slaves. The 
poorer or weaker members of a community might surrender 
their services to more prosperous fellows in return for food 
or shelter. Exiles from another community might be accepted 
on the same terms. Whole communities of refugees from 
drought might be allowed to settle in valleys and oases in re- 
turn for dues or services; the "Children of Israel" are by no 
means the only Asiatic tribe known from _Jntemporary rec- 
ords to have found refuge in Egypt under such conditions. 
The recruitment of slaves or clients by other means than cap- 
ture is illustrated among various barbarian and savage peoples 
of modern times, and is suggested by quite early written texts. 
War and famine were alike potential agents recruiting the 
labor force at the disposal of cities after the second revolution. 
The great public works then undertaken, the variety of crafts 
thereafter plied, employed a host of workers. The latters' 
status is hard to define. How many labored "freely" in return 
for wages, or out of sheer piety, or like conscripts in fulfil- 
ment of customary obligations to the community, or finally 
as slaves, the absolute chattels of an individual, a temple, or a 
State? All we know for the earliest times is that every laborer 
who continued to work must somehow be fed and supported 
by the surplus gathered by primary producers. 
And over against the possible slaves we have to reckon with 
privileged classes-indeed, with chiefs or even kings. The 
Egyptians preserved explicit traditions of independent dynas-' 
ties ruling in Upper and Lower Egypt before the unification 
of the land under one sovereign, the first Pharaoh, Menes, 
originally a king of Upper Egypt. But this unification seems 

110 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
to coincide with the realization of the second revolution in 
Egypt. In that case we must admit kings in Egypt before the 
revolution. The same inference may perhaps be drawn from 
Sumerian traditions of dynasties ruling "before the Flood," 
whatever that may mean. In any case, a way to royal power 
must have been open before city life began. Conquest was not 
the sole road to a throne-economic success, but most of all 
magico-religious prestige, might lead to that glory. The 
magician may have been the first independent craftsman, the 
first member of any community to have a claim on the surplus 
product of the collective food-quest without contributing there- 
to by physical activity. But the magician's wand is an embryo 
scepter, and historical kings still retain many trappings from 
their magic office. 
Now the first revolution had not abolished magic. Quite 
the reverse. Man, let us insist again, was still dependent on 
the incalculable chances of rain, flood, sunshine, still exposed 
to disaster from droughts, earthquakes, hailstorms, and other 
natural but unpredictable catastrophes. He still sought to con- 
trol the beneficent forces and to ward off noxious powers by 
rituals, incantations, and charms. Anyone who could success- 
fully claim to control the elements by his magic would, of 
course, earn immense prestige and authority. It is needless to 
demonstrate in detail how many opportunities of aggrandize- 
ment through alleged magical prowess must have presented 
themselves in ancient societies, but the chapter may be fitly 
closed with a reference to one great discovery: that of the 
solar calendar-that on one theory was one of the sources of 
royal authority in Egypt. 
Farming in the Nile Valley is entirely dependent upon the 
annual flood; the latter's advent is the signal for the whole 
cycle of agricultural operations to start. To forecast precisely 
the day of its arrival and warn the peasant to prepare for it, 
would be and is of great advantage to all the valley's popula- 
tion. It would at the same time seem to be a proof of some 
sort of supernatural knowledge and power; the distinction 
between prediction and control is too subtle for simple peoples. 
Yet in reality the forecast can be made with considerable 
precision. The flood is a function of the annual movement of 
the earth round the sun-actually it depends upon the south- 
west monsoon breaking upon the mountains of Abyssinia. 
It will normally reach any given place at the same point in 
each of the earth's journeys round the sun-that is, on the 
same day in each solar year. All that is necessary, therefore, is 

PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION I I I 
to know the length of the solar year and reckon such a year 
from one observed flood as starting-point to the next. 
Now most simple people who have any sort of calendar at 
all reckon by lunar months, and not by solar years, and there 
is evidence that the Egyptians were no exception to the rule. 
But no fixed number of lunar months (lunations) corresponds 
exactly to a solar year. To be able to predict the flood, there- 
fore, the Egyptians had to determine the length of the solar 
year in days and devise an artificial calendar to reconcile solar 
and lunar years. Now observations recorded over a period of 
fifty years would suffice to show that the average interval be.. 
tween inundations was, to the nearest day, 365 days. On this 
basis an official calendar was introduced, most probably at the 
time of the unification of Egypt under Menes, in which the 
year of 365 days was divided into ten months of thirty-six 
days each, with a period of five intercalary days each year. 
It is difficult to S how even this result could have been ob- 
tained without written records, and it represents the first 
triumph of mathematical astronomy and the first vindication 
of the claim of science to predict. But of course there was an 
error in the calculation of just under six hours, and the 
accunlulation of this error in time put the calendar entirely 
out of gear with the real seasons, and made it useless as a 
guide to the peasants in their agricultural work. New Year's 
Day originally coincided with the advent of the inundation, 
but after a century the inundation could not be expected until 
the 25th day of the first month. The royal officials discovered 
how to correct this error by observations on the star Sirius 
(Egyptian: Sothis) which, in the latitude of Cairo, is the last 
star to appear on the horizon before dawn obscures all stars 
at the flood season. They used their observations on the 
"heliacal rising" of Sirius to give the signal for the start of 
agricultural operations, but by this time it was too late to re- 
form the official calendar-the requisite reform would have 
aroused the same sort of opposition, but naturally much more 
bitter, as has frustrated all attempts to fix the date of Easter. 
So the old official calendar was maintained, though the Egyp- 
tians recognized as Sothic cycles the periods of 1461 years 
when the official New Year's Day did actually coincide with 
the heliacal rising of Sirius. 
Now historical kings in Egypt, as in Babylonia and else- 
where, were intimately connected with the regulation of the 
calendar. It has been suggested that they owed their authority 
in part at least to that first application of predictive science, the 
establishment of the calendar. The Pharaohs may even have 

I 12 PRELUDE TO THE SECOND REVOLUTION 
kept secret the further discovery of the utility of the heliacal 
rising of Sirius as a sign of the flood's proximity to exploit it 
for their own prestige. The knowledge would have enabled 
the Pharaoh to predict the flood to the fellahin, and thus 
vindicate his magical powers of controlling the seasons and 
the crops. That is perhaps just a nice speculation. The determi- 
nation of the solar year and the creation of an official calendar 
dependent on that standard are historical facts of the highest 
importance for the history of science. For the Egyptian is 
admittedly the parent of all Old World solar calendars, in- 
cluding our own. 

z 
o 
H 
E-t 
< 
N 
H 
H 
H 
> 
I-f 
U 
 
o 
en 
 
t4 
Q 
 
U 
 
 
 
o 
 
< 
::g 
 
U 
E-t 
 
 
en 
I. 
t'-- 

CHAPTER VII 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
By 4000 B.C. the great tract of semi-arid lands round the 
East Mediterranean and eastwards to India was populated by 
a multiplicity of cor.dmunities. Among them a diversity of 
economies, appropriate to the variety of local conditions, 
must be imagined-hunters and fishers, hoe-cultivators, 
nomadic pastoralists, and settled farmers. And on their fringe 
we can add other tribes spreading out into the distant wilder- 
ness. Among them these diverse communitit;s had augmented 
man's cultural capital by the discoveries and inventions in- 
dicated in the last chapter. They had severally accumulated 
an imposing body of scientific knowledge-topographical, 
geological, astronomical, chemical, zoological, and botanical 
-of practical craftlore on agriculture, mechanics, metallurgy, 
and architecture, and of magical beliefs that might also en- 
shrine scientific truths. As a result of the commerce and move- 
ments of peoples just hinted at, such science, techniques, and 
beliefs were being widely diffused; knowledge and skil1 were 
being pooled. And at the same time the exclusiveness of local 
groups was being broken down, the rigidity of socia1 institu- 
tions was being relaxed, self-sufficing communities were 
sacrificing their economic indepen dence. 
The last-named development progressed faster than else- 
where in the great riverine depressions, in the Nile V a]]ey, on 
the alluvial plains between the Tigris and Euphrates, and on 
those bordering the Indus and its tributaries in Sindh and Pun- 
jab. There a generous and unfailing water supply and a fertile 
soil annually renewed by floods ensured a reliable and 
superabundant supply of food and permitted the population 
to expand. On the other hand, both the original draining of 
the marshes and jungles fringing the rivers and the subsequent 
maintenance of drainage channels and protective dykes im- 
posed exceptionally heavy demands for sustained and 
disciplined effort upon the communities profiting by these 
advantages. And, as explained on p. 90, irrigation placed 
in the communities' hand an effective means of enforcing 
discipline. 
And, despite the abundance of foodstuffs, alluvial valleys 
114 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
115 
are exceptionally poor in other raw materials essential to 
civilized life. The Nile Valley lacked timber for building, free- 
stone, ores, and magic stones. Sumer was still worse off. The 
only native timber was supplied by the date-palm, quarries of 
building stone were remoter and less accessible than in Egypt; 
not only was copper ore lacking, but flint of which the Nile 
cliffs furnished an excellent supply was equally hard to obtain. 
Indeed, on the alluvial plains and marshes even hard pebbles, 
suitable for making axeheads, were rarities. From the very 
first the Sumerians had had to import Armenian obsidian or 
other exotic stones for cutting tools. Sindh and Punjab 
suffered from the same shortage of essential raw materials as 
Sumer. 
And so on the large alluvial plains and riverside flatlands 
the need for extensive public works to drain and irrigate the 
land and to protect the settlement would tend to consolidate 
social organization and to l:t:ntralize the economic system. At 
the same time, the inhabitants of Egypt, Sumer, and the Indus 
basin were forced to organize some regular system of trade 
or barter to secure supplies of essential raw materials. The 
fertility of lands gave their inhabitants the means for satis- 
fying their need of imports. But economic self-sufficiency had 
to be sacrificed and a completely new economic structure 
created. The surplus of home-grown products must not only 
suffice to exchange for exotic materials; it must also support a 
body of merchants and transport workers engaged in obtain- 
ing these and a body of specialized craftsmen to work the 
precious imports to the best advantage. And soon soldiers 
would be needed to protect the convoys and back up the 
merchants by force, scribes to keep records of transactions 
growing ever more complex, and State officials to reconcile 
conflicting interests. 
And so by 3000 B.C. the archaeologist's picture of Egypt,. 
Mesopotamia, and the Indus valley no longer focuses atten- 
tion on communities of simple farmers, but on States em- 
bracing various professions and classes. The foreground is 
occupied by priests, princes, scribes, and officials, and an 
army of specialized craftsmen, professional soldiers, and 
miscellaneous laborers, all withdrawn from the primary task 
of food-production. The most striking objects now unearthed 
are no longer the tools of agriculture and the chase and other 
products of domestic industry, but temple furniture, weapons,. 
wheel-made pots (p. 102), jewelry, and other manufactures 
turned out on a large scale by skilled artisans. As monuments 
we have instead of huts and farmhouses, monumental tombs, 
temples, palaces, and workshops. And in them we find all 

116 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
manner of exotic substances, not as rarities, but regularly im- 
ported and used in everyday life. 
Evidently the change in the archaeologists' material reflects 
a transformation in the economy that produced the material. 
Evidently too the transformation should be accompanied by 
a rise in the population. Priests, officials, merchants, artisans. 
and soldiers should represent new classes that, as classes, could 
find no livelihood in a self-sufficing food-producing com- 
munity, still less in a band of hunters. And the archaeological 
evidence alone suffices to confirrn that expectation. The new 
cities are spatially larger and can accommodate a much denser 
population than the agricultural villages that have been ab- 
sorbed in them or that still subsist beside them. Mohenjo-daro 
in Sindh, for example, spread over a square mile of land; it 
was a close agglomeration of two-storied houses neatly 
arranged along broad streets or narrow alleys. Again, the 
urban cemeteries attest not only an increase of wealth, but 
also multiplication of people. On the Nile we have not only 
village graveyards continuing from prehistoric times, but also 
large cemeteries of monumental tombs reserved for royalties 
and officials. The so-called "royal cemetery" at U r was prob- 
ably used by only a fraction of the citizen body, and on the 
most generous estimate for not more than three centuries 
(most authorities would reduce this figure by half). Yet it 
comprised over 700 interments still recognizable when dis- 
covered-a vastly larger number than found in any purely 
prehistoric cemetery. 
The change from self-sufficing food-production to an 
economy based also on specialized manufacture and external 
trade did accordingly promote a marked expansion of the 
population. It had such an effect on vital statistics as to earn 
the title of revolution on the definition given on p. 19. 
In the economic sphere the results of the second revolution 
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and India were similar, but only in an 
abstract way. Concretely its results were strikingly different in 
each area. The details not only of the economic structures but 
.also of the political and religious systems reposing thereon 
diverge conspicuously. This divergence extends down to the 
simplest archaeological objects. In each region smiths were 
working the same chemical substances by analogous simple 
processes into tools and weapons to serve common human 
needs. But their products-axes, knives, daggers and spear- 
heads-assume quite distinct forms on the Nile, on the 
Euphrates, and on the Indus. There is no less contrast be- 
1ween Indian, Sumerian and Egyptian pottery, though the 
potter's craft was common to the three regions. And like con- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
117 
trasts can be followed in every aspect of man's activity. An 
abstract account of the revolution in general cannot therefore 
take the place of a description of its course in the several 
regIons. 
In Mesopotamia the archaeologist can watch the several 
stages of the revolution at a number of different sites in the 
south, in Sumer, at Eridu, Dr, Erech, Lagash, Larsa, Shurup- 
pak; the later stages can also be observed in the north, in 
Akkad, at Kish, Jemdet Nasr, Opis, Eshnunna and Mari. In 
Sumer at each site the economic systems at the start and at 
the end are not only similar, but identical; and ultimately this 
identity proves to be founded on a common language, religion, 
and social organization. The events revealed by the excava- 
tions at Erech may accordingly be taken as illustrating what 
was happening at other sites. 
Erech began as a village of neolithic farmers. The decay and 
renewal of successive villages, as described on p. 39, gradual- 
ly formed a mound or tell that slowly rose above the level 
of the marshy plain. The first fifty feet of this artificial hill 
consist entirely of the ruins of reed huts or mud-brick houses. 
The simple relics collected from them illustrate the progress 
summarized in tbe last chapter-an increasing use of metal, 
the introduction of the potter's wheel, and so on. The village 
is growing in size and wealth, but it remains a village. 
But then, instead of the walls and hearths of modest huts, 
appear the foundations of a truly monumental building-a 
temple or group of temples. And close by rises an artificial 
mountain, the prototype of the "ziggurat" or staged tower 
that was an indispensable part of an historical Sumerian 
temple. This first ziggurat was built entirely of hand-formed 
lumps of mud with ]ayers of bitumen between them. But it 
towered more than thirty-five feet above the then existing 
surface of the ground-the street-level of the contemporary 
settlement-and its top measured over 1000 yards square. The 
mountain's steeply-sloping sides were relieved by buttresses 
alternating with recesses, and were further adorned and con- 
solidated by thousands of little pottery tumblers. These had 
been pushed side by side in close-packed rows into the mud 
of the ziggurat while it was still wet. They served to consolidate 
the faces while they were drying, and eventually stood out 
forming decorative patterns of round dimples when the monu- 
ment was complete. 
On the mountain-top was a tiny shrine with white-washed 
walls of mud brick and a staircase by which the deity might 
descend from the heavens. At the foot were more imposing 
temples. 

118 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
The erection of the artificial mountain and of the temples, 
the collection and transportation of the materials, the manu.. 
facture of the thousands of pots and bricks required a large 
and disciplined force of laborers and craftsmen. While these 
were withdrawn from food-production they must have been 
supported, if not paid, from some common store of surplus 
food. Whose? Presumably it was already controlled by the 
power, we may perhaps say already "deity," to whose honor 
and glory the buildings were dedicated. The fertility of the 
land and the pious superstitions of its cultivators must have 
endowed its divine lord with riches at least in surplus food.. 
stuffs. 
But the erection of such a monument required more than 
laborers and their food. The whole was carefully planned: the 
artificial mountain was laid out with its corners to the cardinal 
points. A centralized directing force was requisite. The god 
being but a fictitious projection of the communal will, that 
force must have been supplied by his servants. Naturally 
enough the imaginary god has found earthly representatives 
and interpreters glad to administer and to enlarge his ter- 
restrial possessions in exchange for a modest share of his in- 
come. The wizards and magicians, guessed at in neolithic 
villages, have emerged as a corporation of priests sanctified 
with divine authority and emancipated from any mundane 
labors in field or pasture. These interpret the divine will to 
the toiling masses or, in other words, twist the magic 
ceremonies, by which society would compel natural forces, 
into ever more complicated rites for conciliating the power 
that now personifies these. And in this process of invention 
there are revealed the plans of temples, just as historical kings 
relate that the plan for a temple has been revealed to them in 
a dream. 
We may assume then that, as in the earliest historical period, 
a corporation of priests already corresponds to this first of 
temples. And, as in all written documents, these priests must 
have provided the administrators of the god's treasury. But the 
administration of the rich treasures of the temple would im- 
pose quite a new task on the persons engaged. What those 
tasks were, written documents will soon reveal: it may be 
anticipated that some means had to be devised for keeping 
track of the various offerings and of their utilization, lest the 
deity should demand of his priest accounts of his stewardship. 
And, in fact, in the ziggurat-shrine the excavators found a 
tablet bearing the impression of a seal and hollows that are 
certainly numerals. It is the world's oldest account tablet, the 

THE AN REVOLUTION 
"9 
immediate forerunner of a long series of Sumerian temple 
accounts. 
Thus the first temple at Erech reveals a community, raised 
to the dignity of a city, disposing of a surplus of real wealth 
accumulated in the hands of a deity and administered by a 
corporation of priests. It implies an organized force of workers, 
specialized industries and some rudimentary system of com- 
merce and transportation. And at this crucial moment the be- 
ginnings at least of accountancy and even writing emerge. 
And, of course, Erech did not stand alone; the sites of the 
other great Sumerian cities have yielded remains of the same 
cultural stage and of a like absolute antiquity. And from this 
point the development of urban civilization can be traced 
continuously till the moment when the full light of written 
history dawns upon it and within it. The story is one of 
accumulating wealth, of improving technical skill, of increas- 
ing specialization of labor, and of expanding trade. 
The temple at Erech fell into disrepair, and was rebuilt at 
least four times. Each successive temple is grander than its 
predecessor. The pots hammered into the walls of the first 
ziggurat are replaced by cones of baked clay, the ends of 
which are painted black, red, and white. These are stuck into 
the mud-brick walls so as to make mosaic patterns. By the 
beginning of the historical period inlays of mother-of-pearl 
and carnelian on black bitumen replace the mosaic of clay 
cones. The inner walls of the sanctuary are decorated at first 
with figures of animals molded in clay. Later these are re- 
placed by friezes of plaques cut out of stone or shell and 
mounted in bitumen. At the dawn of history large-size groups 
of animals in copper, cast or beaten up over a core of bitu- 
men, replace the molded clay figures. 
The stage represented by the third principal phase of re- 
building at Erech is equally well known in Akkad (Northern 
Babylonia), particularly at Jemdet Nasr. By this time increase 
of wealth, a profounder knowledge of applied chemistry and 
geology, and more regular and extended commerce are dis- 
closed by the importation and utilization of lead, silver, and 
lapis lazuli. Increased technical skill is indicated by the manu- 
facture of articles in glazed paste and of light war-chariots. 
And now the account tablets are regularly inscribed with 
symbols and numerals. The symbols are mainly pictures, but 
include already conventional signs that are hardly recognizable 
as likenesses of concrete objects, but must already possess a 
conventional meaning. There are different numeral signs for 
units, tens, and sixties or hundreds. The tablets already apply 

120 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
simple arithmetical formulas-reckoning, for instance, the 
area of a field as the product of two adjacent sides. 
The growth of the god's revenues, and the consequent in- 
crease in the complexity of accountancy, have compelled the 
priestly administrators to devise systems of writn£ and 
numeral notation intelligible to their colleagues and succes- 
sors in the permanent corporation of temple officers. To 
simplify and abbreviate their labors they have had to discover 
and formulate rules of reckoning and "laws" of geometry. 
By the next phase, well after 3000 B.C., the "royal 
cemetery" of Ur brilliantly illustrates the culmination of the 
process. Goldsmiths can now make wire and solder; they 
produce delicate chains and elaborate ornaments in granula- 
tion and filigree work. The coppersmith is master of the 
hammer and of casting, and is probably employing the cire 
perdue process. And so he can provide his fel1ow-craftsmen 
with a variety of delicate and specialized tools-axes, adzes, 
chisels, gouges, drills, knives, saws, nails, clamps, needles, and 
so on. Jewelers can now pierce the hardest stones and en- 
grave them for seals. Sculptors are beginning to carve vases 
and statuettes out of limestone and even basalt. The carpenter, 
besides boats, chariots, and couches, fashions harps and lyres. 
Naturally there are professional musicians to play upon them; 
these actually take their places in the tomb beside their royal 
masters. 
All this luxury and refinement means more than accumu- 
lated wealth and intensified specialization. It reposes on an 
enriched craft-lore and new discoveries in applied science. 
The fine castings of the Sumerian smiths could not have been 
achieved with pure copper. They are hardly conceivable unless 
the alloy of copper with tin that we term bronze had been dis- 
covered, and actual analyses have demonstrated the employ- 
ment of this alloy. This does not in itself vindicate for the 
Sumerians the credit of the discovery; bronze was also used in 
India about the same date. It presumably began as an accident- 
al alloy resulting from smelting a copper ore containing tin 
as a natural impurity or from chance mixtures of copper and 
tin ores. But it is only in an urban industry using "copper" 
drawn from a variety of different sources that comparison 
would reveal the superiority of the "copper" from one district 
or ore. That observation must be the first step to the isolation 
of the impurity to which that superiority was due, and so to 
the deliberate preparation of the alloy. Bronze can have been 
discovered only by deliberate comparison and experimenta- 
tion. 
Other evidence of experimentation is afforded by a small 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
121 
dagger of iron belonging to the same period. It had been 
made, not from meteoric iron or natural telluric iron, but 
from metal reduced from its ore. It may have been the result 
of an isolated experiment, and there is no evidence that the 
discovery was followed up. It was not till about 1300 B.C. 
that iron came into regular industrial use, and then not in 
Mesopotamia, but elsewhere in Asia Minor. Yet another dis- 
covery of the period was clear glass. Glazed stones and fayence 
had been known to the prehistoric Egyptians, and the art of 
their manufacture had been introduced into Mesopotamia be- 
fore 3000 B.C. But some time after that date we have examples 
of clear glass. This may rank as a Sumerian discovery resulting 
from experiments with the other glazes, all of which depend 
upon the properties of alkaline silicates. 
The employment on such a vast scale of imported sub- 
stances foreign to the alluvial plains implies that the com- 
lllcrcial rlatiuns foreshadowed in earlier periods had been 
extended and made more regular. Some of the copper was 
brought from Oman south of the Persian Gulf. Silver and 
lead probably came from the Taurus mountains in Asia 
Minor, attested as a great exporting center soon after 2500 
B.C. Large shells were derived from the Persian Gulf and the 
Arabian Sea. Timber must have been brought from moun- 
tains that catch the rain-from the Zagros, or perhaps even 
from Lebanon on the Mediterranean coast. Lapis is believed 
to have been derived from Afghanistan. 
And trade did not stop short at raw materials. The second 
revolution was already being accomplished in Egypt and 
India; the cities of Sumer were in commercial relations with 
others on the Nile and the Indus. Commodities manufactured 
by the specialized industries of one urban center were traded 
to the bazaars of another. In several Mesopotamian cities stray 
seals, beads, and even pots have turned up that are not Sumer- 
ian in character, but are, on the other hand, common in con- 
temporary cities in Sindh and Punjab. They afford conclusive 
proof of international trade linking the Tigris with the Indus 
1200 miles away. They reveal a picture of caravans regularly 
crossing the rugged ranges and salt deserts that separate the 
two valleys, or of fleets of dhows sailing along the waterless 
coasts of the Arabian Sea between the rivers' mouths. 
Now that sort of commerce in the Orient is not, and never 
can have been, a mere transportation of bales of merchandise 
from place to place. At the termini and at stations on the way 
the caravans and merchant dhows must make prolonged halts. 
Representatives, probably colonists from the exporting coun- 
try, must receive the goods at their destination and arrange a 

122- 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
return Joad, entertaining the travelers in the meantime. Just 
as there are permanent colonies of British merchants in 
Oporto, Stamboul and Shanghai, so we may imagine colonies 
of Indian merchants settled at Dr and Kish. Trade under 
such conditions is very really a means of intercourse, a channel 
by which ideas can be diffused on an international scale. 
Again, it is not only goods-the concrete embodiments of 
new inventions-but also men-artisans and inventors-that 
are transported by the caravans. In the Orient skilled labor is 
surprisingly mobile, and it is so traditional1y. Craftsmen 
gravitate to centers where they can profitably employ their 
skill. And this must be true of antiquity. The new class of 
expert craftsmen, created by the second revolution, had been 
liberated from the tasks of primary food-production, and so 
from attachment to the soil. They were perhaps at the same 
time released from tribal bonds and not yet firmly attached to 
the nascent local States. So they could move whithersoever 
profitable employment offered. Or, were they slaves, they 
would be sent as commodities to where their skill would fetch 
the highest price for their persons. In any case, this mobility 
explains the rapid diffusion of technical processes. 
Such were the stage of the second revolution in 
Mesopotamia and such its industrial and economic conse- 
quences for man's material culture. The severa! stages are 
undoubtedly moments in an organic process of economic 
accumulation and of scientific and technical advancement. But 
this continuity need not apply to the ethnological and political 
domains. There are, indeed, indications that accumulation 
and advancement were interrupted or promoted by the advent 
of new peoples, perhaps by conquests and invasions. 
So, for instance, burial rites were changed. The neolithic 
farmers were general1y buried extended, lying full length upon 
their backs. In the cultural phase III (represented at J emdet 
Nasr) the dead were interred crouched with the knees drawn 
up to the chin; in the royal cemetery of Dr the skeletons gen- 
erally lie flexed in the attitude of sleep, while some person- 
ages, supposedly royalties, are laid to rest in monumental 
tombs surrounded with human victims, sacrificed at their 
obsequies. Some changes in architecture too seem to indicate 
more than mere technical advances. The second temple-com- 
plex at Erech rests on foundations of limestone blocks, a 
material that seems exotic in the alluvial plain. In the next 
group stone is abandoned and flat kiln-fired bricks are used. 
But the last group of .emples and all contemporary monu- 
ments are built of absurd pIano-convex bricks, flat on one 
face only, but cushion-shaped on the other. It has been thought 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
123 
that the new architectural devices represent foreign fashions 
introduced into Sumer by invaders from abroad. Sealings 
certainly give indications of warfare and battles. And at the 
end, when written records become explicit, we find Babylonia 
occupied by two distinct linguistic groups: some of its in- 
habitants speak Sumerian, others talk a Semitic dialect- 
Akkadian-allied to Hebrew and Arabic, but radically differ- 
ent from Sumerian. 
The nature and effects of the rather problematical ethnic 
and racial disturbances cannot be defined precisely. They 
certainly did not seriously interrupt the continuity of material 
culture. And the gods and their temples survived the crises; 
the priestly corporations retained their identity whatever hap- 
pened to other social structures. And that was true of all sub- 
sequent history. The written records of Babylonia describe 
frequent changes of dynasty and frequent conquests by foreign 
invaders. In these catastrophes temples might be plundered 
and wrecked, but the new king or the successful conqueror 
regularly displayed his piety and his power by rebuilding and 
enriching with fresh revenues the city temples. As late as 
323 B.C. Alexander of Macedon sealed his conquest of Asia 
by rebuilding the E-sagila, the great temple of Babylon. The 
repeated reconstruction of the prehistoric temples at Erech 
and the other cities is concrete testimony to the same con- 
tinuity of religious corporations with their unbroken cultural 
traditions that history unambiguously attests later on. 
Now, as the temple corporations, continuing through all 
vicissitudes, grew richer, the task of administering the grow- 
ing revenues became heavier and heavier. The administrators 
had to devise ever better means for recording their complicated 
business transactions. Eventually they created a system of 
writing which not only their colleagues and immediate suc- 
cessors, but also modern scholars could read. By the period 
of the fourth temple complex at Erech decipherable written 
documents emerge to supplement the deductions of pre- 
historic archaeology. 
Soon after 3000 B.C. the earliest written texts give us a 
picture of the social and economic organizatior:L of Sumer 
and Akkad. The land is divided up among fifteen or twenty 
city States, each politically autonomous, but all enjoying a 
common material culture, a common religion, and a common 
language, and all largely interdependent economically. The 
center of each city was the sacred temenos or citadel con- 
taining the temples of the city god and other deities. We may, 
if we like, infer that the god is a personification of magic 
forces; dramatic representations of the death and rebirth of 

1 2 4 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
vegetation, of sowing and harvest, may once have been per- 
formed as magic rites designed to compel the germination of 
the crops. In time the actors who symbolized the grain and its 
magic fertility would be taken as playing the role of a deity 
who controlled the magic forces. The magic force which man 
had sought to compel would be personified as a god who 
must be helped and conciliated. Before history begins, society 
has projected its collective will, its corporate hopes and fears, 
into this fictitious person whom it reveres as Lord of its 
terri tory. 
In any case, each god has an earthly dwelling, the city 
temple, a material estate, and human servants, the priestly 
corporation. The oldest decipherable documents from Meso- 
potamia are, in fact, the accounts of the temple revenues kept 
by the priests. They reveal the temple as not only the center 
of the city's religious life, but also the nucleus of capital 
accumulation. The temple functions as the great bank; the 
god is the chief capitalist of the land. The early temple archives 
record the god's loans of seed or plow animals to cultivators, 
the fields he has let to tenants, wages paid to brewers, boat- 
builders, spinners, and other employees, advances of grain or 
bullion to traveling merchants. The god is the richest member 
of the community. His wealth ii available to the community 
from whose piety he, in fact, derived it. But the same piety 
required that the borrower should not only pay back the loan, 
but also add a little thank-offering. The god's ministers were 
doubtless careful to remind you of your duty, and even 
stipulated in advance what decency demanded you to offer. 
Such thank-offerings would today be called interest, and the 
temple's tariff might be styled usurious by the impious. 
This economic system that made the god a great capitalist 
and landlord, his temple into a city bank, evidently goes back 
to remote prehistoric times. The figured gypsum tablet from 
the oldest temple at Erech, the tablets from J emdet N asr 
with their picture-writing, are undoubtedly precursors of the 
temple accounts that can now be read. The latter accordingly 
justify the description of Sumer's economic development al- 
ready deduced. They will form the basis of the analysis of the 
second revolution's scientific consequences to be given in the 
next chapter. 
But by 3000 B.C. there is already emerging beside the deity 
in every city a temporal potentate. He styles himself humbly 
the god's "vicegerent," but also boldly "king." Perhaps he had 
once impersonated the god in those sacred dramas imagined 
above as a factor in the genesis of godhead. Indeed, he still 
takes the part of the god in some acts of the drama. But he 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
125 
has emancipated himself from the fate of the original actor- 
to be consig.ned to the tomb as the seed is to the earth. And 
he has certainly usurped a substantial share of the god's tem- 
poral power over men. He even oppresses his subjects accord- 
ing to quite early documents. The State has, indeed, "arisen 
out of Society, places itself above it, and separates itself from 
it. " 
Nevertheless, the king fulfilled essential economic func- 
tions in the deveJopment of Sumerian society. He was pos- 
sessed of the material power of a civil ruler and a military 
commander. One use of this power may have been to Sfie 
that "the antagonisms," generated by the revolution, "classes 
with conflicting interests, did not consume themselves and 
society in sterile struggle." But of that the records are silent. 
They do mention the use of the State's power to supplement 
the work of "private enterprise" in providing for the economic 
needs of the country. Early kings boast of their economic 
activities-of cutting canals, of building temples, of importing 
timber from Syria, and copper and granite from Oman. They 
are sometimes depicted on monuments in the garb of brick- 
layers or masons and of architects receiving the plan of a 
temple from its god. 
Doubtless the royal power accelerated the accumulation of 
capital in foodstuffs and real wealth. Courtiers, ministers, 
musicians, and men-at-arms were supported by the surplus 
thus extorted. And the army was fulfilling an economic func- 
tion in guarding the city, its canals, its irrigated fields and 
pastures against the incursions of starveling nomads from 
the surrounding steppes or wild tribes from the mountains. In 
the end it would create a political order more compatible with 
economic realities than the system of city-states. 
Lower Mesopotamia is a geographical unit, dependent for 
life on the waters of its twin rivers, for a civilized life on the 
importation of the same exotic substances from common 
sources. Precisely because they were dependent on the waters 
of the same rivers, disputes about lands and water rights were 
liable to arise between the several autonomous cities. Just be- 
cause all relied on the same foreign trade to bring them the 
same necessities for industry, commercial rivalries were inevit- 
able amongst sovereign states; the contradiction between an 
economic system that ought to be unitary and political sepa- 
ratism was made manifest in interminable dynastic wars. Our 
earliest documents after the temple accounts, in fact, record 
wars between adjacent cities and treaties that temporarily 
ended them. The ambition of any city dynast was to obtain 
hegemony over his neighbours. 

12b 
TH URBAN REVOLUTION 
But no permanent result was obtained by these internecine 
conflicts tiJl 2500 (or later) B.C. Then the Semitic ru1er or 
Agade or Akkad whom we term Sargon established an em- 
pire over al1 Babylonia which lasted with intervals of revolt 
for nearly a century. His feat was subsequently imitated, more 
or less successfully, by kings of Ur and of other cities. £ Jt 
only a little after (or before) 1800 B.C. was Babylonia made a 
political reality, a unified nation with a common capital, a 
common code of written law, a common calendar, and a per- 
manent system of government by Hammurabi, king of Baby- 
lon. Then at last the city-state was absorbed into the territorial 
state that corresponded on the whole to the rea]ities of eco- 
nomic needs. 
In Egypt it seems as if political unification coincided with 
the accomplishment of the second economic revolution. The 
Nile Valley is geographically even more a natural economic 
unit than is the plain of the Tigris and Euphrates, and so the 
natural factors tending to unity were more efficient. At the 
saIne time, the contrast between the narrow valley of Upper 
Egypt and the open Delta, Lower Egypt, is fundamental. His- 
torically the unification of Egypt means the union of these 
Two Lands in a single kingdom. That event preceded Sargon's 
unification of Babylonia by some five centuries, so that the 
second revolution in the two regions is approximately con- 
temporary. 
Egypt is again less completely dependent on imports from 
abroad than is Mesopotamia. In particular, local supplies of 
excellent flint rendered metal less essential for industrial pur- 
poses; indeed, stone was still being used by Egyptian farmers 
and artisans a thousand years after their Babylonian con- 
temporaries had been using only metal tools. It was, in fact, 
primarily luxury articles and magic necessities-malachite, 
gems, gold, spices-that had to be imported into Egypt. It 
was accordingly only a demand for such substances on a large 
scale that made inevitable the systematic organization of ex- 
ternal trade and the specialization of manufacturing indus- 
tries. That demand became effective only through the rise of a 
class that set an extravagant value on the exotic materia1s for 
magical purposes, and at the same time disposed of the sur- 
plus wealth needed to gratify their desires. 
And so the reserves of supplies required for the transforma- 
tion of the economic system were not accumulated in the 
temples of a communal deity, but in the hands of a monarch 
who had already placed himself above the society from which 
he had arisen. The unification of Egypt and creation of a state 
based on secondary industry and commerce as well as food- 

THE UREAN REVOLUTION 
127 
production were finally accomplished when a king of Upper 
Egypt, Menes, conquered the Delta. His ancestors have left 
no concrete memorials of their rise to power comparable to 
the prehistoric temples of Sumer. And so we have to recon- 
struct the course of the revolution, the rise of the monarchy, 
by hazardous inferences from later literary sources, instead 
of reading off the concrete record of archaeological remains. 
A plausible but rather speculative, and certainly much over- 
simplified, account of the genesis of the Egyptian monarchy 
would run as follows. In the prehistoric village, communities 
of self-sufficing food-producing clans whose cemeteries line 
the Nile Valley may have fallen under the sway of a class of 
magicians. By the time most individual villagers, having found 
their private magics futile, were prepared to rely on the magic 
of the cleverer persons, some acquired a little authority by 
successful pretensions to influence the fertility of the crops, the 
weather, and the Nile flood. The invention of a calendar 
making possible the accurate prediction of the flood's advent 
would, as suggested on p. 111, be a sure way of justifying such 
pretensions and consolidating such authority. To enforce them 
the actual power of cutting off real water by blocking irriga- 
tion channels would be an effective means. 
But it is likely that our hypothetical magician-chiefs would 
have enjoyed only a limited tenure of authority, as did the 
historical chiefs who ruled Nilotic tribes last century. Their 
magic powers would be regarded as correlative to physical 
powers. Only a healthy and vigorous chief would perform effi- 
ciently the requisite rites; before old age impaired his potency 
he must be slain to make room for a young and virile succes- 
sor. 
That fate might be escaped could a chief persuade his fol- 
lowers that by his secret magic he could secure immunity 
from physical infirmities. One of Menes' ancestors may, in 
fact, have established some such claim to magic rejuvenation. 
In any case, all historical pharaohs performed periodically a 
rite-the Sed-festival-that seems designed to secure a re- 
newal of youth by a simulated death and resurrection. By this 
rite, modeled on the agricultural festivals mentioned on p. 
123, 124, pharaoh rose after his symbolic death magically 
restored to youth, like the grain that has been sown. 
Perhaps at the same time the magic chief contrived to iden- 
tify himself with the totem of his clan and to monopolize 
communion with the animal or object that all clansmen had 
once revered as their common ancestor. In any case, Menes 
and his successors arc identified with the Falcon, Horus, who 
had been just the totem of his clan. But, as we saw on p. 84, 

130 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
into Upper Egypt. The army, which had been the instrument 
of forcible unification, was employed thereafter to ward off 
such plunderers and trespassers. Quite early texts disclose the 
organization of a regular system of defense through the estab- 
lishment of frontier posts manned by permanent garrisons 
commanding the ways of access to the Nile Valley. 
It was, of course, these realist measures that promoted the 
extraordinary growth in wealth and population reflected in 
the archaeological record after Menes' conquest. But it has 
been necessary to explain the peculiar ideology associated 
with those measures, because in the archaeological record 
economic achievements and scientific discoveries appear only 
as applied to magical ends, as distorted in an ideological 
medium. 
Down to 2000 B.C. the archaeological record of Egypt con- 
sists almost entirely of graves and their furniture. From per- 
haps 5000 to about 3000 B.C. extend pre-dynastic cemeteries 
of simple pit-graves furnished more or less richly with home- 
made articles (p. 127 above). Modest improvements in tomb 
construction, the appearance of imported luxuries in growing 
numbers, occasional copper implements and beads of fayence 
illustrate the advances and discoveries described in Chapter 
VI. The unification of Egypt under 1enes and his immedi- 
ate successors (Dynasty I) is symbolized by the construction 
near Abydos of monumental tombs which find only remote 
and vague precursors among the later pre-dynastic graves. 
The royal tombs of i\bydos were miniature palaces of brick 
and timber erected at the bottom of vast pits dug in the desert 
sand. There are also mastabas of mud brick built above ground 
to serve as funeral shrines for the cult of the dead and store- 
houses for mortuary offerings. The tombs are furnished with 
a quite unprecedented wealth and variety of exquisitely 
wrought furniture, 'eapons, vessels, toilet articles, and orna- 
ments wrought with masterly perfection of cedar-wood, gold, 
copper, alabaster, obsidian, lapis lazuli, turquoise, and other 
choice materials, native or foreign. The storerooms are crowd- 
ed with well-made pots containing oil, beer, grain, and other 
foodstuffs. Inscriptions on seals and wooden tablets, recording 
outstanding events of the reign, prove that a system of writing 
had already been invented, although the script is still primitive. 
Servants and officials are buried in rooms adjacent to the 
royal burial chamber, and have presumably been slain to 
accompany their master. 
A multitude of laborers must have been employed in dig- 
ging the grave-shafts, in preparing and transporting the bricks 
and planks, and in erecting the tombs and mastabas. The subtly 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
129 
Mesopotah.\i3, this substantial god devoted part of his power 
and wealth to the material prosperity of his kIngdom; a share 
of his revenues was invested in genuinely reproductive under- 
takings. A pharaoh of Dynasty II is represented ""cutting the 
first sod" of a new irrigation canal. Operations instituted by 
the king for the control of the floodwaters are mentioned. 
Prom the foundation of the unified kingdom under Menes a 
special gauge, the Nilometer, was constructed to measure the 
height of the Nile, and records were kept of the floods. These 
measurements and records were designed primarily to serve 
as a basis for the assessment of taxes. But, like the calendar, 
they indirectly helped the farmer as well as the tax-gatherer. 
The importation of raw materials, needed for the develop- 
ment of Egyptian industries as well as for funerary ceremonies, 
was financed from the royal revenues. Copper and turquoise 
were mined in Sinai. Expeditions, equipped by the State and 
escorted by royal soldiers, were periodically dispatched across 
the desert for the purpose. It was the same with the importa- 
tion of cedar wood and resins from North Syria. Ships for the 
voyage to Byblos were equipped and provided with trade 
goods by the State. Similarly, government officials led expedi- 
tions to the Upper Nile and brought back gold and spices. 
The principal object of this foreign trade was doubtless to 
secure luxuries and magic substances or war materials- 
while peasants and laborers still used stone tools in the fields 
and quarries, soldiers were armed with metal weapons. Still, 
commerce brought materials essential to progress in civiliza- 
tion and in science. It offered a livelihood for new classes- 
merchants, sailors, porters, soldiers, artisans, and clerks- 
supported from the surplus revenues collected by the pharaoh. 
Finally, the monarchy from its foundation conferred upon 
the Egyptians real benefits that the Sumerians still lacked. A 
series of villages strung out along the banks of a single river 
are liable to be involved in mutual squabbles over boundaries 
and water rights. Actually throughout Egyptian history right 
down to modern times such parochial disputes have broken 
out violently whenever the central government is weak. Menes 
and his successors repressed such wasteful conflicts as long as 
the Old Kingdom endured. And besides maintaining internal 
peace, they preserved the land from foreign aggression. The 
arid plateaus on either side of the Nile Valley were sparsely 
populated by tribes of poor pastoralists and hunters. Such 
were liable at any moment to raid the fertile valley. The Delta 
was exposed to attack from Libyans on the west and from 
bedouins on the east. Nubians, perhaps still in the stage of 
nomadic garden-culture, were constantly pressing downstream 

13 2 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
men were employed continually for ten years on quarrying the 
stone alone. Though not "free workers," the army of quarry- 
men, masons, and porters were provided with food and shelter 
out of the royal revenues. Though many must have perished, 
it is still likely that this distribution of wealth promoted a 
growth in population. 
But not only labor was required: the architects had to learn 
to co-ordinate and control this vast force of workers and to 
solve the mechanical problems of applying manpower to the 
lifting of heavy and unwieldy blocks. Moreover, a mystical 
significance seems to have attached to the accuracy of the 
structure's orientation and proportion. The success achieved 
is surprising. The base of the great pyramid is intended to be a 
perfect square, with a side of 7753/4 feet. The error, according 
to modern measurements, does not exceed one inch in any 
side! 
The accuracy of Egyptian workmanship was largely 
achieved by inexhaustible patience and trial-and-error. But a 
monument like a pyramid must have been planned to scale in 
advance and precisely measured. Its execution is hardly con- 
ceivable without prior calculations involving geometrical 
formulas. Extant mathematical texts confirm this expectation. 
For example, they contain a whole group of problems devoted 
to calculating the batter of a pyramid. The sepulchral monu- 
ments, indeed, imply the application of a considerable body of 
mathematical knowledge. The Egyptians' peculiar beliefs 
about dead kings seem thus to have inspired scientific dis- 
coveries that had more practical uses too. 
By the IVth Dynasty care for the conservation of the body 
had led to the development of mummification, giving employ- 
ment to a whole class of professional embalmers and affording 
exceptional opportunities for the accumulation of knowledge 
of human anatomy. In the pre-dynastic graves contact with the 
dry desert sand had sufficed to preserve the flesh and hair of 
corpses. Enclosed in coffins of wood or alabaster and in built 
tombs after the revolution, the bodies were no longer naturally 
preserved from putrescence. To stay its ravages chemical 
methods of embalming and a ritual of magic spells were 
gradually elaborated. 
The deceased's survival 'could further be ensured by carving 
likenesses in wood or stone-portrait statues of him. These 
had to be "animated" by magical means. And to be effective 
they must be as lifelike as possible. Hence the superb natural- 
ism of some Old Kingdom statues and bas reliefs. 
The dead man needed in the afterworld the objects and the 
services he enjoyed here. Hence not only were the tombs liber- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
131 
fashioned articles deposited therein are indubitably the prod- 
ucts of speciaJized and highly trained carpenters, smiths, stone- I 
cutters, engravers, goJdsmiths, and jeweJers. These laborers 
and expert artisans, withdrawn from primary production, have 
been paid by the surp1us collected by the monarch-the booty 
of conquest and the tribute regularJy exacted. And that surplus 
must have been used for securing the foreign materials, like 
cedar-wood, copper, obsidian, and lapis lazuli, so lavishly em- 
ployed. Inscriptions in the tombs attest already the existence 
of scribes and officiaJs charged with the collection and ad- 
ministration of the royal revenues, the planning and direction 
of building operations, and other functions. The unification of 
Egypt has, in fact, evoked the same new classes and the same 
new professions as the urban revolution in Sumer. But their 
services seem to be devoted primarily to the conservation of 
royal corpses. 
To the same end were applied the growing resources, the 
fresh scientific discoveries of subsequent reigns. To secure 
greater permanence and security for the king's last resting- 
place, the tomb came to be hewn out of the living rock under 
Dynasty III. The quarrymen thus learned to carve the hardest 
rocks with rudimentary tools; the architects had to plan and 
layout a complex of galleries and shafts that they could never 
look at as a whole (they had, that is, to solve the same prob- 
lems as are involved in drilling a tunnel or a mine gallery). 
Corbelled vaults of mud brick were employed even under 
Dynasty II; by Dynasty III the principle of the true arch (with 
keystone) had been mastered and applied. 
The overground monuments-mastabas and funerary 
chapels-were similarly elaborated. Under Dynasty III stone 
replaced mud brick to give the structure greater permanence. 
The bundles of papyrus reeds that had once supported the 
king's earthly palace were thus converted into fluted columns 
of imperishable stone-an idea which we have inherited 
through Greece from IIIrd Dynasty Egypt. The colored reed 
mats that once hung between the papyrus columns were 
copied in glazed tiles under Zoser. Under the same monarch, 
the mastaba, now built of stone, was enlarged, becoming the 
so-called stepped pyramid. Cheops in Dynasty IV then trans- 
lated this into the true pyramid. 
The execution of such works required a gigantic labor force. 
The huge blocks of limestone or granite for the pyramid, 
weighing anything up to 350 tons, were quarried at Tura, on 
the east bank of the Nile, floated downstream to Gizah above 
Cairo, and then dragged up a ramp to the level of the plateau 
100 feet above the river. Herodotus was told that 100,000 

134 
THE 'URBAN REVOLUTION 
the same effect on population as in the cities of Mesopotamia. 
And, as there, it coincided with the first development of writ- 
ing and mathematics. Nevertheless, now that we have exam- 
ined them at close quarters, the two systems appear remark- 
ably dissimilar. The contrast is no longer confined to the 
individual products of the several trades, but affects even 
fundamentals: the focus of accumulation appears in the one 
area a priestly corporation, in the other an individual monarch; 
the economic unit in Sumer is a city with outlying fields and 
hamlets which could and did function by itself. In Egypt, on 
the contrary, the unit is the kingdom as a royal estate; the 
manors or cities into which it may be subdivided would cease 
to function if isolated from it, or rather would relapse into 
more or less self-sufficing peasant communities. Egyptian 
civilization is in no sense a colonial outpost of the Sumerian 
nor VIce versa. 
The same contrasts, overshadowing all abstract agree- 
ments, would probably be revealed did written documents 
supplement the archaeological record in the Indus valley. 
There the second revolution had been probably contemporary 
with that in Egypt and Sumer, and was in any case perfected 
by 2500 B.C. By that date large cities had been established in 
Sindh and the Punjab. They may exceed a square mile in 
area. The houses are built mainly of kiln-fired bricks, and 
boast at least two stories. The streets and alleys on which they 
open have evidently been laid out in conformity with a pre- 
conceived plan which is preserved through several periods 
of reconstruction. A system of sewers serves the houses. 
Among these can be distinguished shops and factories, the 
sumptuous abodes of wealthy merchants or officials, and the 
hovels of artisans and transport workers. 
The buildings and aricles found in them have been 
produced by specialized craftsmen-brickmakers, carpenters, 
potters, coppersmiths, glaziers, stonecutters, goldsmiths, and 
jewelers. The regularity of the streets implies a civic authority 
with officials to enforce its decisions. Public servants were 
required for cleaning the drains. There must have been a 
class of clerks, since a system of writing and numeral nota- 
tion was in use as well as standardized weights and measures. 
All these classes, evidently very numerous, must be sup- 
ported by the surplus foodstuffs produced by peasants living 
in the city or in suburban villages. But even fishermen, toiling 
far away on the Arabian Sea, made contributions; for dried 
sea-fish was imported. The urban artisans, for their part, must 
produce a surplus of manufactured commodities to be 
bartered for the raw materials needed in industry, but un- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
133 
ally provided with furniture and offerings, but estates were 
set apart to provide. a permanent supply of the requisite offer- 
ings to the deceased. To ensure his enjoyment of this provision, 
magic pictures of the life of the estate were painted on the 
tomb walls, already under Dynasty IV and more regularly 
later. These pictures are our best source for the secular life 
and economic organization of Egypt in the later days of the 
Old Kingdom. They depict an economic unit that is not a city, 
but a large farm like a medieval manor. The farm is worked 
by peasants under the administration of bailiffs or overseers. 
The scenes include the work in the field, the breeding of cattle, 
hunting and fishing. And we see the peasants coming in to pay 
FIG. B.-GOLDSMITH'S WORKSHOP FROM AN OLD KINGDOM 
TOMB PAINTING. 
their rent or dues, always in kind, while a scribe notes down 
on papyrus what each man brings and an overseer with a whip 
keeps the tributaries up to the mark. But the estate was not 
purely agricultural; it included potteries, smithies, carpenters' 
and jewelers' workshops. Here again we see overseers weigh- 
ing out quantities of material to the craftsmen and scribes not- 
ing down the amounts issued. 
The manorial community looks very like a self-sufficing 
unit with specialized labor and graded classes. It is, of course, 
in reality inconceivable apart from the larger economic system 
that is the Egyptian State. That system provides the manor's 
artisans with their raw materials, and absorbs the surplus 
products of the farm. And we know that genuine cities existed 
even though none has so far been excavated from this period. 
With the political unification of Egypt there emerged in the 
Nile Valley an economic system in which manufacture and 
commerce ranked on a par with the production of foodstuffs 
by farming, hunting, and fishing. This revolution in Egypt had 

134 
THE 'CRBAN REVOLUTION 
the same effect on population as in the cities of Mesopotamia. 
And, as there, it coincided with the first development of writ- 
ing and mathematics. Nevertheless, now that we have exam- 
ined them at close quarters, the two systems appear remark- 
ably dissimilar. The contrast is no longer confined to the 
individual products of the several trades, but affects even 
fundamentals: the focus of accumulation appears in the one 
area a priestly corporation, in the other an individual monarch; 
the economic unit in Sumer is a city with outlying fields and 
hamlets which could and did function by itself. In Egypt, on 
the contrary, the unit is the kingdom as a royal estate; the 
manors or cities into which it may be subdivided would cease 
to function if isolated from it, or rather would relapse into 
more or less self-sufficing peasant communities. Egyptian 
civilization is in no sense a colonial outpost of the Sumerian 
nor VIce versa. 
The same contrasts, overshadowing all abstract agree- 
ments, would probably be revealed did written documents 
supplement the archaeological record in the Indus valley. 
There the second revolution had been probably contemporary 
with that in Egypt and Sumer, and was in any case perfected 
by 2500 B.C. By that date large cities had been established in 
Sindh and the Punjab. They may exceed a square mile in 
area. The houses are built mainly of kiln-fired bricks, and 
boast at least two stories. The streets and alleys on which they 
open have evidently been laid out in conformity with a pre- 
conceived plan which is preserved through several periods 
of reconstruction. A system of sewers serves the houses. 
Among these can be distinguished shops and factories, the 
sumptuous abodes of wealthy merchants or officials, and the 
hovels of artisans and transport workers. 
The buildings and aricles found in them have been 
produced by specialized craftsmen-brickmakers, carpenters, 
potters, coppersmiths, glaziers, stonecutters, goldsmiths, and 
jewelers. The regularity of the streets implies a civic authority 
with officials to enforce its decisions. Public servants were 
required for cleaning the drains. There must have been a 
class of clerks, since a system of writing and numeral nota- 
tion was in use as well as standardized weights and measures. 
All these classes, evidently very numerous, must be sup- 
ported by the surplus foodstuffs produced by peasants living 
in the city or in suburban villages. But even fishermen, toiling 
far away on the Arabian Sea, made contributions; for dried 
sea-fish was imported. The urban artisans, for their part, must 
produce a surplus of manufactured commodities to be 
bartered for the raw materials needed in industry, but un- 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
135 
obtainable on the alluvial plain. Not only have the cities of 
the plain yielded deodara wood, imported from the Himalayas, 
and metals and precious stones brought from distant high- 
lands, but commodities manufactured in the cities have been 
found in prehistoric villages among the hills of Baluchistan 
and even far away in Mesopotamia. 
The prehistory of the Indus civilization is still unknown; 
the simpler villages and tov/nships from which the cities have 
arisen remain unidentified. By 2500 B.C. the same uniform 
civilization extends from the muth of the Indus throughout 
the lo\\dands of the Punjab right up to the foothilJs, but there 
is no evidence whether any political unity corresponded to this 
cultural uniformity. It is even uncertain what was the nucleus 
of capital accumulation. We have indications of a division 
into classes of rich and poor, but whether a king or a god 
stood at the head of the hierarchy is uncertain. Both temples 
and palaces are so inconspicuous among the ruins that their 
very existence is dubious. 
The revolutions just described occurred almost simultane- 
ously in Egypt and Sumer, and probably in India too. In each 
case the revolution was based on the same scientific dis- 
coveries, and resulted in the addition to the population of the 
same new classes. It is hard to believe in the independence of 
these events, especially when the proofs of long-standing in- 
tercourse between the areas be recalled. And this intercourse 
became closer than ever at the moment of the revolution or 
just after it. Just about the time of Egypt's unification, devices 
that may reasonably be regarded as Mesopotamian in origin 
--cylinder seals, certain artistic motives, crenelated brick 
architecture, a new type of boat-appear on the Nile for the 
first time. Soon after the revolution Indian manufactures were 
being imported into Sumer. 
Some sort of diffusion had evidently been going on. Yet 
no theory of one-sided dependence is compatible with the 
contrasts revealed by closer scrutiny. Urban civilization was 
not simply transplanted from one center to another, but was 
in each an organic growth rooted in the local soil. If we want 
a modern analogy, the establishment of mechanized industry 
and factory production by European capitalists in Africa or 
India will not serve. We must think rather of the rise of that 
system of production in the countries on both sides of the 
Atlantic. America, Britain, France, the Low Countries shared 
a common scientific, cultural, and mercantile tradition long 
before the Industrial Revolution. Despite wars and customs 
barriers, the interchange of goods, ideas, and persons went on 
continuously. England, indeed, was in the van of the Revolu- 

136 
TI-IE URBAN REVOLU'rION 
tion itself, but the other countries did not merely copy her 
mechanical inventions or economic organization; they had 
been experimenting along the same lines, and made in- 
dependent contributions when the time came. The establish- 
ment in China or even Russia of factories and railways 
modeled on Western lines and staffed with European and 
American managers and technicians was quite a different 
process. 
And so Egypt, Sumer, and India had not been isolated or 
independent before the revolution. All shared more or less a 
common cultural tradition to which each had been contribut- 
ing. And it had been maintained and enriched by a continuous 
intercourse involving an interchange of goods, ideas, and 
craftsmen. That is the explanation of the observed parallelism. 
But once the new economy had been established in the 
three primary centers, it spread thence to secondary centers, 
much like Western capitalism spread to colonies and economic 
dependencies. First on the borders of Egypt, Babylonia, and 
the Indus valley-in Crete and the Greek Islands, Syria, 
Assyria, Iran, and Baluchistan-then further afield, on the 
Greek mainland, the Anatolian plateau, South Russia, we see 
villages converted into cities and self-sufficing food-producers 
turning to industrial specialization and external trade. And the 
process is repeated in ever-widening circles around each sec- 
ondary and tertiary center. 
In the new cities not only abstract agreements in economic 
structure and underlying science, but also identity in the forms 
of artificial products, like amulets, seals, and letters, demon- 
strate how many of the vital elements of civilization had been 
borrowed from the primary centers on the Nile, the Euphrates, 
and the Indus. The second revolution was obviously propa- 
gated by diffusion; the urban economy in the secondary centers 
was inspired or imposed by the primary foci. And it is easy to 
show that the process was inevitable. 
The civilizations of the alluvial plains were dependent on the 
importation from abroad of raw materials; part of their sur- 
plus wealth had to be expended upon obtaining the requisite 
imports. But the coveted materials seldom lay in an unin- 
habited wilderness. And so communities within whose terri- 
tories the materials lay could claim a share in the surplus. They 
must, indeed, be persuaded to produce more of their metal, 
timber, spices, or precious stones than was required for do- 
mestic consumption to barter to Egyptians, Sumerians, and 
Indians, or at least to lend their services to the latter as guides, 
porters, and laborers. 
New opportunities of livelihood were thus opened up to the 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
137 
possessors of industrial materials. But to profit by these oppor- 
tunities industrial specialization was necessary. The surplus 
wealth of the alluvial plain was available to support families in- 
habiting metalliferous mountains if those families were with- 
drawn from food production to mine and transport ore. In 
practice, of course, local food production was not arrested, but 
the new wealth was employed to support a new population that 
on the old economy would have been superfluous and con- 
demned to starvation or emigration. The new role of purveyor 
of raw material meant both an increase in population and also 
class-divisions. A couple of examples will illustrate the process. 
The Egyptians required large quantities of cedar-wood for 
tombs, for boat-building, and for furniture. They obtained it 
from Lebanon in North Syria, and shipped it from the port of 
Byblos (close to Beirut). But long before the rise of the 
Egyptian dynasties, Byblos, like other Syrian harbors, was the 
site of a township. Its inhabitants, the Giblites of the Bible, 
were presumably more or less self-sufficing fishers and farmers. 
They had participated in the intercourse outlined in Chapter 
VI, and had been in contact with Egypt, and probably with 
Mesopotamia too, before the second revolution. 
The effect of the revolution in Egypt had been to make ef- 
fective a tremendous demand for the raw materials Byblos 
could supply. In satisfying it, the Giblites had an opportunity 
to share in the surplus wealth of Egypt; its expenditure opened 
up means of livelihood to families for whom the local farming 
and fishing could offer no sustenance. But its acceptance spelt 
the final abandonment of economic self-sufficiency. Byblos 
would henceforth owe its prosperity to producing for a foreign 
market. 
Imported articles of Egyptian manufacture, found at Byblos 
and going back to the period immediately before Menes' uni- 
fication, illustrate the Giblites' share in Egypt's prosperity. 
And, of course, Egyptian merchants or officials had to settle 
there to look after the vital trade, just as English merchant 
houses have their representatives in Oporto. The Egyptians in- 
structed the Giblites in the administration of the growing city 
and the management of their revenues; they may even have 
established a sort of protectorate. A stone temple was erected 
in the city and was decorated by immigrant Egyptian crafts- 
men. To meet the needs of commerce the Giblites learned the 
Egyptian script. 
Thus the Giblites adopted discoveries of the Egyptians, as- 
similated their economy to the standards of the urban revolu- 
tion and increased in numbers. Their township became a city, 
and was soon rich enough to become a market for raw mate- 

138 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
rials from other regions, a secondary center for the diffusion 
of the new economy. But Giblite civilization was not just a 
transplantation of the Egyptian; native traditions in architec- 
ture, pottery, and other crafts, in dress and religion were con.. 
served. It was the refinements superadded that were taken 
over from Egypt. And inspiration may have come from other 
quarters too. On the other hand, Giblite civilization remained 
provincial as compared with the Egyptian. The borrowed re- 
finements were not developed as they were in the home coun- 
try. The Egyptians, for instance, improved their script with 
the passage of time; the Giblites preserved the archaic charac- 
ters adopted under the early dynasties and kept them un- 
changed for nearly a thousand years. 
In much the same way, the importation of copper, silver, and 
lead from the Taurus mountains into Mesopotamia resulted in 
the growth of an urban civilization in Cappadocia on the 
plateau of Asia Minor. Before 2500 B.C. the native settlements 
there had scarcely advanced beyond a neolithic economy. The 
local villagers or townspeople were content with the stone tools 
and handmade pots produced by unspecialized domestic in- 
dustry. Soon after 2500 B.C. we read of Assyrian merchants 
settled among the native townships and trading in ore. A few 
centuries later the correspondence of such merchants shows 
how they were bartering Babylonian manufactures for metal 
and local products. Evidently the surplus wealth of Mesopo- 
tamia was providing for miners and smelters who made no 
direct contribution to the communal food supplies. At the 
same time, excavation reveals the townships growing into 
cities dependent on industry and trade. Metal becomes com- 
mon, pots are manufactured on the wheel by professionals 
instead of being built up by the housewife. Mesopotamian de- 
vices are borrowed to meet the requirements of the new 
economic situation. The cylinder seal is adopted as a means for 
labeling property and signing documents. Soon the Babylonian 
script is adapted to transcribe the local languages. But Cappa- 
docian civilization, like the Giblite, preserved its local pecu- 
liarities. And again the borrowed elements were developed 
more slowly than in Mesopotamia. The local seals, for in- 
stance, go on repeating designs a thousand years after they 
had gone out of fashion in Babylonia. 
But often the second revolution was propagated by violence 
and imposed by the force of imperialism. Some communities 
were too backward and unenterprising to appreciate the ad- 
vantages of the new economy and its products. The nomads 
who hunted or grazed their flocks on the flanks of Sinai were 
not to be enticed by corn or manufactured trinkets into mining 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
139 
copper for the Egyptians. The mines were exploited by workers 
sent from Egypt, and the royal army had to protect then: 
against the nomads. Prom the IInd Dynasty pharaohs have had 
themselves depicted on the rocks of Sinai "smiting the 
wretched bedouin." In this case armed intervention did not ex- 
tend civilization or create new urban centers. 
In other cases, however, the victims of imperialism were 
educated thereby to compete with the aggressors in material 
culture. The Sumerians had to import their raw materials from 
lands inhabited by progressive communities like the Elamites, 
and to reach them the caravans had to traverse similar terri- 
tories. Now the communities thereby affected often inhabited 
adequately watered territories and had prospered under a 
neolithic regime. They did, indeed, adopt devices like the 
wheeled car and the potters' wheels and imported gold, lapis 
lazuli, and other luxury articles. 
But on the whole they were satisfied with homemade prod- 
ucts and could live in modest comfort on their own resources. 
Their demands for luxury articles were too feeble to persuade 
them to produce timber or metal in the vast quantities required 
by the Sumerian cities, or to tolerate caravans disturbing their 
fields and pastures. They may ultimately have resisted the 
overtures of Sumerian merchants and attacked their caravans. 
And then the Sumerians would have to undertake punitive ex- 
peditions to secure raw material and to protect trade routes. 
Very early texts refer to wars waged by the cities of Sumer 
and Akkad against Elamites and other "barbarian" neighbors. 
While these references may refer to raids by impoverished 
mountaineers upon the rich plains, they may equally indicate 
struggles of the sort just envisaged. Besides unifying Babylo- 
nia, Sargon of Agade embarked upon campaigns of conquest 
in surrounding regions, the economic motives of which are 
clear enough. His own inscriptions mention explicitly as ob- 
jectives the Silver Mountains (Taurus) and the Cedar Forests 
(? Lebanon). A later document describes how he was invited 
to Cappadocia to support the metal traders settled there, and 
refers also to a mountain of lapis lazuli. A still later tablet is to 
claim a "Tinland" among Sargon's conquests. Undoubtedly he 
subdued the metalliferous district of Elam and extended his 
dominions from the Upper Sea (Mediterranean or Caspian) to 
the Lower Sea (the Persian Gulf), thus embracing the regions 
on which Babylonia was dependent. 
In some instances at least the conquests resulted in the 
forcible implantation of urban civilization, converting more or 
less self-sufficing townships into industrial and commercial 
cities. At Nineveh in Assyria (opposite Mosul), Sargon's 

14° 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
grandson founded a temple to Ishtar, the first of a long series 
of temples erected on the site. Now that symbolized an eco- 
nomic revolution; for, as in Sumer, the temple constituted a 
permanent center for the accumulation of wealth and the de- 
velopment of industry. Its erection and adornment involved 
the expenditure of a surplus that would nourish a prolific, if 
servile, proletariat. It would create a new demand for lapis 
lazuli, timber, metal, and so on, thus turning Nineveh into a 
secondary center of diffusion. This process may have been re- 
peated under Sargon or a little earlier in other Assyriaa towns. 
And about the same period the Babylonian script and other 
devices were introduced, fully formed, into Assyria. 
Sargon and :1is successors can therefore claim to have been 
"founders of cities" even where townships had existed long 
before them. There is this much truth in the biblical phrase 
about "Asshur going forth from Shinar (Sumer) and building 
Nineveh," etc. The people of Assyria had not come from 
Babylonia, but the earliest temples in what were to be the his- 
torical cities of Assyria were founded by Akkadians (Nineveh) 
or Sumerians, or were at least furnished with cult statues of 
Sumerian type (Assur). 
N ow Syria and Assyria were certainly populous long before 
3000 B.C., very likely even before Sumer was colonized. But 
those steppe countries enjoy a regular rainfall, so that the in- 
centive to close social organization that worked so efficaciously 
in Lower Mesopotamia was lacking. The population was scat- 
tered among numerous permanent villages which grew into 
little townships like the modern Kurdish villages. Their pros- 
perous inhabitants had adopted the wheel and other devices, 
and occasionally made use of imported substances like lapis 
lazuli, gold, and copper. But at least down to 3000 B.C. they 
preserved their economic independence; they remained con- 
tent with stone tools and weapons, and so did not have to rely 
on imports. But after 3000 B.c.-perhaps, indeed, as late as 
the time of Sargon-they suddenly began to use metal regu- 
larly. Their tools and weapons are all of distinctively Sumerian 
form, so that there is no doubt who were their instructors in 
metallurgy. And the sacrifice of self-sufficiency thus attested 
was accompanied by other familiar signs of the second revolu- 
tion; soon some towns begin to expand into cities, while a few 
are absorbed by more successful neighbors. It is by no means 
certain how far the revolution here was the result of actual 
conquest by Sargon or by some Sumerian precursor. Even the 
cities that may most plausibly be claimed as Akkadian foun- 
dations did not remain colonies and dependencies for long. 
They had never lost their native culture, and soon became 

THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
141 
centers of revolt, and ultimately at times the capitals of new 
States like Assur itself. 
For economic imperialism did not propagate the second 
revolution only by conquest. Successful resistance to its attacks 
or the threat thereof was only possible by assimilating part of 
the civilization of the aggressors. Stone weapons were no more 
a match for the bronze armament of the Babylonian troops 
than were the bows and tomahawks of the Red Indians effec- 
tive against Europeans' firearms. To succeed in defending their 
independence, peoples hitherto content with a neolithic equip- 
ment had to adopt arms of metal. That meant in practice that 
they had to learn metallurgy and adjust their economy to its 
requirements. It was not enough to purchase or steal some 
axes, spears, and helmets, manufactured in Babylonia: they 
must capture smiths to train armorers among their own people; 
they must produce surplus foodstuffs to support the new 
craftsmen and to secure the requisite raw materials; they must 
organize trade to ensure regular supplies. In a word, they must 
submit to the second revolution and adopt an urban economy. 
The beginnings of metallurgy and of a rudimentary city 
life in Assyria may often be explained in this way. And not in 
Assyria only: in all the regions traversed by Sumerian trade 
routes and exposed to Sargon's campaigns-in North Syria, in 
Luristan, in Elam-we find centers of metallurgy arising soon 
after 3000 B.C. where Sumerian types were copied locally, and 
often modified according to local tastes. In one way or another 
Sumerian trade and the imperialism it inspired were propa- 
gating metallurgy and the new economy it implies. 
Between 3000 and 2000 B.C. bronze-using civilizations were 
established in Crete, on the Greek mainland, at Troy on the 
Dardanelles, in the Kuban basin north of the Caucasus, on the 
plateau of Asia Minor, in Palestine and Syria, in Iran, and in 
Baluchistan. Each of these civilizations has a character of its 
own, but all exhibit so many concrete features of agreement 
with the products of Egypt, Sumer, or the Indus basin or of 
one of the secondary centers that their indebtedness to earlier 
foci of civilization is indisputable. 
These secondary and tertiary civilizations are not original, 
but result from the adoption of traditions, ideas, and processes 
received by diffusion from older centers. In most cases the 
mechanism of this transmission is lost. The foregoing pages 
should reveal that effective mechanisms of diffusion were at 
work. The second revolution, once established, had to spread. 
And every village, converted into a city by the spread, became 
at once a new center of infection. Before 1500 B.C. the new 
industrial structure was reaching Spain, Britain, and Germany. 

14 2 
THE URBAN REVOLUTION 
In less than five centuries more it had penetrated to Scandi- 
navia and Siberia. 
But in this process of diffusion culture was de 6 raded. 
People who have learned a new technique are apt to apply it 
clumsily; proficiency requires generations of practice and of 
discipline. Again, the higher civllization is not adopted in its 
entirety; the recipient people feel the need of, and can assimi- 
late, only a few items in the new cultural equipment. It is pos- 
sible, for instance, to learn enough metallurgy and to get 
enough ore for armaments without learning to write or estab- 
lishing such a commercial organization as should make writing 
indispensable. There thus arise different rades of civilization, 
varying degrees of approximation to the standards set by the 
primary centers. And these grades tend to be arranged in zones 
about the primary centers. 
By 2500 B.C. the Minoans of Crte were dwelling in cities 
and living by industry and comnlerce. So intent arc they, in- 
deed, on profiting by the surplus wealth of Egypt and Syria, 
that they will build a city even on a tiny island with no cul- 
tivable land, provided it offer a convenient harbor. They had 
borrowed various items of the necessary technical equipment 
from Egypt or Sumer, directly or through Syria. They had 
early adopted the seal as a device for labeling their jars of oil 
and bales of merchandise. But the early native seals are rather 
crude products. Eventually they devised a rather clumsy picto- 
graphic script to assist them in their accountancy. They could 
smelt and work metals, and they employed the Sumerian type 
of axe-head with a hole for the shaft. But early Minoan metal 
tools look very clumsy beside the original models. Wheeled 
wagons were employed at first, but not the potters' wheel. 
The Helladic people of Mainland Greece had begun to live 
in cities rather later than the Cretans, and were less dependent 
on trade and manufactures. They made no seals of their own, 
presumably because trade was on too small a scale for the 
device to be needed. Naturally they did not know how to write. 
Stone was still effectively competing with copper as tool ma- 
terial, and metal weapons were poor imitations of the Minoan. 
Finally, the barbarians living north of the Balkans in what 
was to become the Austro-Hungarian Empire were only just 
beginning to use metal for weapons and ornaments, and occa- 
sionally for tools, by 2000 B.C. But they continued to live in 
small and nearly self-sufficing village communities. Of course 
they had no use for writing, or even for seals. Metallurgy they 
had learned from Greece and Troy, but they were far behind 
their masters. And their neighbors to the north were still 
neolithic! 

