CHAPTER VIII 
THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE 
THE economic revolution just described was possible only be- 
cause Sumerians, Egyptians, and Indians disposed of a body 
of accumulated experience and applied science. The revolu- 
tion inaugurated a new method of transmitting experience, 
fresh ways of organizing knowledge, and more exact sciences. 
The science requisite for the revolution had been transmitted 
in the form of craft lore by oral precept and example. The be- 
ginnings of writing and of mathematics and the standardiza- 
tion of weights and measures coincide in time with the revolu- 
tion. The synchronism is not accidental. The practical needs of 
the new economy had, in fact, evoked the innovations. 
In Sumer, we have seen, the resources needed to transform 
economic organization were accumulated in temples and ad- 
ministered by priests. The administrators were not isolated 
individuals, but continuing corporations. Nor were the temples 
isolated units. In the earliest historical times we find temples to 
the same deity in several Sumerian cities. The gods worshipped 
in them were not, or at least not exclusively, local deities; they 
were common to the whole land, like many of the saints to 
which Christian churches are dedicated. Presumably their 
priests too were not entirely restricted in their allegiance to the 
single city, but had a sort of international citizenship in "the 
kingdom of heaven" again like medieval clerics. Probably, 
though not certainly, these conditions go back to prehistoric 
times. The sovereignty of the same deities over the whole land 
would be the theologico-political counterpart of the uniformity 
of material culture throughout Sumer (and eventually through- 
out Babylonia). 
A Sumerian temple C:isposed, as we have seen, of vast es- 
tates, flocks, and herds, and of huge revenues. It expended and 
augmented that wealth by assisting its votaries with advances 
and loans. Now the priests who administered that revenue 
must give an account to their divine master of their dealings 
with his property and must ensure the conservation and en- 
143 

144 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
richment of his estates. They were confronted with -a prob- 
lem unprecedented in human history; never before had such 
vast wealth been concentrated under unitary control. To keep 
track of the god's dues and of his transactions the priest dare 
not rely on his memory. Nor would private mnemonic devices, 
like tying a knot in a handkerchief, help. 1 The individual 
priest was mortal, but the corporation to which he belonged 
was immortal, like the god it served. The priest might die 
before his master's loan had been -epaid, but his duty of ex- 
acting repayment would be fulfilled by a colleague or succes- 
sor. The god's minister must record how many jars of seed and 
of what quality he had advanced, how many sheep and of what 
breeds he had entrusted to a shepherd. And the transactions 
must be recorded in such a way that the priesthood, not just 
the priest, could interpret the record and secure satisfaction for 
the god. In a word, writing as a socially recognized system of 
recording was essential for keeping the temple accounts 
satisfactorily. 
It will be recalled that in the first temple at Erech which 
signalized the transformation of the village into th city a 
primitive account-tablet was found. The symbols on it attest, if 
not a system of writing, at least a system of numeral notation. 
Rather later (but not later than 3000 B.C.) clay tablets bearing 
accounts are found not only at Erech, but also at J emdet N aSf 
and other sites. 
On the clay the priest has drawn characters and also nu- 
merals. The characters are mostly shorthand pictures-a jar, 
a bull's head, two triangles, and so on. The script is therefore 
termed pictographic. You can guess what the signs mean by 
simply looking at them. Even so they are already to some 
extent conventional. Society has selected and sanctioned one 
out of several possible ways of representing summarily, say, 
a bull. And some of the signs already mean more than the 
simple picture can indicate: the jar means a jar containing 
so much-in fact, a unit of measurement. Such a sign, standing 
for an idea, is termed an ideogram; its value is said to be ideo- 
graphic (our mathematical symbols +, -, X, --;.--, and so on 
are examples of ideograms) . 
Finally, there are already signs that cannot be recognized 
as depicting any specific object. The meaning of these ideo- 
grams is purely conventional. The priest has rightly despaired 
of indicating with a few strokes the distinction between several 
kinds of sheep. Instead he has adopted conventional signs to 
] You know-it is to be hoped-what the knot meant, but a policeman. 
picking up your dead body, could not expect to guess which of the innumer. 
able possible errands the knot had been designed to recall! 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 145 
denote mouflon, urial, ram, wether, ewe. These signs are de- 
liberate inventions by individual priests. But they must be 
accepted by the corporation, sanctioned by society to be useful. 
Just because the accounts were not private documents and 
the signs were more than reminders to an individual, the sys- 
tem of writing employed had to be conventional. A canon of 
signs had to be established and authorized by society. In fact, 
we possess actual lists of signs as well as accounts from this 
period. And all administrators must be initiated into the con- 
vention. The process of initiation is what we call learning to 
read and write. (That consists, of course, in learning what 
meanings, i.e. sounds, the usage of our society attaches to 
twenty-six arbitrary symbols and learning to form the char- 
acters in the way approved by our fellows.) There must ac- 
cordingly have been schools for scribes. The sign-lists which 
have been dug up could serve very well as school texts. 
Moreover, since the same signs were employed both at 
Erech in Sumer and at Jemdet Nasr in Akkad, there must have 
been an interchange of pupils and masters between the various 
cities. The system of writing was not a convention peculiar to 
a particular temple-corporation, but was recognized and au- 
thorized by Sumerian society as a whole. 
A large collection of tablets unearthed at Shuruppak (Fara) 
illustrates the development of Sumerian writing at the begin- 
ning of the historical period-after 3000 B.C. These documents 
are exclusively temple accounts and sign-lists used as school 
texts. In the latter the signs are grouped by subjects; different 
sorts of fish, for instance, are listed consecutively. And after 
each sign is added the name of the clerk or priest who in- 
vented it. 
The signs are now highly conventionalized. The pictograms 
have been so simplified and abbreviated that the object in- 
tended is barely, if at all, recognizable. Moreover, signs are 
now used to represent sounds as well as ideas or things; they 
have become phonograms as well as, or instead of, ideograms. 
The sign W stood for bearded head and for the Sumerian 
word ka, face. It may be now employed to denote just the 
syllable ka, without any reference to heads or faces. By select- 
ing signs with the proper phonetic value it is now possible to 
spell out words-proper names or terms denoting concepts of 
actions that can hardly be represented by pictures. (In practice 
the above sign might also be used for "to speak," "to cry," 
"word," etc., and for the Sumerian equivalents dug, gug, 
e nim! ) 

146 . 'THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
Signs continued, however, to be used with an ideographic 
value (to denote things or concepts instead of sounds) by 
themselves. And even when a word was spelt out phonetically 
an ideogram was often added to indicate to the reader the sort 
of word intended. Ideograms thus used are termed determina. 
tives. 
After 3000 B.C. we begin to find documents other than ac- 
counts, contracts, and sign-lists-at first mainly names and 
titles, then treaties, liturgical and historical texts, spells, and 
fragments of legal codes. And the script is further simplified; 
instead of being drawn, the various elements of the sign were 
stamped on to the soft clay with a wedge-shaped stylus. Be- 
cause the signs are composed of wedge-shaped impressions, 
this classical Babylonian script is termed cuneiform. It re- 
mained in use till almost the beginning of our era, and was 
later adapted to write various foreign languages-Hittite (in 
Asia Minor), Vannie (in Armenia), Persian, and so on. 
But even before 2500 B.C. the script, invented by the 
Sumerians, was being used to transcribe the language of their 
Semitic fellow-countrymen-Akkadian. This use of Sumerian 
characters to write Semitic names may have accelerated the 
conversion of ideographic into phonetic signs. But it conl- 
plicated the result. A given sign is now liable to stand for one 
or more concepts, the sound of the Sumerian name of the con- 
cepts and the sound of the corresponding Semitic word. (The 
complexity is really much greater, since the same sign even in 
Sumerian might stand for several words, and so for several 
sounds.) Probably Sumerians and Babylonians never felt any 
difficulty here, but for modern scholars the transliteration of 
Sumerian names into European alphabets is always difficult, 
Ur-nina has been changed to Ur-nanshe, Ur-engur to Ur-nam- 
mu, and so on. 
The fortunate circumstance that the Sumerians adopted 
clay as their writing material and made their documents im. 
perishable by baking the clay, allows us to follow the history 
of writing from its very beginnings in Mesopotamia. It shows 
the development of writing and of city life advancing step by 
step. It is no accident that the oldest written documents in the 
world are accounts and dictionaries. They disclose the severely 
practical needs that prompted the invention of the Sumerian 
script. 
Nowhere else can the practical economic origin of writing 
be demonstrated so clearly, because nowhere else can the art 
be traced to its starting point. Other peoples probably began 
writing on perishable materials and applied their script to in- 
scriptions on more durable substances only when it was well 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN !{NOWLEDGE 147 
advanced. The earliest Egyptian documents that survive are 
names and titles on seatings and vases, notes of accounts 0f 
inventories, and short records of events on slips of wood found 
in the royal tombs of the 1st and Ilnd Dynasties at Abydos. 
By this time (3000 or 2950 for the oldest) the system is al- 
ready more mature than that of the oldest Sumerian docu- 
ments. The signs are, indeed, quite recognizable pictures, and 
must originally have been pictograms. Indeed, in the early 
kings' names and titles, the pictures sometimes "come to life." 
And some characters retain their value as ideograms; indeed, 
as determinatives (p. 146), such were used throughout the 
whole period during which the Egyptian scripts were current. 
But even in the days of Menes many picture-signs have a 
purely phonetic value, and words are regularly spelled out 
instead of being indicated by ideograms alone. The purely 
pictographic stage has been passed and remains a matter of 
inference. And quite soon the Egyptians were in possession 
of an alphabet: twenty-four signs have been adopted, each 
to stand for a single consonant (vowels were not written). 
But though any words could thus be spelt, ideograms and 
detern1inatives were never abandoned. 
Of course even the picture-signs, though much more realistic 
than Sumerian pictograms, conform to a social convention. 
And in addition to this hieroglyphic script, the Egyptian scribes 
soon devised a quicker cursive hand (termed hieratic), the 
characters of which are so much simplified that the object 
once depicted is no longer recognizable. 
The names, titles, and historical summaries that constitute 
the oldest surviving documents of Egyptian literature can hard- 
ly be used as evidence for the causes inspiring the invention 
of writing on the Nile. The practical uses of the art are attested 
from the time of the earliest dynasties. Scribes are explicitly 
mentioned among the royal officials. The observations on the 
height of the Nile and the assessments based thereon (p. 129) 
must have been written down. In later tomb-pictures (p. 133) 
we see the scribes busily scribbling down the rent or tribute 
brought in by tenants and herdsmen. In the workshop scenes 
they are recording the materials removed from store to be 
worked up by the individual artisas. 
The scribes are officials, members of an organized and per- 
manent public service. Their accounts and records must be 
intelligible to their colleagues, their superiors, and, in the last 
resort, to their supreme master, who is an earthly god. They 
must, as in Sumer, conform to a social convention; and read- 
ing and writing must be learned. 
Nothing can be said of the Indus script, since only brief and 

148 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
un deciphered inscriptions on seals or copper tablets survive. 
It may here be noted that in Crete, where the Minoans began 
to develop a script before 2000 B.C., the vast majority of the 
extant documents are account tablets or inventories. The in- 
vention of writing was thus probably inspired everywhere, as 
in Sumer, by the peculiar practical needs of the urban econ- 
omy. Admittedly the Sumerian script was invented, and at 
first used exclusively, by priests of a sort. But the Sumerian 
priests invented writing not in their capacity of ministers of 
superstition, but in that of administrators of a worldly estate. 
They, like the Egyptian and Minoan scribes, used the inven- 
tion first not for magical and liturgical purposes, but for prac- 
tical business and administration. 
The invention of writing (as here defined) really marks an 
epoch in human progress. For us moderns it seems significant 
primarily because it offers an opportunity of penetrating to the 
very thoughts of our cultural ancestors, instead of trying to 
deduce those thoughts from their imperfect embodiments in 
deeds. But the true significance of writing is that it was destined 
to revolutionize the transmission of human knowledge. By its 
means a man can immortalize his experience and transmit it 
directly to contemporaries living far off and to generations 
yet unborn. It is the first step to raising science above the 
limits of space and time. 
The utility of early scripts for this high mission must not 
be exaggerated. Writing was not invented as a medium of pub- 
lication, but for the practical needs of administrative corpora- 
tions. The earlier Sumerian and Egyptian scripts were distinct- 
ly clumsy instruments for expressing ideas. Even after a proc- 
ess of simplification lasting over 2000 years the cuneiform 
script employed between 600 and 1000 distinct characters. 
Before one could read or write, one had to memorize this 
formidable array of symbols and learn the complex rules for 
their combination. Egyptian hieroglyphic and hieratic scripts, 
despite their alphabetic elements, remained cumbered with a 
bewildering multitude of ideograms and determinatives, so that 
the number of characters required ran to about 500. 
Under these conditions writing was inevitably a really diffi- 
cult and specialized art that had to be learned by a long ap- 
prenticeship. Reading remained a mystery initiation into which 
was obtainable only by a prolonged schooling. Few possessed 
either the leisure or the talent to penetrate into the secrets of 
literature. Scribes were a comparatively restricted class in 
Oriental antiquity, like clerks in the Middle Ages. This class, 
it is true, never became a caste. Admission to the schools did 
not depend upon birth, though quite how scholars were se- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 149 
lected is uncertain. But the "reading public" must have been 
a small minority in a vast population of illiterates. 
Writing was, in fact, a profession, rather like metallurgy or 
weaving or war. But it was a profession that enjoyed a privi- 
leged position and offered prospects of advancement to office, 
power, and wealth. Literacy came thus to be valued not as a 
key to knowledge, but as a stepping-stone to prosperity and 
social rank. A rather hackneyed quotation from later Egyptian 
literature will illustrate an attitude that can hardly have been 
peculiar to the Nile Valley or the period of the texts. 
An amusing group of Egyptian documents dating from the 
New Kingdom contrasts the prestige and privileges of a scribe 
with the hardships of a craftsman or a cultivator. They take 
the form of paternal admonitions, but embody sentiments that 
might be expressed today by a farmer or small shopkeeper 
writing to a son who has to choose between proceeding to 
higher education or entering industrial employment. 
"Put writing in your heart that you may protect yourself 
from hard labor of any kind and be a magistrate of high 
repute. The scribe is released from manual tasks; it is he 
who commands. . . . Do you not hold the scribe's palette? 
That is what makes the difference between you and the man 
who handles an oar. 
"I have seen the metal-worker at his task at the mouth 
of his furnace with fingers like a crocodile's. He stank worse 
than fish-spawn. Every workman who holds a chisel suffers 
more than the men who hack the ground; wood is his field 
and the chisel his mattock. At night when he is free, he toils 
more than his arms can do (? at overtime work); even at 
night he lights (his lamp to work by). The stonecutter seeks 
work in every hard stone; when he has done the great part 
of his labor his arms are exhausted, he is tired out. . . . 
The weaver in a workshop is worse off than a woman; (he 
squats) with his knees to his belly and does not taste (fresh) 
air. He must give loaves to the porters to see the light." 
The prospects of social advancement implied in these ad- 
monitions may not have been so bright or definite at earlier 
periods or in other countries. But the general attitude towards 
clerical employments and theoretical science as contrasted to 
manual labor and applied sciences probably goes back to the 
earliest phases of urban life, and was the same in Sumer as in 
Egypt. The foregoing quotations accordingly recall the fact 
that the second revolution had produced or accentuated a 
division of society into classes. In practice kings, priests, 

150 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
nobles, and generals stand opposed to peasants, fishermen, 
artisans, and laborers. And in this class division the scribes be- 
long to the former class; writing is a "respectable" profession. 
Now material progress in prehistoric times had been due 
mainly to improvements in technique, made presumably by the 
craftsmen and husbandmen themselves. But in the class divi- 
sion of urban society scribes belong to the "upper classes," 
in contrast to the working artisans and farmers; writing is a 
respectable profession while farming, metallurgy, and carpen- 
try are not. The practical applied science of botany, chem- 
istry, and geology were not accordingly embraced in the liter- 
ary tradition whose exponents looked down upon manual 
labor; craft lore was not reduced to writing nor handed on in 
book form. 
On the other hand, certain sciences and pseudo-sciences- 
mathematics, surgery, medicine, astrology, alchemy, haruspicy 
-were made the subjects of written treatises. They thus 
formed a body of learned sciences, accessible only to those who 
had been initiated into the mysteries of reading and writing. 
But by this very fact the disciplines in question were liable to 
be divorced from practical life. In entering the school the pupil 
turned his back on the plow and the bench; he had no desire 
to return to them. 
Inevitably, too, words written with such difficulty and de- 
ciphered so laboriously must seem to possess an authority of 
their own. The immortalization of a word in writing must have 
seemed a supernatural process; it was surely magical that a 
man long vanished from the land of the living could still speak 
from a clay tablet or a papyrus roll. Words thus spoken must 
possess a kind of mana. Thus learned men in the East, like 
schoolmen in our own Middle Ages, were apt to turn to books 
in preference to Nature. In Egypt books on mathematics, sur- 
gery, and medicine, composed under the Old Kingdom (before 
2400 B.C.) were slavishly, and often very incompetently, 
copied after 2000. Between 800 and 600 B.C. the upstart kings 
of Assyria were at pains to acquire for their libraries copies of 
texts going back to the time of Hammurabi (about 1800 B.C.) 
or of Sargon of Agade (2350). 
Instead of demanding that a book should be up to date and 
embody the latest disoveries, the Egyptian or Babylonian stu- 
dent valued it for its antiquity. A publisher would then adver- 
tise his wares not as a "new and revised edition," but as a faith- 
ful copy of a fabulously old text. And so the "jacket" of the 
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus runs: "Rules for enquiring into 
nature and for knowing all that exists. The roll was written in 
the thirty-third year of King Aauserre in the likeness of a writ- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 15 1 
ing of antiquity made in the time of king Nemare (1880-1850 
B.C.). It was the scribe Ahmose who made this copy." One of 
the treatises included in the Ebers Medical Papyrus is entitled 
"The Book of Healing Illnesses found in ancient writing in a 
chest at the feet of Anubis in the time of King UsaphaYs" (a 
monarch of Dynasty I). 
Nevertheless the schools for scribes did actually function as 
what we should call research institutes. Even for the purposes 
of teaching it was necessary to organize and systematize the 
knowledge to be imparted. The post of instructor gave oppor- 
tunities and inducements for addition to knowledge by a sort 
of "theoretical research." 
Particularly in Mesopotamia the very "scholastic" attitude, 
just criticized, promoted the systematic organization of learn- 
ing. Prom 2500 B.C. onwards people of Semitic speech were 
winning the upper hand in Babylonia. The First Dynasty of 
Babylon that finally unified Sumer and Akkad about 1800 was 
Semitic. And so Semitic Akkadian thereafter became the offi- 
cial language of the kingdom. Sumerian became a dead lan- 
guage. But the revered old texts were written in Sumerian. And 
Sumerian remained the language of religion, just as Latin did 
in medieval Europe. The priests of the temples, retaining their 
corporate identity from prehistoric Sumerian times, were 
trained in the Sumerian tradition whatever their native speech 
might have been before ordination. 
Naturally they held that the ancient gods of the land must 
still be conciliated with Sumerian liturgies; the old magic 
powers could be compelled only with Sumerian spells. The 
temple schools had therefore now to teach and study Sumerian, 
just as medieval colleges had to study Latin. In addition to in- 
struction in reading and writing, they had to provide for some 
at least of their students a "higher education" and to study sub- 
jects of no practical utility in mundane affairs. In the course of 
this study they learned to make grammars and dictionaries to 
facilitate the comprehension and correct recitation of the old 
Sumerian hymns and incantations and to collect and arrange 
the ancient texts. Though inspired by hopes of supernatural 
gain, this work did give scholars training in the organization 
of knowledge and in research; and it has enabled us to read 
Sumerian. 
Even in Egypt the reverence for ancient traditions going 
back to the glorious Pyramid Age, attested in the titles we 
quoted on pp. 150-1, impelled later generations to the system- 
!tic study of documents composed in a language and a script 
'urther removed from contemporary usage than are those of 
;haucer's days from our own. 

152 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
And in neither country was the scribe's education confined 
to reading and writing. To fulfil the functions normally re- 
quired of him, the scribe must study mathematics too. Some 
must have been trained also in astrology, medicine, surgery, 
and perhaps even alchemy. The bulk of the papyri and tablets 
which modern scholars designate "mathematical," "medical," 
or in general "scientific," have probably been produced and 
used in such schools. To these we may add accounts and field- 
plans, calendars, and other documents illustrating applications 
of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and so on. From these 
sources we have to deduce how ancient learning was organized, 
how it was transmitted, and what it had achieved. 
Accounts and calendars obviously bear precisely the same 
relation to the science of mathematics as do metal slags and 
castings to the science of chemistry. From each we can infer 
the amount of scientific knowledge the accountant or the 
metallurgist was actually applying in the course of his business. 
Field-plans are not differentiated from the material handled by 
the "prehistoric archaeologist" by the fact that they have 
figures and words written in. 
Secondly, there are included in the "scientific" texts them- 
selves various tables comparable to our multiplication and in- 
terest tables. These are, of course, helps to reckoning and in- 
struments of calculation. Though the extant examples are 
mostly drawn up for use in "schools," they are strictly com- 
parable to the instruments used by a craftsman in the applica- 
tion of his branch of science. Multiplication tables fulfil the 
same function as furnaces, crucibles, and bellows. The insight 
they give into mathematical knowledge is of precisely the same 
order as that which can be obtained into applied chemistry 
from an examination of uninscribed archaeological relics. 
The remaining texts, however, have no exact counterparts 
in the material which pure archaeology uses as illustrations of 
applied sciences. These documents are the actual instruments 
in the transmission of scientific knowledge. They take the place 
of textbooks for school use, books of reference, and perhaps 
communications in learned journals amongst us. But they are 
strikingly unlike modern textbooks that aim at explaining the 
general theory and methods of a whole discipline, and equally 
unlike the monographs which aim at the exposition and dem- 
onstration of a particular discovery or generalization. 
The mathematical texts are simply concrete examples of 
different problems worked out in full. They illustrate to the 
reader how to do sums of various kinds. But by themselve 
such series of examples could hardly suffice to enlighten 
novice as to new methods nor impart to him fresh knowledge 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 153 
They must have been intended as supp]ements to oral instruc- 
tion. The same is true of the medical texts. They contain at 
best a summary of symptoms, recapitulated in a diagnosis, and 
followed by a prescription. They thus resemble the notes of 
cases a student would take during his hospital practice. They 
presuppose some sort of oral instruction given by the professor. 
It looks then as if there was no real distinction between the 
transmission of the learned sciences and that of the applied 
sciences or crafts; the sort of instruction given to a student of 
mathematics or medicine was essentially the same as that given 
to an apprentice in metallurgy or weaving. The apprentice 
watches his master at work, is shown how to perform the op- 
eration, and is then set to work himself under his master's eye 
to be corrected when he goes wrong. Just in the same way, the 
pupil scribe or doctor in Egypt and Babylonia must have 
watched his professor working out simple examples of treating 
actual cases. Literature gives no hint that this practical instruc- 
tion was preceded Or supplemented by a reasoned exposition 
of general principles and abstract theory such as today distin- 
guishes a university training, in engineering, say, from mere 
apprenticeship. 
The learned sciences in the Ancient East were still more 
obviously allied to the crafts in their aims. Egyptian and 
Babylonian mathematics, medicine, and astrology professedly 
aimed at satisfying specific needs felt by Egyptian and 
Babylonian societies. They aimed at solving problems actually 
arising in the course of business and building, at the cure of 
known diseases, and at the determination of agricultural 
seasons, and still more the prediction of men's fortunes. 
Mathematics is as obviously a consequence of the economic 
needs of the urban revolution as is writing. The business trans- 
actions of temple corporations and revenue administration by 
a public service need standardized weights and measures, a sys- 
tem of numerical notation, and rules to expedite counting, as 
much as they need writing. 
Measurement, of course, did not begin with the revolution. 
It only means comparing objects in resr:ect to length, width, 
weight, and so on. In some form it must be as old as human 
industry . You cannot fit a string to a bow nor an axe-head to 
its shaft without measurement. At first the objects to be fitted 
were compared directly one to the other. As soon as indus- 
trial operations became more complicated, it was more con- 
venient to compare each part to one standard. In boat-building 
it would be inconvenient to have to compare each plank you 
were cutting with the keel already laid down and with the last 
plank cut. It was easier to compare the keel with, say, your 

154 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
arm, and cut each plank to the number of arm's lengths repre- 
sented in the keel. 
At first the standards would be individual natural objects. 
Your finger, your palm, and your forearm (ell or cubit) 
provided, as it were, personal units of length. In exchanges a 
grain of barley or a sackful of grain would be treated as a unit 
of weight. But for social labor that requires both accuracy and 
the co-operation of several workers personal measures prove 
inadequate; no two workers need have arms of precisely the 
same length. So too i exchanging quantities the varying 
weights of different barley-grains and disproportion in the con- 
tent of sacks may cause injustice. Weights and measures have 
to be standardized. That is, society must agree to assign a 
fixed value to the finger, the span, and the cubit, the grain and 
the sackful. The social standards of length are then marked on 
measuring rods; weights of stone or metal are made to repre- 
sent the convenient grain and sackful. Soon it is arranged that 
the several conventional units of length, volume, weight, and 
so on shall bear simple mathematical relations to each other, 
though retaining their old names. The cubit is chosen as a 
simple multiple of the span, and so on. Standardization of 
weights and measures, therefore, like language and writing, re- 
poses on a convention. Weghts and measures, like words and 
characters, have to be authorized by social usage. 
Incidentally, measurement by conventional standards is 
more abstract than the comparison of concrete individual ob- 
jects. And all measurement involves abstract thinking. In 
measuring lengths of stuffs you ignore their materials, colors, 
patterns, textures, and so on, to concentrate on length. Ulti- 
mately the process leads to concepts of "pure quantity" and 
"Euclidean space." 
It must not be supposed that ancient societies were inter- 
ested in infinite length or empty space. Their abstractions were 
limited by practical interests. The ancient Sumerian measures 
of area have in some cases the same names as measures of 
weight; in particular the smallest unit in both "tables" is the 
se or grain, in other words, Sumerian "square measure" was 
originally a seed measure. The Sumerian's interest was the 
quantity of seed needed to sow his field. He regarded the field 
not as occupying so much "empty space," but as needing so 
much seed-grain. With the areas of bits of uncultivable desert 
or blue sky he was not concerned. 
Weighing, it may be remarked, required also the invention 
of a special instrument, the balance. Objects supposed by Petrie 
to be weights have been discovered in prehistoric Egyptian 
graves. If Petrie be right, it must be admitted that the invention 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 155 
of the balance and standardization of weights began some time 
before the revolution. 
That is intrinsically probable. In any case, the several com- 
munities among whom the revolution was traced in Chapter 
VIII came to attach rather different conventional values to 
their several units. After the revolution, that is, we find differ- 
ent systems of weights and measures in Egypt, Mesopotamia, 
and India. Even in Mesopotamia itself minor differences in 
weights may be due to the adoption of divergent standilrds in 
several autonomous cities. Trade was, however, sufficiently in- 
ternational for the standards of one country to find recognition 
and usage in another. So the Egyptian sometimes measured by 
Babylonian units of weight instead of the native weights. 
Counting must go back to the earliest human societies, 
though some savages today cannot, it is alleged, count beyond 
five. Presumably men began by counting on their fingers. 
Hence the wh.1espreau lleciInal system whereby numbers from 
one to ten have distinct names. 
In all cases, of course, men were numbering actual objects- 
salmon caught, sheep in a fold, threads in the weft, and so on. 
The modest totals that a paleolithic hunter or a neolithic herds- 
man might want to remember could be recorded by notches on 
a stick. For recording the vast revenues of a Sumerian temple 
or an Egyptian pharaoh such series of strokes became too cum- 
bersome. The priestly corporation and the civil service had to 
adopt a conventional system for noting down large quantities. 
Both in Sumer and in Egypt there are documents, using a con- 
ventional system of numeration, that are older than the earliest 
extant examples of writing. 
In both countries and also in India (and subsequently in 
Crete) the conventions adopted for recording large totals 
were substantially the same. Units were represented by one 
sign repeated as often as necessary to denote any number up to 
9. A different symbol ws adopted to denote 10 and multiples 
of 10, and so with the next higher units. In Egypt the following 
umbo]s are attested as early as Dynasty I: I == I; n == 10; 
@ = 100;  === 1000. In Mesopotamia the system developed 
along different lines. 
On the oldest account tablets from Erech and J emdet N asr, 
the following numerals occur: D = 1, 0 === 10, 0 = 100. But in 
other texts from the same cities, probably rather later, the nu- 
merals have the following values: D === 1, 0 === 10, D = 60, 0 
= 600. This is the ..o-called sexagesimal system used by the 
Sumerians and then by the Babylonians as long as their civiliza- 
tion survived. Naturally, the forms of the numerals were sim- 

156 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
plified in the course of time, as in Egypt. But in Babylonia this 
simplification had surprising consequences. 
When the imprint of a wedge-shaped stylus took the place 
of drawn signs in the script D became f, 0 became < , D T, 
and 0  or (in the "mathematical texts" (). Hence by about 
2000 B.C. the same sign represented any power of sixty (includ- 
ing one) and ten such units respectively. Only the order of 
the signs helped distinguish their values:  T < < < T must 
mean 2 X 60 + 3 X 10 + 1, or, in our notation, 151. The 
Babylonians thus found themselves in possession of a system 
using "place value" just like our own. It had one defect: there 
was no sign for zero; but some time after 1000 B.C. this de- 
ficiency was made good. 
All these systems are rather clumsy; to write 879 in 
Egyptian, for instance, twenty-four distinct signs had to be 
drawn. On the other hand, addition and subtraction are almost 
as easy as in counting on the fingers: III added to::' evidently 
make ::::. Multiplication and division by 10 are also easily 
represented. To multiply 2 by 10 merely involved changing 
T T to < < · 
Our oldest "mathematical documents," the pictographic ac- 
count tablets, illustrate only the simplest mathematical opera- 
tions. They record numbers of actual sheep, measures of bar- 
ley, or jugs of beer. Totals are reached by addition and sub- 
traction. The areas of fields (in the sense defined on p. 154) 
are reckoned as the product of two sides. Under such condi- 
tions fractions need not arise. The scribe i counting real sheep 
and men. An eighth of a sheep and five-eighths of a man would 
be meaningless. In dealing with measures and volumes, the 
several units, each with distinct names, took the place of frac- 
tions, as elementary arithmetic expresses fractions of a pound 
in ounces, pennyweights, grains, etc. So in Sumer convention 
had fixed the values of the "natural units" of length so that 15 
fingers made 1 span, 2 spans 1 cubit, and so on. Both in 
Sumerian and Egyptian writing, simple numerals, unaccom- 
panied by any other sign or word, might be used to denote 
units of weight or of length: so in Sumerian D might stand for 
1 gan and 0 for 1 bur ( i.e. 18 gan). Perhaps from this sort of 
practice arose "individual signs" used to denote certain frac- 
tions: in Egyptian C for 1;2", (x = ;4) '1' , and 1? 
%; in Babylonian + for 1;2", -» 1h and !J1 %. 
But the complexities introduced into social life by the urban 
revolution rised problems that required more advanced 
mathematical processes for a satisfactory solution. Large 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 157 
armies of laborers were gathered together to execute gigantic 
public works, and provision must be ma-de for these in ad- 
vance. It was necessary to calculate the supplies of food and 
raw material that must be collected; the time likely to be 
occupied had accordingly to be estimated. But that might in- 
volve reckoning up the cubic contents of sloping banks of earth 
or of pyramids or the number of bricks in the walls of a well. 
The wages of gangs had to be apportioned in accordance with 
the qualifications or output of each member. 
Grain was stored up in granaries that might be cylindrical or 
pyramidal in shape; still, the overseers and revenue officers 
needed to know how much grain to expect from such con- 
tainers. Trade was organized on a partnership basis, and the 
profits had to be apportioned according to the shares con- 
tributed. A Sumerian deity was daily placated with large offer- 
ings of beer, the strength of which was prescribed by ritual 
usage. The tenlple brewer Ileeuu tu know the quantities of 
grain requisite for the malting and for the actual liquor, and 
the overseer must ascertain how much grain to issue to him for 
each purpose and for each brew. Egyptian superstition de- 
manded extreme accuracy in the erection of pyramids; the 
mason must know the exact measures of the individual blocks 
that must be cut to face such monuments. 
The sort of problem which an Egyptian scribe might have 
to solve is stated in a late papyrus, dating from about 1200 
B.C. The speaker is supposed to be upbraiding a rival for in- 
competence:- 
"You say: 'I am the scribe who issues commands to the 
levy. ' You are given a reservoir to dig. But you come to me 
to inquire about the rations for the soldiers and say: 'Reckon 
it out. ' You desert your office and the burden of teaching 
it to you falls on me. 
"You are the clever scribe at the head of the levy. A ramp 
is to be constructed, 730 cubits long, 55 cubits wide, con- 
taining 120 compartments and filled with reeds and beams. 
. . . The quantity of bricks required for it is demanded of 
the generals, and the scribes are gathered together without 
one of them knowing anything. They put their trust in you 
saying: 'You are the clever scribe, my friend! . . . Answer 
us, how many bricks are needed for it?' 
"It is said to you, 'Empty the magazine that has been 
filled with sand under your lord's monument that has been 
brought from the Red Mountain. It measured 30 cubits 
when lying extended on the ground and 20 cubits in breadth. 
The magazine consisted of several divisions each 50 cubits 

158 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
high. You are commissioned to find out how many men will 
demolish it in six hours.'" 
(The problems are, of course, insoluble as stated, but that is 
part of the jest here.) 
It is problems of just the foregoing kinds that are worked out 
in the extant mathematical texts from Egypt and Babylonia. 
Most of the problems seem to us rather trivial; few should 
seriously perplex an elementary school boy today. But it would 
be grossly unfair to judge scribes who lived 5000 years ago by 
modern standards. Operations that worried them are familiar 
to us just because we have, through the Greeks and Arabs, in- 
berited the techniques they devised. 
Actually the Sumerian and Egyptian scribes were experi- 
menting in an utterly strange and uncharted domain, opened 
up by the unprecedented events of the urban revolution. The 
problcms they had to solve were absolutely new, and had never 
arisen before because they were created by the revolution itself. 
Like the rest of its results, they are famiJiar as the very basis of 
our own civilization. But the ancient mathematician had actu- 
ally to invent methods for their solution. 
In the first place, they had to create the machinery for 
reckoning. The first step had been to devise a system of no- 
tation, to reduce to writing whole numbers for which, after all, 
names already existed in spoken language. The next step was 
to improve the technique of reckoning. Addition and sub- 
traction are simply counting abbreviated by memorizing results 
already obtained. In "adding" 5 to 3 we just remember that the 
result (presumably first obtained by counting) is 8, instead of 
counting up step by step. As already remarked, the Egyptian 
and Sumerian notation gave graphic expression to this fact. 
Multiplication is a further abbreviation of addition. To 
multiply 5 by 3 means to add three 5's together . We learn at 
school that the result is 15. The Egyptians do not seem to 
have recorded this result as something to be memorized. In 
any case, they never applied the process familiar to us. They 
always proceeded by the method of "duplication." They 
added the multiplicand to itself. But they did remember that 
12 + 12 (i.e. 12 X 2) === 24, and abbreviated the process 
to that extent. An example illustrates the method. This is how 
the Egyptians would work out 12 X 12 and 14 X 80:- 
1 12 1 80 
2 24 \ 10 800 
"4 48 2 160 
\ 8 96 v 4 320 
Total 144 Total 1120 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 159 
(You write 1 opposite the multiplicand, and then double 
each side till in the first column you have numbers totalling 
up to the multiplier, ticking off the relevant lines. You then 
add up the corresponding figures in the second column. In 
example 2 the process is simplified by the decimal notation 
as described on p. 156. 
In division the process is reversed. The division of 19 by 8, 
which the Egyptian would have expressed as '.reckoning with 
8 to find 19," would be thus set out:- 
1 8 
'v 2 16 
2 4 
- 
'v 4 2 
- 
'v 8 1 
result 2 + 4 + 8 
(Here he doubles and halves the divisor until numbers in the 
second column add up to the dividend, ticking off the integers 
and fractions in the first column and adding together the 
ticked figures. 1/2, 1/4 can be written, 2, 4 , in conformity with 
Egyptian fractional notation.) 
It is probable that the Sumerians tirst used similar "ad.. 
ditive" methods. But before 2000 B.C. the Babylonians were 
familiar with multiplication as we know it. That means that 
they possessed multiplication tables, and such have come 
down to us. They had, that is, noted down the results ob... 
tained by additive methods and tabulated them for memoriza... 
tion or reference. They had thus equipped themselves with 
instruments for ready reckoning, and thereby enormously 
lightened and accelerated the work of calculation. 
Possibly it was the great importance of trade for Babylonia 
that evoked this simplification of arithmetical procedure. 
Mesopotamia had been more dependent than Egypt on foreign 
trade in prehistoric times and remained so. Her geographical 
position makes her a junction of natural trade routes, whereas 
Egypt is relatively isolated. The transaction of foreign busi... 
ness on a large scale would certainly have been expedited 
by the new procedure. At the same time the cOlnpilation of 
the tables, i.e., the systematic recording and arrangement of re... 
suIts obtained by simpler reckonings, may be credited to the 
"research organization" of the temple schools. 
The extant tables give the product of the multiplier with 
all integers up to 20 and with 30, 40, and 50 too, and are 
set out and arranged like ours. But the multipliers include 
also seemingly high numbers like 1,15 and even 44,26:40 (all, 

160 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
of course, expressed in sexagesimal notation). They could 
therefore serve also as division tables, as explained below. 
Tables of squares, cubes, and other powers, square roots, 
cube roots, etc., also survive. 
Evidently the practical problems that confronted the scribes, 
such as even the division of rations among workmen, must 
eventually have forced them to deal with fractional quantities. 
To comprehend what that meant, it is well to recall how frac- 
tions bothered us in our early schooldays. To Egyptians and 
Babylonians they were something absolutely novel. You can- 
not conveniently represent fractions, as you can integers, on 
the fingers or an abacus. A notation had to be devised for 
quantities which could not be thus concretely imaged. 
The Egyptians denoted fractions (with numerator 1) by a 
sign over the denominator, which may be represented in our 
notation by a stroke. (There were, of course, special signs 
for 1/2, 1/3, and 2/3 as noted.) It would clearly be difficult on 
this notation to write 2/5 or 7/10. And, in fact, the Egyptians 
never wrote such fractions at all. They always expressed them 
as a sum of fractions with numerator 1, or, as we should say, 
of aliquot parts, save that 2/3 might be introduced into the 
series. Our examples are accordingly resolved as follows: 
- - 
2/5 === 1/3 + 1/15 (or, in Egyptian notation, 3 + 15) and 
7/10 == 2/3 + 1/30. Tables were compiled giving the correct 
resolution of all fractions whose numerator is 2 and whose 
denominator is an odd number from 3 to 101. The first part 
of the Rhind Papyrus sets forth this table with "working out" 
attached. 
The Egyptians had then hardly grasped that fractions were 
amenable to precisely the same rules as integers. The failure 
was due primarily to their primitive technique of reckoning; 
division carried out on the Egyptian plan automatically results 
in just such series of aliquot parts. Defective notation was a 
contributory cause in perpetuating the usage. 
The transformtion of the numeral system, described on 
p. 156, incidentally gave Babylonian mathematicians a com- 
plete mastery of fractional quantities about 2000 B.C. The 
simplification of the script meant that the value of a numeral 
depended entirely upon its position relative to others. With us 
the same figure, 5, is used to denote 5 X 10, 5 Xl, 5/10, and 
so on. Which value it possesses is determined in each given 
case by its position relative to other figures including zero and 
decimal point. Just so about 2000 B.C. the Babylonians came in 
mathematical texts to use the same group of signs < < to 
denote 20 and 20/60; but they lacked signs for 0 and. and 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 161 
used a sexagesimal scale. Thereby they were enabled to extend 
the mastery of numbers to the whole domain of the rational. 
For they could express fractions just as we do in "d:cimals": 
1/5 could be written ; 12 (it is convenient for us to Insert a ; 
to represent the "point" that the Babylonians lacked), 2/5 
;24, and so on. And they treated their sexagesimal fractions 
exactly like integers. 
This notation simplified the difficult operation of division. 
They drew up tables of the reciprocals of numbers between 1 
and 60:- 
2 
3 
4 
30 
20 
15 
5 
6 
8 
12 
10 
7;30, and so on. 
Thereafter instead of dividing by, say,S, you multiplied by its 
reciprocal ;12 (12/60). But what happened when the recip- 
rocal was not a finite number-60/7, for instance-is un- 
known. 
The system of sexagesimal fractions and the new processes 
thereby initiated were incidental consequences of a change in 
the script. But the realization of its potentialities and their ex- 
ploitation were achievements apparently of the temple schools. 
The system seems, in fact, confined to the "mathematical 
texts" compiled in and for such schools. It was, however, used 
in the earliest texts for the solution of problems in architecture 
and military engineering and for calculating interest and 
principal. Apparently only a thousand years later was the new 
mathematic applied to astronomical calculations, despite the 
importance of astrology in the temple curricula. 
To teach and apply the new methods of reckoning it was 
desirable to adopt conventionally standardized terms for the 
several operations; to make mathematics a science an exact 
terminology was essential. The definition of terms is, of course, 
a social function, and the schools were the institutions to 
select the expression that should alone be accepted as the 
designation or indicator of each operation. As far as Egypt is 
concerned, there is considerable variation in the Rhind Papy- 
rus in the expressions used to denote addition, subtraction, and 
so on; multiply 5 by 4 may be expressed "count with 4 5 
times," "reckon with 4 5 times." In the Moscow Papyrus the 
terminology is less variable, but not yet quite fixed. 
The Babylonian texts, on the other hand, from 2000 B.C. em- 
ploy a very explicit terminology. Indeed, the Ba.bylonians were 
well on the way to creating a mathematical symbolism that 
would materially accelerate calculation. First, the technical 

162 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
terms for several operations were words of one syllable ex- 
pressed by a single cuneiform sign. Then the Babylonians, 
though they spoke a Semitic tongue, used the old Sumerian 
terms for operations like "multiplied by," "find the reciprocal 
of." Finally, many of the technical words were written as 
ideograms instead of being spelt out. (Our arithmetical and 
geometrical symbols+,X,,7r are, of course, true ideograms.) 
The later the texts, and therefore the deader the Sumerian 
language, the more Sumerian terms and ideograms were used. 
They became quite abstract symbols freed from the concrete 
notions of "nodding the head" or "breaking away" that inhere 
in Egyptian terms. But, even in Egyptian, ideograms were 
sometimes employed as mathematical symbols; in the Rhind 
Papyrus a pair of legs may denote + or -, according to the 
direction of the feet. 
The terminology for what we regard as ratios was curious. 
Babylonian and Egyptian texts frequently refer to the "batter" 
c 
A 
E: 
B 
FIG. 9.-DIAGRAM TO ILLUSTRATE THE FORMULA FOR "BATTER." 
or "slope" of a pyramid's sides. We should express this as a 
ratio, as we say 1 in 10 for the gradient of a hill. The Egyptians 
always express this as a length, e.g., 5-1/25 palms. What they 
really meant was 5-1/25 palms horizontally for each cubit of 
height or, as we should say, "AE/ED, where ED is one unit 
of length, a cubit." The Babylonian expressed this more 
clearly: "for 1 cubit, 1 the batter-value" (always reckoned in 
GAR). Both phrases illustrate how very concrete mathemati- 
cal thinking remained. 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 163 
br 
M z 
r 
};!t )14  & 
 
 
 .... 
t:5' )t   
6 z 
  <: 
  H 
Z 
A.:A;: 0 
11  H 
i.  >t 
 
  < 
A   
TI  -0 lJ. -..::. I 
 t 'QP }  0 
 
 <Y- 0 
H 
 
 
.( 4- 
q'/  
 
I 
 
Ii 
 
 
The conditions of urban economy, indicated on pp. 156-7 
required some knowledge of geometrical relations. The areas 
of fields must be determined for estimations of the seed re- 
quired for sowing them and the rent or tax that might be ex- 
acted in respect of them. But for such estimates and assess- 
ments absolute accuracy was unnecessary: the bailiff only 
wanted to know roughly how much grain to allow for each 
field; the tax-collector needed a general idea of the yield to 
be expected. We have seen that even before 3000 B.C. the 
Sumerians were calculating the areas of fields as the product 

16 4 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
of length by breadth; they were, that is, applying the correct 
geometrical formula for the area of a rectangle. 
In later documents the areas of irregular quadrangles are 
calculated by various approximations, usually the mean of 
the products of the two pairs of adjacent sides. Polygonal 
fields were divided up into quadrangles and triangles, the 
areas of which were similarly calculated. In Egypt, even in 
New Kingdom contracts, the area of a four-sided field is taken 
as half the sum of two adjacent sides multiplied by half the 
sum of the remaining sides. In the case of a triangular field 
the lengths of two sides were added together and halved, and 
then multiplied by half the length of the third side. 
The documents just examined generally contain plans of 
the fields in question. The lengths are written in along the 
sides, but the plans are not drawn accurately or to scale. The 
theory that exact geometry arose out of land-surveying in 
Egypt or Babylonia is not supported by the evidence at our 
disposal. 
Again, it would be useful as a check to know the quantity 
of grain to be expected from a rectangular silo with sloping 
sides, but absolute accuracy was not essential. So, to estimate 
the contents of a pit in the form of a truncated pyramid, the 
Babylonians were content with a calculation that we should 
[ (a + b)2 (a - b)2 ] 
express by the formula V == h 2 + 2 ' 
though this formula is incorrect. 
On the other hand, architects and engineers often required 
more exact calculations to fulfill the tasks imposed on them. 
The accuracy of a pyramid was a matter of ritual significance. 
To secure it the sizes of the blocks facing it must be accurately 
calculated. And so the Egyptian scribes had discovered and 
used the correct formula for the volume of a truncated 
pyramid. A famous problem in the Moscow Papyrus runs:- 
"Example of reckoning a ?truncated pyramid. 
If one says to you a ?truncated pyramid of 6 (cubits) in 
height to 4 (cubits) on the underside to 2 (cubits) on the 
upper side. 
Reckon with this 4 squared, it gives 16. 
Double 4, it gives 8. 
Reckon with this 2 squared; it gives 4. 
Add together this 16 to this 8 and to this 4. It gives 28. 
Reckon 1/3 of 6; it gives 2. Reckon with 28 2 times; it 
gives 56. 
See: 56 it is. You have got the answer." 
The process here set out can be expressed V = 1/3h(a 2 + 

THE REVOLUTION m H1J1.IAN KNt>WLEDGE 165 
ab + b 2 )-the correct formula for the frustum of a pyramid. 
The rough figure accompanying the example suggests an 
irregular pyramid-in fact, one of the blocks casing a regular 
pyramid (Fig. 11). 
Problems involving the relation of the circumference to the 
diameter of a circle, the "irrational" quantity which we call 
7r, inevitably arose. In their solution the Babylonians were 
content with a very rough approximation, 7r === 3, presumably 
obtained by direct measurement. The Egyptians, on the other 
hand, used a surprisingly close ap- La 
proximation in estimating the area   · 
of circles. An example in the 
Rhind Papyrus runs:- 
"Method of reckoning a cir- 
cular piece of land of diameter 
9 khet. What is its area? 
You are to subtract 1/9 of it, 
namely 1. Remainder 8. 
You are to reckon with 8 8 
times; it becomes 64. This is its 
area in land: 6 thousands-of-Iand 
and 4 setat." 
. 
 
lJt 
If 
It 
FIG. 11.- EXACT COpy OF 
FIGURE FROM Moscow 
PAPYRUS, REVERSED AND 
WITH SYMBOLS TRANSLIT- 
ERATED. 
The formula used is (d - 1/9d) 2, 
which makes 7r == (16/9) 2. The 
result of Pythagoras' Theorem (that 
in a right-angled triangle the square 
on the side opposite the right angle is equal to the sum of the 
squares on the other two sides) was perfectly familiar to the 
Babylonians from 2000 B.C. Of course, they could not apply 
it in all calculations, since they could not handle surds. When 
the sum of the two squares yielded a number that was not itself 
a perfect square, they had to resort to other methods of ob- 
taining an approximate result. A tablet in Berlin gives two 
calculations of the diagonal of a door ;40 GAR high and ; 1 0 
GAR wide. They give respectively values of ;41,15 and ;42,13, 
w 2 
20, and can be represented by the formulas d === h + 2 h 
and d == h + 2 w 2 h. The first formula is the ar ithmetical 
mean between two approximations to the value of V h 2 + w 2 . 
In Egypt there is no direct evidence for the application of 
Pythagoras' Theorem. The oft-repeated statement that a 
triangle with sides 3, 4, and 5 was used in laying out a right 
angle is quite unfounded. 
The Babylonians could even calculate the height of an arc, 

166 THE REVOLUTION IN HU1:AN KNOWLEDGE 
given the length of its chord and the circle's diameter. Their 
actual procedur e can b e expressed by the formula 
h === 1 12 (d - V d 2 - a 2 ), and is perfectly correct. It im.. 
plies appreciation of the properties of similar triangles, but 
not, of course, that Babylonians had worked out the various 
steps in pure geometry by which the formula is deduced by 
Euclid. 
In fact, we do not know how any of the foregoing 
geometrical rules were obtained. They certainly had not been 
deduced a priori from the properties of abstract space as they 
purport to be in EucHd's geometry. For such a "pure geome.. 
try" there is no evidence at all. Figures often accompany the 
geometrical problems in the mathematical papyri and tablets, 
but such figures are no more drawn to scale than are the field.. 
plans in contracts. On the other hand, the patterns decorating 
craft-products, piles of bricks, and composite wooden boxes 
often give very striking ocular demonstrations of geometrical 
propositions. Checker patterns, that arise almost spontane- 
ously in basketry and matting, illustrate concretely the 
geometrical formula for the area of a rectangle. Incidentally, 
painted checker patterns were popular on vases precisely at the 
time of the earliest pictographic tablets on which the Sumer- 
ians applied this formula. 
Early Oriental decorative art was very largely geometric. 
Patterns of triangles and checkers in textiles or mosaic might 
easily illustrate Pythagoras' Theorem. Designs based on in- 
tersecting circles or on squares and triangles inscribed in 
circles were very popular, and might show how to calculate 
the height of an arc. But these patterns are produced by 
artists and craftsmen, not mathematicians. 
Nor do the mathematical texts ever enunciate a general 
rule or formula. No rule is stated for finding the area of a 
rectangle or a circle nor the volume of a cylinder or trun- 
cated pyramid. There is no statement beyond the actual work- 
ing out as given in the two Egyptian examples cited. No text 
gives any more explanation of the reason for the operations 
than is contained in the quoted problems. Indeed, the quan- 
tities dealt with are seldom even pure numbers, but generally 
so many loaves or cubits or bushels. 
The mathematical texts, in fact, consist entirely of con.. 
crete problems of the sort likely to arise in real life worked 
out step by step, like the examples in a school arithmetic. And, 
as in a school arithmetic, the actual values in the problems 
have been so selected that a neat result can be obtained by 
the methods at the disposal of the scribe: the circles' diameters 
are always divisible exactly by 9, the quadratics do not lead 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 167 
to surds. The examples do not illustrate how the deductions 
of a pure mathematics could be applied to problems of every- 
day life. They illustrate rather methods whereby problems 
arising in practice had been satisfactorily solved. 
Nevertheless, the activity that produced our mathematical 
texts was not confined to recording problems that had been 
put to the scribe and his methods of solving these. Still less did 
it consist merely of making simplified versions of such prob- 
lems for the instruction of beginners. The examples look as 
if they had been deliberately constructed. They give the im- 
pression that scholars in higher centers of learning were setting 
themselves problems just to see what they could do neatly. In 
that way they would be building up techniques whch were 
later applied not only to the familiar tasks dealt with in the 
examples, but also to those confronting other colleagues, like 
astrologers. 
To this extent the Babylonian mathematical tablets at least 
disclose as strictly "theoretical" a science as any paper 
presented to the Royal Society. It was theoretical in the sense 
that it resulted from investigations each of which was not 
deliberately directed to the solution of any specific practical 
problem. But as a whole the problems investigated were 
strictly modeled on the actual real-life problems from which 
they started. Indeed, it looks as if the research they disclose 
was really limited in its scope by consciously conceived pos- 
sibilities of practical application. In any case, no attempt was 
made to generalize the results. 
It would help us to estimate the scientific value of Egyptian 
and Babylonian mathematics if we knew exactly how the 
results of investigations were arranged. In a scientific arith- 
metic the examples would today be grouped according to the 
methods employed, irrespective of whether the problems con- 
cerned grocers, builders, surveyors, or generals. The existing 
material gives little indication of the principles of arrange- 
ment followed in Egypt and Babylonia. In the Moscow 
Papyrus no systematic arrangement at all is recognizable. The 
examples in the Rhind Papyrus are deliberately grouped as 
follows:- 
1. Problems 1-6. Division of 10 loaves between 1, 2, 6, 7, 
8, and 9 men. 
11. 7-20. "Completions": multiplication of vulgar and im- 
proper fractions. 
Hi. 21-23. "Completions": subtraction of fractions. 
iv. 24-38. Simple equations. 
v. 39-40. Division of loaves in unequal proportions. 

168 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
vi. 41-47. 
Quantities of grain contained in receptacles of 
varying shapes. 
Areas of fields of varying shapes. 
Batter of pyramids. 
Brewers' problems. 
vii. 48-55. 
viii. 56-68. 
ix. 69-78. 
Groups vi-ix are related primarily by their subject matter- 
the materials dealt with or the occupations concerned. It is true 
that similarity of subject matter often involves similarity in 
method of solution. But the areas in vii include rectangles, 
triangles, and circles; the containers in vi, cubes, cylinders, and 
so on. The term "completion" is applied to two apparently 
quite dit'feren t operations. 
It looks as if the Egyptian examples were arranged for the 
convenience of reference by employers of labor, granary-over- 
seers, surveyors, and brewers rather than by any logical 
affini ty . 
In Babylonia we have to rely generally on the small groups 
of examples on a single tablet. A Strassburg tablet contains 
thirty problems, all deling with the division of triangular 
fields. Three could today be solved by linear equations, seven 
would require quadratics. Thirty-two problems are decipher- 
able on a tablet in the British Museum. They concern: (i) 
masses of earth moved and the tasks to be assigned to indi.., 
vidual laborers in complicated engineering works, (ii) the 
numbers of bricks walling a cylindrical well, (iii) the division 
of water-clocks, (iv) the time occupied by weaving operations, 
(v) the evaluation of crops from fields of different areas, and 
(vi) the height of the arc of a circle. They involve a great 
variety of geometrical relations. But, given familiarity with 
these, all the problems could be expressed either as simple 
proportions or as simple calculations of areas and volumes. 
Was the tablet's writer conscious of the inner relationship be- 
tween problems superficially so different? 
On the whole we have to judge the scientific value of the 
work embodied in our texts by its results. They disc lose con- 
siderable skill in the formulation of problems. A study of the 
examples would accustom the scholar to arrange the data 
which professional practice might present in a manner suit- 
able for mathematical treatment. 
And then the examples illustrate the capacities of their com- 
pilers. The Egyptians were grievously handicapped by their 
imperfect symbolism and crude technique of reckoning. 
Though they could handle the fractions with surprising success, 
these must have delayed progress. In pure mathematics their 

TIlE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 169 
highest efforts, judging by the extant examples, would now- 
adays be called compound proportions or simple linear equa- 
tions. One of the latter may be quoted from the Rhind Papyrus 
(No. 34):- 
A quantity whose half and whose quarter are added to it 
becomes 10:- 
VII + 1/2 + 1/4 
2 3 + 1/2 
V 4 7 
V 1/7 1/4 
1/4 + 1/28 1/2 
V 1/2 + 1/14 1 
Total this quantity is 5 + 1/2 + 1/7 + 1/14 
The method here adopted is just to multiply 1 + 1h -1- tA to 
find 10. It is followed by a "proof," which consists in halving 
and quartering the solution and adding the results to it to 
show that they do add up to 10. 
The Babylonians, aided by their sexagesimal fractions could 
aim higher than the Egyptians and actually solve quite neatly 
problems involving quadratic and even cubic equations. One of 
the simpler quadratics may be quoted. (Note that the depth is 
always given in GAR, the other measures in cubits, i.e., 1/12 
GAR.) 
"Length, Breadth. 1 ;40 the length. The 7th part of that 
whereby the length exceeds the breadth and 1 cubit added 
thereto is also the depth. ;50 the volume excavated. What 
are breadth and depth? 
You: Multiply 1 ;40, the length, by 12, the fraction of the 
depth; you see 20. Find the reciprocal of 20. ;3 you see. 
Multiply ;3 by ;50. ;2, 30 you see. Multiply ;2, 30 by 7. ;17, 
30 you see. Multiply 7 by ;5, 1 cubit. ;35 you see. Subtract 
;35 from 1; 40, the length. 1; 5 you see. Break away 1/2 
from 1;5 (;32, 30) Square ;32, 30. ;17, 36, 15 you see. Re- 
move therefrom ;17, 30. ;0, 0, 15 you see. ;2, 30 the 
(square) root add to ;32, 36 and subtract (it therefrom). 
;35 and ;30 you see as breadth. 7 35 5 depth. The process." 
(The "sum" is unfinished.) 
These and other technical processes were transmitted 
directly or indirectly to the Greeks to form the foundation of 
their higher mathematics. The Babylonians, for their part, re- 
mained limited by their utilitarian aims. As their generals and 

170 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
merchants were content with rough estimates, they remained 
satisfied with incorrect formulas for the volume of a truncated 
pyramid and the ludicrous approximation 7r == 3! 
The movements of the heavenly bodies had to be studied by 
early man for practical needs of navigation and of agriculture 
(pp. 86, 110). Favored by the clear skies normal1y ruling be- 
tween the 10th and 35th degree of latitude, the regularity of 
celestial events and their connection with mundane ones must 
soon have been recognized. Success in foretelling from obser- 
vations of the heavenly bodies the times for harvest or the 
advent of a flood, then led to the prosecution of such observa- 
tions in the vain hope of predicting other events affecting men's 
fortunes (p. 86). After the urban revolution, astronomy was 
still studied both for the legitimate purpose of regulating agri- 
cultural works and the connected festivals and for the futile 
aims of astrological prediction. The study was now supported 
by the authority of organized States, it was equipped with the 
devices the new crafts could produce, its results were recorded 
in writing. 
In Egypt astronomy remained necessary to guide agricul- 
tural operations. It is, indeed, true that the Egyptians, probably 
around 2900 B.C., had devised a calendar that attempted to rec- 
oncile the old reckoning by lunar months with the solar year. 
But that calendar was inaccurate (p. 111) and could not be 
used successfully for regulating work on the farm. Attempts to 
reform it seem to have been made under the earliest dynasties, 
but were abandoned, whether through incompetence or sacer- 
dotal opposition is unknown. But the true year was recognized 
side by side with the vague official year. 
An inscription, written about 2000 B.C., speaks of "offerings 
at the feast of the Beginning of the Year, at the feast of the 
New Year, of the Great Year, of the Little Year. . . ." The 
first year mentioned is the vague official year of the calendar. 
The N ew Year is determined astronomically by the rising of 
Sirius. The Great Year may be a Sothic cycle of 1461 years, 
the Little Year was perhaps a quadrennial cycle for the cor- 
rection of the calendar on the principle of our leap years. The 
regulation of this embarrassing number of conflicting reckon- 
ings was left to royal officials, ultimately to priests of the Sun. 
In Babylonia organized observation of the heavens was still 
more necessary. For the Babylonians never established a solar 
calendar for official purposes, but recognized always a lunar 
year of 354 days. Even the beginnings of the months were 
fixed empirically. In IGng Hammurabi's correspondence 
(about 1800 B.C.) we read the reports of officials whose duty 
it was to watch for the appearance of the new moon. The new 

THE REVOLUTION IN 'HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 171 
month began officially only when they had reported to the king 
the moon's reappearance. Charged with such a task, the royal 
astronomers were naturally trained in keen observation and, in 
fact, became surprisingly expert. 
The lunar calendar left to itself would, of course, cause com- 
plete chaos in the community's religious life, which was bound 
up with seasonal agricultural fesivals. It was in practice 
corrected by the periodical intercalation of an extra month. 
But no system of intercalation was officially extablished. It was 
left to the king to order the addition of an extra month to the 
official year when needed. He presumably acted on the advice 
of astronomers. The latter must have known the equivalent of 
the solar year, but it was determined, as in Egypt, by obser- 
vation of the stars. 
So in Egypt and Babylonia the movements of the heavenly 
bodies were systematically observed both for practical and for 
superstitious ends. To reduce such observations to material for 
an exact science it was essential to standardize the divisions of 
time and to devise instruments for measuring them. But such 
division and measurement were equally needed for life in an 
urban civilization. 
For work in factories and farms equal divisions of the day 
and of the night respectively would be the more useful. The 
Egyptians, in fact, recognized only such divisions. They di- 
vided daylight and darkness each into twelve equal watches 
(seasonal hours), which naturally varied in absolute length 
with the seasons. The Babylonians, on the other hand, divided 
day and night, i.e., the full period of the earth's rotation, into 
twelve double hours (biru). In each case the numbe: twelve 
was probably suggested by the twelve months of the year. 
For determining the hours of daylight both peoples used 
the movements of the shadows cast by fixed objects. The sur- 
viving Egyptian sundials (New Kingdom and later) use the 
width of the shadow of a block. The earlier examples do not 
seem to be corrected for the variation in the sun's altitude. In 
Babylonia the gnomon, the shadow of an upright staff, was 
utilized, but no specimens survive. 
For division of the night, water-clocks were employed in 
both countries. The periods of time were measured by the 
quantities of water that had run out from or into standardized 
and graduated vessels. In Egypt the vessels from which the 
water gradually flowed were conical in form, and therefore 
never gave accurate results; for only from a vessel whose walls 
follow a parabolic curve would the water level sink equal dis- 
tances in equal times. The instrument was further complicated 

172 THE. REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
by the seasonal inequalities of the "watches" they had to 
measure. 
At first the "clocks" were adjusted by the attachment of two 
or more outlets, presumably of different bores. An improve- 
ment was introduced between 1557 and 1541 B.C. A high offi- 
cial, Amenemhat, tells us in his epitaph that he had found in 
earlier writings that winter nights were to summer nights as 
14 to 12. He had then made his sovereign a clock with only 
one outlet, which gave correct divisions of the night at all 
seasons of the year. 
This remarkable inscription attests the existence and use 
of collected observations inherited from earlier generations. 
But it also records an invention that can only have been 
reached as the result of deliberate experiments, conducted with 
a specific end in view. It is striking that the invention should be 
due to an official not professionally concerned with measuring 
time, and that he should pride himself on it. It sounds like a 
piece of disinterested research carried on in leisure hours by 
Amenemhat. 
The Babylonian water-clocks were of cylindrical form. 
Problems in a mathematical tablet, already mentioned, are 
concerned with their graduation. Adjustment for seasonal 
variation was not needed (p. 171). But from Assyrian times 
we possess a table for the conversion of biru (double hours) 
into watches month by month. 
Inspired by the motives and armed with the equipment above 
mentioned, the Oriental astronomers were in a position to ap- 
preciate even the less cor.spicuous regularities in the move- 
ments of heavenly bodies and to accumulate data for the con- 
struction of a mathematical astronomy. 
The Egyptians mapped the heavens, drew up lists of stars, 
and grouped stars into constellations. The stars round the 
pole received special attention, and the knowledge gained 
seems very early to have found practical application. From the 
Old Kingdom the pharaoh performed a ceremony termed 
"stretching the cord." The traditional formula uttered by the 
king on this occasion has survived. 
"I have grasped the peg with the handle of the hammer. 
I took the measuring line with the Goddess Safekhabui. 1 
watched the advancing motion of the stars. My eye was 
fixed on the ?Bear. 1 reckon the time checking the hour, and 
determine the edges of thy temple. . . . 1 turn my face to 
the course of the stars. I direct my eyes upon the constella- 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 173 
tion of the ?Bear. There stands the time pointer with the 
hour. I determine the edges of thy temple." 
The ceremony evidently concerns the orientation of a 
temple. Apparently its object was the determination of the 
meridian by observing the culmination of some equivalent of 
our "pole star." The success of such determinations may per- 
haps be judged by the Great Pyramid, whose sides deviate from 
true north by only 2' 30" and 5' 30" respectively! The ac- 
curately determined meridian was, of course, a base for further 
accurate observations. 
Before 2000 B.C. the Egyptians were experimenting with 
stellar clocks or calendars built on the diagonal principle. Such 
are known only from coffins, where they have been painted 
on the inside of the lid to enable the corpse to tell the time! 
The lid is divided into thirty-six vertical columns, each repre- 
senting a decade, i.e., a week of ten days, with a division be- 
tween columns 18 and 19 to represent perhaps the summer 
solstice. Horizontally there are twelve cases, representing the 
twelve night hours with the line between cases 6 and 7 for mid- 
night. The decans (constellations fulfilling the function of 
Signs of the Zodiac, but situated on the celestial equator), 
rising in the short summer hours between darkness and dawn, 
are entered in the appropriate cases in columns 18 and 19. 
They are repeated in the remaining columns in other cases 
lying along diagonals. 
Such tables, ignoring the five epagomenal days, the different 
lengths of seasonal hours, and other factors, were at best far 
from accurate. The coffin-decorators, not being astronomers, 
have caricatured the scheme. Still, the coffin-lids give a clue to 
the knowledge possessed by the Egyptians, and how they tried 
to apply it. Five centuries later the tomb of Senmut is 
decorated with a sort of planetarium. The astronomy it dis- 
closes is not fundamentally different from that of the coffin- 
lids. There are several pairs of holes to denote the pole. That 
looks like a provision for the precession of the equinoxes. The 
latitude of Thebes is taken as the altitude of the pole. 
Such funerary monuments are the only extant sources for 
Egyptian astronomy, since no astronomical texts have yet been 
found. They certainly embody the results of systematic obser- 
vations carried on and recorded over many centuries. But they 
give no hint of a mathematical astronomy capable of predict- 
ing with the aid of compJicated calculations. No records of 
eclipses survive from Egypt. Indeed, relatively little attention 
seems to have been paid to the movements of the moon and 
the planets, perhaps owin to the early adoption of a non-lunar 

174 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
calendar and the supreme importance of the sun god in the 
State religion. 
In Babylonia the stars were mapped as carefully as in Egypt, 
and with the zodiac as a plane of reference. But the lunar 
calendar and astrological preconceptions directed the astrono- 
mers' attention especially to the movements of the moon and 
the planets and to eclipses and occultations. The scrupulous 
observations of these phenomena, faithfully recorded, revealed 
to the Babylonians regularities that are far from obvious. For 
instance, soon after 2000 B.C., it had been noted that in about 
eight years Venus returned five times to the same place on the 
horizon. 
A thousand years or so later the Babylonians began to apply 
to astronomy the mathematics described on p. 160 fI., and 
then performed prodigies of measurement, calculation, and 
prediction. This mathematical astronomy lies outside the 
period surveyed in this book-fortunately, since it would take 
several chapters to explain it. Still, it must be insisted that, as 
in Egypt, all this research was undertaken primarily with false 
astrological ends in view. But it provided accurate data with- 
out which Greek and modern astronomy would be unthink- 
able. 
Attempts at curing diseases must have been made centuries 
before the urban revolution. Presumably, as among savages 
today, early medical theory was essentially magical, and medi- 
cal practice inextricably bound up with spells and prestidigi- 
tations; the account of paleolithic burial rites on p. 50 gives 
color to this assumption. Even so, the aid of liniments, potions, 
and manipulations would be invoked, and some really effective 
remedies thus discovered. As soon as specialists in magic 
arose in a society, they would be liable to monopolize the 
healing art. 
After the second revolution we accordingly find that doctors 
in Mesopotamia were also priests, and in Egypt sacerdotal 
and healing functions were closely allied. However, Imhotep, 
the first recorded name in the annals of medicine, had been 
architect to King Zoser, though he eventually became a god of 
healing. The Sumerian and Egyptian medicine men, being 
clerks, committed their observations to writing, as did astrolo- 
gers. In the Nile Valley medical books are mentioned as early 
as Dynasty III. Examples of such books have come down to 
us from a period shortly after 2000 B.C. In Mesopotamia the 
extant medical texts were drawn up after 1000 B.C., but some 
may be copies of tablets a thousand years older. 
In both countries the surviving medical texts have the form 
of casebooks, as explained on p. 153. No treatises on anatomy 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 175 
or physiology survive. Yet the Egyptians in particular must 
have acquired very accurate knowledge of human anatomy 
through the practice of mummification. Nevertheless, the 
hieroglyphic signs for bodily organs are derived from animal, 
not from human anatomy. The sign for "heart" is an ox's 
heart, that for uterus the organ of a cow. Hence medical 
literature in Egypt presumably goes back to a period before 
mummification was extensively practiced. 
Medicine was, in fact, little affected by the knowledge 
gained by embalmers, who formed a distinct and specialized 
I craft. Though the heart was recognized as the center of the 
vascular system, the physiological knowledge implied by the 
texts is rudimentary. The same remark applies to Babylonian 
medical literature. Even in Assyrian texts the functions of the 
organs are often misunderstood; the bladder is never men- 
tioned, and nerves are not distinguished from sinews. 
Discascs both in Egypt and in Mesopotamia were regarded 
essentially as the work of demons or vaguer magic powers. 
Medicine therefore consisted essentially in the expulsion of 
the evil spirit by incantations and ritual acts. The actions, how- 
ever, often took the form of the application or administration 
of liniments or potions. The nastier the potion, the sooner the 
demon would take flight; the excreta of men and of animals 
were particularly often prescribed. The tradition that medi- 
cines must be disgusting is a survival of the demoniacal theory 
of disease, traceable in the oldest extant medical texts! The 
same theory naturally approved of strong purges and emetics 
as means of expelling the maleficent agent. 
Dominated by the foregoing theory, the Egyptian and 
Babylonian physicians had no incentive to study the objective 
causes of disease or to investigate systematically the func- 
tioning of the bodily organs. The theory's maintenance was 
bound up with all the privileges of the priesthood, so that to 
challenge it would be treason as well as heresy. The attribu- 
tion of medical books to a god "placed medical lore outside 
the range of human observation as something of supernatural 
origin." It is hardly surprising that, beyond the discovery of 
 certain number of useful drugs and the recognition of a few 
obvious physiological truths, little of value can be attributed 
to Oriental medicine. 
Surgery was in a different position, approximating rather 
to a craft than to a branch of religion. The surgeon has to 
treat injuries inflicted by perfectly obvious physical agencies, 
and has no occasion to attribute them to supernatural powers. 
Surgery might accordingly be expected to be freer than medi- 

176 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
cine from the domination of magical ideas, and accordingly 
more objective and scientific. 
Hammurabi's law-code (1800 B.C.) prescribes fees for 
surgeons (2 to 10 shekels, where a mechanic's wage for the 
year was 8 shekels) and penalties for unsuccessful operations. 
But no surgical texts have come down to us from Mesopota- 
mia. Is this because surgery was a craft, and craft lore was not 
transmitted in writing? 
From Egypt we possess a valuable treatise known as the 
Edwin Smith Papyrus. In its present form it dates from the 
first half of the Ilnd millennium B.C., but Breasted has ad- 
vanced weighty arguments for thinking that it is based on an 
original going back to the Pyramid Age (2500 B.C.). It con- 
firms our expectations, in that it is free from magic formulas, 
records objective observations, and relies entirely on material 
remedies and manipulations for cures. 
Like the medical texts it is a collection of cases, but, unlike 
all Egyptian medical papyri, the cases are systematically 
arranged. They are grouped in accordance with the part 
affected, beginning with the head and going down to the feet, 
a system followed also by Assyrian medical texts and even 
medieval treatises. Each case gives first a classification of the 
wound, then an examination, by palpation where necessary, 
next a prognosis or verdict, and finally rules for treatment. 
What is most striking is that fourteen cases are described in 
detail which are nevertheless pronounced incurable, "a case 
not to be treated." The careful recording and description of 
injuries which the surgeon will not attempt to cure seem to 
disclose a more disinterested attitude to knowledge than is 
usual in early literature. Breasted, indeed, goes so far as to de- 
scribe the papyrus as "the earliest known recorded group of 
observations in natural science," and to call its author "the 
first natural scientist." 
Such a description exaggerates the disinterested character 
of the observations. It was plainly important to know when a 
case was incurable, especially if, as in Babylonia, operations 
resulting in death or permanent disablement were severely 
punished in Egypt. Still, the observations recorded are 
penetrating. It is noted how the dislocation of the cervical 
vertebrae is accompanied by paralysis and an erection of the 
penis. The following passage is worth quoting in full:- 
"Instructions concerning a smash in his skull under 
the skin of his head. If you examine a man having a 
smash in his skull. . . . Now as soon as you find that 
smash which is in his skull like those corrugations which 

THE RJtVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 177 
form on molten copper and something therein fluttering and 
throbbing beneath your fingers like the weak place of an 
infant's crown before it is knit, when it has happened that 
there is no throbbing, under your fingers. . . . Say of it 
'A case not to be treated.'" 
That is a very good and accurate description of the brain. 
The observations here recorded could not be made in the 
course of mummification, but must be due to the intelligent 
study of a wounded soldier or workman. 
So far the treatise produces a favorable impression of Egyp- 
tian surgery. But if it is based on an original going back to 
the Pyramid Age, as Breasted thinks, surgery in Egypt will 
appear in much the same plight as other learned sciences. We 
should have no evidence for any advances since 2500 B.C. 
There would have been no development of the scientific spirit 
displayed by our unknown author, but only a slavish copying 
down of old results and an appeal to "the wisdom of the an- 
cients." Of course, the absurdities of later medical papyri 
cannot be used as evidence for the state of contemporary 
surgery, but positive evidence for progress is equally lacking. 
On the whole an examination of Egyptian and Babylonian 
"scientific literature" does not disclose such an acceleration in 
progress after writing had revolutionized the methods of trans- 
mitting knowledge as might at first sight have been expected. 
The available documents are admittedly too scanty to serve 
as a basis for definite conclusions. They are at least not in- 
compatible with the forebodings expressed on p. 150. 
On the other hand, literary sources do give evidence for the 
pooling of knowledge, of diffusion, such as has been traced in 
previous chapters, affecting the learned sciences. As we have 
described them, mathematics, astronomy, and medicine cer- 
tainly assumed quite distinct forms and developed in general 
along autonomous lines in Egypt and Babylonia. That does 
not exclude the possibility of an interchange of ideas that did 
not affect the fundamental structure of the sciences in each 
country. Egyptian mathematicians, for example, could learn 
from Babylonians geometrical formulas without having to 
modify their system of notation, their terminology, or their 
conception of fractions. In fact, a ?Cretan medical prescription 
is quoted in one Egyptian medical papyrus and a recipe by 
an Asiatic from Byblos is included in the Ebers Papyrus. 
Interchanges of physicians, astrologers, and magicians be- 
tween the several courts are mentioned in the Foreign Office 
archives of Egypt (discovered at Tell el Amarna) about 1350 
B.C., and in those of the Hittites of Boghaz Keui about a 

178 THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
century later. Soon after 1500 B.C. learned men were traveling 
as freely between the capitals of Egypt, Asia Minor, Syria, and 
Mesopotamia, as they did a thousand years later. The Foreign 
Office documents themselves are the results of diffusion. 
Akkadian was the diplomatic language of all the Oriental 
monarchies, and Babylonian cuneiform the script universally 
adopted. The Egyptian pharaohs and the Hittite kings must 
have imported Babylonian scribes to write it, or to train native 
clerks. 
And with language and script must have gone the ideas 
embodied in its literature. The Hittites in particular did their 
best to assimilate all the results of Babylonian science, and 
drew largely on Egypt too. And Babylonian and Egyptian 
concepts are reflected in the earliest Phoenician documents. 
If the Egyptians borrowed Cretan prescriptions, the Minoans 
must have been far more indebted to the Nile. Long before the 
Greeks emerged from their Dark Age the results of Babylonian 
and Egyptian science were familiar on the coasts of the Aegean. 
The possible range of diffusion is not thereby exhausted. 
The decorative art of the Indus cities, with its compass-drawn 
circles, circumscribing triangles, and squares, would illustrate 
"geometrical propositions" by 2500 B.C. Two thousand years 
later Sanskrit ritual manuals bear witness to extensive applica- 
tions of geometry. 
In the interval it is quite possible that India was contribut- 
ing to the development of Baby Ionian mathematics. There 
is, indeed, as yet no positive evidence for this or against it. 
But much later the numeral system with a sign for 0 which we 
use was borrowed by the Arabs from India. The three primary 
centers of urban civilization and of writing may therefore 
have been contributing continuously to the formation of the 
scientific tradition which the Greeks developed and passed 
on to us. 
NOTE ON MAGIC, RELIGION, AND SCIENCE 
On pp. 50-51 we spoke of a magic rite as inspired by the 
same sort of reasoning as would suggest a scientific experiment. 
We did not suggest that the logical process was conceived as 
it would be in a modern laboratory, but we accepted the 
account given by Tylor and Frazer of the origins of magic. 
That is a theory of origins only, and is not meant as a descrip- 
tion of the motives of the practitioner of magic. As a theory 
of origins it is not incompatible with the conclusions based on 
a tudy of modern savages-a man performs a magic rite be- 
cause he believes in magic, not to see what will happen. His 

THE REVOLUTION IN HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 179 
society is convinced of the efficacy of magic; testing is un- 
thinkable. The attitude of the magician is diametrically op- 
posed to that of the experimental scientist. 
Again, it has been convenient to give simplified, and thus 
rationalized accounts of magic processes. We must then insist 
that neither modern medicine-men nor paleolithic artist- 
wizards nor Egyptian magicians did or could formulate a 
logical and coherent theory of magic. That is clear enough 
from inconsistencies of behavior which have been mentioned. 
For convenience only we distinguish magic in which im- 
personal mystic forces are directly controlled from religion in 
which the forces are personified, and can therefore be in- 
fluenced in the same way as men by entreaties or flattery. But 
really there is no sharp distinction. Most rituals are designed 
also magically to coerce, or at least assist, the gods. That is the 
sense, for instance, of the numerous ritual dramas and also 
of the meals and beer given to the gods. It is quite obvious 
that science did not, and could not, spring directly from either 
magic or religion. We have shown in detail that it originated 
in, and was at first identical with, the practical crafts. In so far 
as a craft like that of healing or astronomy was annexed to 
religion it was sterilized of scientific value. 

CHAPTER IX 
THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION 
OF PROGRESS 
BEFORE the urban revolution comparatively poor and illiterate 
communities had made an impressive series of contributions to 
man's progress. The two millennia immediately preceding 
3000 B.C. had witnessed discoveries in applied science that 
directly or indirectly affected the prosperity of millions of 
men and demonstrably furthered the biological welfare of 
our species by facilitating its multiplication. We have men- 
tioned the following applications of science: artificial irriga- 
tion using canals and ditches; the plow; the harnessing of 
animal motive-power; the sailboat; wheeled vehicles; orchard- 
husbandry; fermentation; the production and use of copper; 
bricks; the arch; glazing; the seal; and-in the earliest stages 
of the revolution-a solar calendar, writing, numeral notation, 
and bronze. 
The two thousand years after the revolution-say from 
2600 to 600 B.c.-produced few contributions of anything 
like comparable importance to human progress. Perhaps only 
four achievements deserve to be put in the same category as 
the fifteen just enumerated. They are: the "decimal notation" 
of Babylonia (about 2000 B.C.); an economical method for 
smelting iron on an industrial scale (1400 B.C.); a truly al- 
phabetic script (1300 B.C.); aqueducts for supplying water 
to cities (700 B.C.). 
The "decimal notation" enabled the Babylonians to deal 
effectively with fractional quantities and to establish a m:lth.. 
ematical astronomy. But place value died with their script 
though sexagesimal fractions survived to inspire "decima 1s" 
in A.D. 1590. Economical iron-smelting first made metal tools 
so cheap that they could be universally used for clearing forests 
and draining marshes. In temperate latitudes the new tools 
opened up to agriculture vast tracts of land hitherto uninhabit- 
able, and so made possible a great expansion in population. 
Yet the crucial discovery Vt'as not due to the rich and long- 
civilized communities of Babylonia or Egypt, but to a hitherto 
unknown community, dependent upon the Hittite Empire. 
180 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 181 
The alphabet brought reading and writing within the reach 
of all and made literature potentially popular . Yet again this 
revolutionary simplification of writing was not carried through 
in the old centers of learning, but in the relatively young com- 
mercial cities of Phoenicia. Aqueducts, bringing supplies of 
fresh water, must have reduced the mortality among city- 
dwellers, and so added to the total of humanity. The earliest 
example yet discovered was built by Sennacherib, King of 
Assyria, to supply his capital. 
Two of our four discoveries, therefore, cannot be credited 
to the societies that had initiated and first reaped the fruits of' 
the urban revolution. Technical improvements like the addi- 
tion of a fixed rudder to ships or the glazing of pottery may be 
neglected here, as being merely logical developments of proces- 
ses initiated before the revolution. For the same reason we may 
ignore some medical, astronomical, and chemical discoveries 
made in the Orient that, purified from the dross of magic 
surrounding them, were incorporated in Greek science. 
We are then left with only two first-rate discoveries made 
by societies equipped with all the advantages of the fifteen 
mutations that were unified in the urban revolution. Viewed 
in this light the achievements of Egypt, Babylonia, and their 
immediate cultural dependencies appear disappointing from 
the standpoint of human progress. Contrasting progress before 
and after it, the second revolution seems to mark, not the 
dawn of a new era of accelerated advance, but the culmina- 
tion and arrest of an earlier period of growth. Yet the Oriental 
societies had been equipped by the revolution with un- 
precedented resources and a new faculty of transmitting and 
accumulating knowledge. 
One partial explanation for such arrested growth may be 
detected in internal contradictions evoked within the societies 
by the revolution itself. The latter was made possible, it will 
be recalled, not only by an absolute accumulation of real 
wealth, but also by its concentration in the hands of gods or 
kings and a small class dependent on these. Such concentration 
was probably essential to ensure the production of the requisite 
surplus resources and to make these available for effective 
social use. 
None the less it meant in practice the economic degrada- 
tion of the mass of the population. The lot of the primary 
producers-farmers, herdsmen, fishers-may, indeed, have 
been ameliorated by the public works, promoted by the State, 
and by the security regular Government guaranteed. Yet 
materially their share in the new wealth was minimal, and 
socially they were sinking toward the status of tenants or even 

182 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION. OF PROGRESS 
serfs. The new army of specialized craftsmen and laborers 
could certainly have found no livelihood but for the expen- 
dit.ure of the surplus created by the revolution. But the frac- 
tion which came to them was again trifling. An unknown per- 
centage of the new craftsmen were actually slaves working for 
a bare living wage; the rest, though legally free, must have 
been impoverished by the competition of servile labor, and 
were ultimately reduced to the straits described by the Egyp- 
tian father quoted on p. 149. 
The substantial balance of the new surplus was retained by 
the few-the kings, the priests, their relatives, and favorites. 
Society is divided into economic classes. A "ruling class" of 
kings, priests, and officials is contrasted to the "lower classes" 
of peasants and manual laborers. The division is typified for 
the archaeologist by the contrast between the overpowering 
magnificence of royal tombs and the simplicity of private 
graves in Egypt or by that between the luxurious houses of 
merchants and the hovels of artisans in an Indus city. As com- 
pared to these the graves in a pre-dynastic cemetery or the huts 
in a neolithic village reveal equality, albeit equality in squalor. 
Now by the biological standard here adopted the urban 
revolution is amply justified in its effects, even if those effects 
include the class division just outlined. That does not mean 
that such a class division was itself likely to accelerate further 
progress. On the contrary, it should retard it. Progress before 
the revolution had consisted in improvements in productive 
processes made presumably by the actual producers, and 
made moreover in the teeth of superstitions that discouraged 
all innovations as dangerous. 
But by the revolution the actual producers, formerly so 
fertile in invention, were reduced to the position of "lower 
classes." The ruling classes who now emerged owed their 
power largely to the exploitation of just those hampering 
superstitions. The Egyptian pharaoh may have started as a 
magician; in any case, he did claim to be a god and spend 
much of his time performing magic rites. The first beneficiaries 
of the revolution in Sumer were the temple priests; the king, 
when he emerges there, is closely associated with the god 
whom he impersonates in periodical ceremonies. It is hardly 
to be expected that ruling classes with such affiliations should 
be patrons of rational science; they were too deeply implicated 
in the encouragement of hopes which experience was repeated- 
ly showing to be illusory, but which still deterred men from 
pursuing the harder road of sustained and intense thinking. 
And, in fact, such rulers had few incentives to encourage 
invention. Many of the revolutionary steps in progress-the 

THE J\CCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 183 
harnessing of animals' motive-power, the sail, metal tools- 
originally appeared as "labor-saving devices." But the new 
rulers now commanded almost unlimited reserves of labor 
recruited from subjects fired with superstitious faith and 
captives taken in war; they had no need to bother about labor- 
saving inventions. 
At the same time, the new middle class of scribes and 
learned men was firmly attached to the ruling class. They were 
in many instances actually "clerks in holy orders," and thus 
as closely identified as tLe rulers with the maintenance of vain 
superstitions. The learned professions were "respectable," and 
actually offered opportunities for advancement into the ruling 
class itself. Finally, the private interests of the "wise men" 
tempted them as a class to set undue store by mere book- 
learning as against experiment and observation in the living 
world. The new sciences for which the revolution gave scope 
were thus all too often fettered by subservience to supersti- 
tion and divorced from the applied sciences that produced 
results. 
The practical exponents of the latter were relegated to the 
lower classes. Escape from their position of inferiority was 
not offered by technical improvements that the ruling classes 
could hardly appreciate, but at best by joining the middle 
class in supporting "the established church." 
Thus, from the point of view of pro gress, Egyptian and 
Babylonian societies were involved by the urban revolution 
in a hopeless contradiction. And they bequeathed this con- 
tradiction to the various successor states-Hittites, Assyrians, 
Persians, Macedonians-that took them as models. The cre- 
ative work of the Greeks in applied and theoretical science 
begins long before the "golden age," when a nominal democ- 
racy had become rather a privileged minority, living largely 
on the labor of aliens and slaves and the tribute of subject 
states. It was when the Greeks were just emerging from the 
dark e after the fall of Minoan-Mycenaean civilization that 
the sClntific traditions of the Orient were transformed by a 
new spirit. At this time in cities already reorganized for trade 
and industry, the wealth from these pursuits balanced that of 
landed aristocracies but was not yet unduly concentrated, 
while a simple alphabetic script made learning accessible to a 
wide public. 
In addition to the internal contradiction just explained, the 
ancient Oriental civilizations were involved in an external con- 
tradiction of a similar nature. As we have seen, neither the 
Nile Valley nor Babylonia was self-sufficing. Even when united 
in a single political and economic system, each country was 

18 4 
c ., "". . 
THE ACCELERATION' AND RETARDATION OF' PRdGRSS 
forced to rely for essential raw materials on imports from 
regions occupied by different societies. The necessary imports 
had presumably once been obtained by a free exchange of 
surplus products. But reasons have been given for the belief 
that the supplies thus obtained did not suffice to meet the de- 
mands of Egyptians and Sumerians, enriched by the urban 
revolution. 
They accordingly attempted to expedite and regularize 
deliveries by force; armies followed the routes opened up by 
merchant caravans. Eventually attempts were made to annex 
the sources of supplies and to conquer the exporting countries. 
As the rulers of Sumerian cities had aimed at giving a political 
form to the geographical unity of Babylonia by subjugating 
neighboring cities, so they sought to extend their domains by 
annexing geographically distinct regions essential to the 
stability of their economy. They came thus to embark upon 
a course of imperialist conquest. The Empire founded by 
Sargon of Agade about 2500 B.C. is the first recorded realiza- 
tion of this endeavor. 
It is not, of course, asserted that the conqueror was con- 
sciously inspired by deliberate economic calculations. But his 
conquests did, in fact, tend to the results here indicated. And 
Sargon's empire, although transitory, became the model for 
all Oriental imperialisms. Throughout the Ancient East 
Sargon's conquests became an ideal and the conqueror himself 
a hero of romance. A thousand years after the disintegration 
of his empire, literary panegyrics on his prowess were circulat- 
ing throughout the Ancient World. Fragments of such com- 
positions have been dug up at the Egyptian capital of Tell el 
Amarna and at the Hittite capital of Boghaz Keui. Sargon set 
a standard which his immediate successors, the kings of Dr and 
then of Babylon, after 1600 B.C. the Egyptians, the Hittites, 
the Assyrians, the Lydians, the Medes, the Persians, and the 
Macedonians were fain to imitate. 
Now these successive but short-lived empires undoubtedly 
contributed to human progress. While they lasted, they 
guaranteed over wide areas internal peace and security 
favorable to the accumulation of wealth. They ensured for the 
great industrial centers adequate supplies of raw materials. 
They spread abroad the economic advantages of the urban 
revolution and the advances in appJied science that accom- 
panied it. The ways of communication essential to the main- 
tenance of an empire were channels for diffusion. It was along 
them that learned men traveled in the fifteenth and fourteenth 
centuries B.C. and that Greek physicians and geographers went 
to Babylon and Susa a thousand years later. The imperial 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 185 
generals themselves studied the botany and zoology of the 
conquered territories, and recorded their observations on re- 
turning home. Thus knowledge was accumulated and recorded. 
But the instability of these empires discloses a contradiction 
within them; the persistence with which the subject peoples 
revolted is a measure of their gratitude for the benefits just 
recited, and perhaps of the latter's value too. Presumably the 
benefits were more than outweighed by disabilities. In reality 
an empire of the Sargon type probably did directly destroy 
more wealth than it indirectly created. 
The first boast of an Oriental conqueror in his inscriptions 
is the booty in animals, metal, jewels, and slaves that he has 
brought home. Such plunder did not increase the total wealth 
available for human enjoyment. At best it effected a redistribu- 
tion of existing resources and released hoarded treasures. But 
mostly it meant transferring wealth from poorer societies to 
courts already glutted with a superfluity. Thereafter the 
victor's main concern was to exact a regular tribute from the 
vanquished peoples. 
In a general way the empires thus established were mere 
tribute-collecting machines. Normally the imperial govern- 
ment interfered in the internal affairs of subject peoples only 
in so far as was necessary to ensure obedience and the regular 
payment of taxes. The monarch was concerned with the 
prosperity and good government of his domains only if such 
conditions promoted the collection of revenue. And quite 
certainly Oriental monarchies were created by war, main- 
tained by continual war, and eventually destroyed by war. 
N ow warfare has undoubtedly served as a potent incentive 
to new discoveries that could be applied also to peaceful ends; 
we saw in the last chapter how its exigencies stimulated the 
ingenuity even of mathematicians. Admittedly, too, militarism 
was necessary both to protect the achievements of civilization 
against the envious attacks of slothful barbarians and to 
spread the blessings of civilization itself. But it did not even 
succeed in either direction. 
Despite all their standing armies and military equipment 
the Sumerian and Akkadian states were impotent to repel the 
assaults of less prosperous and less civilized peoples. Sargon's 
Empire fell before invaders from Gutium, and thereafter the 
land was overrun in turn by Elamites, Amorites, Hittites, 
Kassites, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and Macedonians. 
The punitive expeditions and elaborate frontier defenses of 
the Old and Middle Kingdoms could not permanently protect 
the Nile Valley from invasion. The New Empire was founded 
better to defend the frontiers by advancing them. It was over- 
! 

f 
1186 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 
\ thrown by the onslaughts of Philistines, Libyans, and other 
,barbarians who had been trained in "civilized warfare" as 
\mercenaries in the imperial armies. And thereafter the Nile 
!Valley itself was occupied by Libyans, Nubians, Assyrians, 
: Persians, and Macedonians. Such was the security obtained 
:by ever-increasing expenditure on armaments and application 
of the maxim "the best defense is attack"! 
As a civilizing force militarism's record is equally disap- 
pointing. Resistance to imperialist aggression did, as explained 
on p. 140, induce barbarians to adopt some arts of civilization, 
notably metallurgy. But in most cases they adopted only so 
much of the higher culture as was needed for military equip- 
ment. And that equipment was promptly turned against the 
imperialist apostles of civilization. The ultimate results of the 
"civilizing missions" undertaken by Sargon and his imitators 
were successful raids by barbarians on the centers of civiliza- 
tion; a few of these were mentioned above. And each raid 
and invasion destroyed men, squandered wealth, and at least 
temporarily put back the clock of progress. 
The apparent arrest of growth, already alluded to, may be 
partly due to these circumstances. The period after the urban 
revolution is certainly one in which organized warfare is re- 
peatedly attested both by written records and by the prominent 
place henceforth assumed by armaments in the achaeological 
record. Before the revolution unmistakable weapons of war 
were, as explained on p. 108, far from conspicuous. Yet it was 
just then that progress was proceeding most rapidly. Had 
organized warfare been such an essential spur to progress, a 
reversal of the above relations would have been expected. 
And biologically the slaughter of increasing numbers of 
members of the human species cannot well have promoted the 
multiplication of that species. Yet that has been our final test 
of pro gress. 
Almost from the outset of his career, it would seem, man 
used his distinctively human faculties not only to make sub- 
stantial tools for use upon the real world, but also to imagine 
supernatural forces that he could employ upon it. He was, that 
is, simultaneously trying to understand, and so utilize, natural 
processes and peopling the real world with imaginary beings, 
conceived in his own image, that he hoped to coerce or cajole. 
He was building up science and superstition side by side. 
The superstitions man devised and the fictitious entities he 
imagined were presumably necessary to make him feel at 
home in his environment and to make life bearable. Never- 
theless the pursuit of the vain hopes and illusory short cuts 
suggested by magic and religion repeatedly deterred man 

THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 187 
from the harder road to the control of Nature by understand- 
ing. Magic seemed easier than science, just as torture is less 
trouble than the collection of evidence. 
Magic and religion constituted the scaffolding needed to 
support the rising structure of social organization and of 
science. Unhappily the scaffolding repeatedly cramped the ex- 
ecution of the design and impeded the progress of the per- 
manent building. It even served to support a sham facade 
behind which the substantial structure was threatened with 
decay. The urban revolution, made possible by science, was ex- 
ploited by superstition. The principal beneficiaries from the 
achievements of farmers and artisans were priests and kings. 
Magic rather than science was thereby enthroned and in- 
vested with the authority of temporal power. 
It is as futile to deplore the superstitions of the past as it 
is to complain of the unsightly scaffolding essential to the 
erection of a lovely building. It is childish to ask why man did 
not progress straight from the squalor of a "pre-class" society 
to the glories of a classless paradise, nowhere fully realized as 
yet. Perhaps the conflicts and contradictions, above revealed, 
themselves constitute the dialectics of progress. In any case, 
they are facts of history. If we dislike them, that does not mean 
that progress is a delusion, but merely that we have under- 
stood neither the facts nor progress nor man. Man made the 
superstitions and the institutions of oppression as much as h 
made the sciences and the instruments of production. In both 
alike he was expressing himself, finding himself, making him- 
self. 
The word "race," the reader will note, has hardly been 
mentioned in this book. In particular, in an attempt to ex- 
plain, even briefly, the rise of agriculture, the foundation of 
States, or the growth of sciences, it was found unnecessary to 
invoke peculiar psychological endowments, inherited along 
with bodily characteristics by the human groups active in those 
directions. A popular theory attributes an innate "capacity for 
leadership" to a hypothetical "Nordic race." It would have 
been easy to "explain" in this way the progress of mathematics 
in Babylonia as due to a "mathematical talent" inborn in 
Sumerians or Semites. ("The Egyptians' genius for . . ." is 
an too often mentioned in quite serious works.) But such a 
procedure would not have been scientific explanation. In 
practice it is only a restatement in pompous language of the 
fact that some Sumerians were actually good accountants. 
At best it might mean that some inexplicable and undemon- 
strable mutation in the germ plasm of hypothetical ancestors, 

188 THE ACCELERATION AND RETARDATION OF PROGRESS 
transmitted to the Sumerrans, produced a brain and nervous 
system that facilitated the processes of reckoning. 
High-sounding terms that give confusion the semblance of 
logic and un demonstrable postulates have alike been avoided 
here. We have instead tried to show how certain societies in 
the process of adjusting themselves to their environments 
were led to create States and mathematical sciences by apply- 
ing distinctively human faculties, common to all men. Under 
certain conditions, a State and mathematics were necessary to 
enable men to live, prosper, and multiply. No change in germ 
plasm, introduced by unknown non-human agencies, had to 
be assumed. 
At the same time, the achievements we have sought to ex- 
plain were not automatic responses to an environment, not 
adjustments imposed indiscriminately on all societies by forces 
outside them. All the adjustments we have considered in detail 
were made by specific societies, each with its own distinctive 
history. In the course of its history, the society had built up 
traditional rules of behavior and a stock of craft lore or practi- 
cal sciences. It was the application of these rules and sciences 
to the particular environment that determined the form of 
the adjustment under examination. 
The differences between Egyptian and Sumerian political 
organizations and mathematical techniques are explicable by 
the divergent histories of the two societies, not simply by the 
contrast between the Nile Valley and the Tigris-Euphrates 
plain, still less by hereditary disparities in nervous mechanisms. 
Now it is the social traditions, shaped by the community's 
history, that determine the general behavior of the society's 
members. The differences in behavior exhibited by members 
of two societies, viewed collectively, are due to the divergent 
histories of the two societies. But it is just this average be- 
havior that a science of racial psychology might study; only by 
a perversion from its scientific aims could it deduce therefrom 
"innate faculties." 
Actually, we have seen (p. 117 fI.) that this behavior is 
not innate. It is not even immutably fixed by the environment. 
It is conditioned by social tradition. But just because tradition 
is created by societies of men and transmitted in distinctively 
human and rational ways, it is not fixed and immutable: it is 
constantly changing as society deals with ever new circum- 
stances. Tradition makes the man, by circumscribing his be- 
havior within certain bounds; but it is equally true that man 
makes the traditions. And so, we can repeat with deeper in- 
sight, "Man makes himself." 

Note on Chronology 
DATES in years before 3000 B.C. are just guesses, and are rarely 
given. For the next thousand years several systems of chro- 
nology are in vogue both for Egypt and Mesopotamia. I have 
adopted in each country what is usually called a short chro- 
nology: in Egypt I accept the reductions in the Berlin system 
proposed by Scharff, and in Mesopotamia I have followed 
Sidney Smith and Frankfort. The dates here given accordingly 
differ by from 200 to 450 years from those given by Breasted, 
Hall, or Peet for Egypt, and Contenau or Woolley for Mesopo- 
tamia. It makes not the slightest difference to any argument in 
this book whether a long or a short chronology be adopted, 
provided it be applied both to Egypt and Mesopotamia. That 
the relative dates are correct for both countries I feel fairly 
confident. 
It has been convenient in each case to follow the native 
annalists of both countries in dividing up history on a political 
basis into dynasties. In Egypt the modern practice of desig- 
nating the periods of greatness as Old, Middle, and New 
Kingdoms has also been followed. The following table will ex- 
plain tbe usage of these terms and dates. All dates are given in 
round figures. 
189 

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE FOR 
EGYPT AND MESOPOTAMIA 
EGYPT 
 'raSian 
Badarian 
Prehis- Amratian 
toric ) Gerzean 
 Semainian 
2950 to . 
2750 \ Dynasties I-II 
 I)vnastv III } 
2750 O)'nasty IV OLD 
2100 (Pyrmids) KInO'f 
,Dynasties V-VI 
2300 to} Dvnasties VII- 
2000 l "XI 
2000   
to Dvnast XII MIDDLE 
1750 ., Y KINGDOM 
1750 Dynasties XIII- 
to XVI I (i ncl. 
1600 H yksos) ) 
NEW 
1600 to Dvnasties ( KINGDOM 
1100 XVIII-XX J 
MESOPOTAMIA 
al Ubaid ) 
Prehis- 
( toric 
J emdet N asr ) 
Uruk 
 2850 
Early Dynastic to 
2350 
Dynasty of 2350 to 
Agade (Sargon) 2250 
Dynasties of 2250 to 
Dr, Isin, etc. 1900 
Dynasty I of 1900 
Babylon to 
(I-Iammurabi) 1600 
Kassi te 
Dynasty 
1600 to 
1150 
GEOGRAPHICAL NOTE 
Egypt is the Nile valley from the first cataract to the Medi- 
terranean. The part south of Cairo is roughly Upper Egypt, 
that lying to the north, Lower Egypt. 
Mesopotamia is taken as equivalent to the modern Iraq; it 
includes: 
Assyria-roughly the triangle between the Tigris and the 
Zab round Mosul-and 
Babylonia-the region between the Tigris and Euphrates 
south of Samarra. It is subdivided into: 
Akkad, north of Diwaniyeh, and 
Sumer, south thereof. 
190 

INDEX 
ABSTRACT THINKING, 32, 57, 154 
