CHAPTER TV 
FOOD GATHERERS 
MAN'S emergence 01... the earth is indicated to the archaeologist 
by the tools he made. Man needs tools to supplement the 
deficiencies of his physiological equipment for securing food 
and shelter (p. 20). He is enabled to make them by the 
delicate correlation of hand and eye rendered possible by the 
constitution of his brain and nervous system (p. 28). 
The first tools would presumably be bits of wood, bone, or 
stone, very slightly sharpened or accommodated to the hand 
by breaking or chipping. In so far as they were made of wood, 
they will have perished. The earliest stone tools will normally 
be indistinguishable from the products of natural fracture 
(stones splintered by frost or heat or shattered by jostling in 
a river gravel). However, even from times prior to the first 
Ice Age, archaeologists have recognized pieces of flint that 
appear to be intelligently chipped, as if to adapt them to serve 
as knives, choppers, and scrapers. The human workmanship 
of such "eoliths" is indeed still disputed, but is admitted by 
the majority of authorities. 
In quite early pleistocene times there were certainly "men" 
manufacturing unmistakable implements of stone and also 
controlling fire. Conclusive evidence has been obtained from 
the cave of Choukou-tien near Pekin (Pei-ping). There, to- 
gether with the fossilized remains of "Pekin man" and of ex- 
tinct animals, were found very crudely fashioned flakes of 
quartzite and other stones, and also bones that had indubitably 
been subjected to the action of fire. Superior tools have been 
found in geological deposits of the same age in East Anglia 
and elsewhere, but not definitely associated with "human" 
skeletons. Little is to be learned from tools of this sort; they 
reveal that some manlike creature was adapting stones to his 
rudimentary needs, but little more. What the tools were made 
for can only be guessed. Hides and skins take a lot of "dress- 
ing," and contemporary savages employ a variety of tools in 
preparing them for service as coats or shelters. Some of the 
implements thus employed for scraping hides are very like 
early flints, and so archaeologists are rather fond of labeling 
45 

4 6 
FOOD GATHERERS 
rude implements "scrapers." The term implies that men were 
not only fashioning tools, but also using them to dress hides 
for clothing, but the correctness of this tacit inference is, of 
course, unproven. 
Most probably the first tools served a multitude of purposes. 
Early man had graduall to learn by experience what stones 
were most suitable for the manufacture of tools and how to 
chip them correctly. Even flint-the best natural material- 
is very hard to manipulate successfully, as the reader may 
easily discover by hitting flint nodules against one another and 
trying to produce a "flake." In the course of making tools, the 
earliest communities had to build up a scientific tradition, 
noting and transmitting what were the best stones, where they 
were to be expected, and how they were to be handled. Only 
after he had mastered the technique of manufacture, could 
man successfully start making special tools for each individual 
operation. At first the best obtain'lble flake must serve in- 
discriminately as chopper, saw, borer, knife, or scraper. The 
demonstrated facts are the manufacture of tools and the con- 
trol of fire. 
The control of fire was presum,Jly the first great step in 
man's emancipation from the bondage to his environment. 
Warmed by the embers, man could endure cold nights, and 
could thus penetrate into temperate and even arctic regions. 
The flames would give him light at night and allow him to 
explore the recesses of sheltering caves. Pire would scare away 
other wild beasts. By cooking, substances became edible that 
would be indigestible if eaten raw. Man is no longer restricted 
in his movements to a limited range of climates, and his 
activities need not be entirely dete'mined by the sun's light. 
But in mastery of fire man was controlling a mighty physical 
force and a conspicuous chemical change. For the first time 
in history a creature of Nature was directing one of the great 
forces of Nature. And t e exercise of power must react upon 
the controller. The sight of the bright flame bursting forth 
when a dry bough was thrust into glowing embers, the tran- 
formation of the bough into fine ashes and smoke, must have 
stimulated man's rudimentary brain. What these phenomena 
suggested to him is unknowable. But in feeding and damping 
down the fire, in transporting and using it, man made a 
revolutionary departure from the behavior of other animals. 
He was asserting his humanity and making himself. 
At first, of course, man just tamed and kept alight fires that 
had been produced by lightning or other natural agency. Even 
that presupposes some science-observation and comparison 
of experiences. Man had to learn what the effects of fire were, 

FOOD GATHERERS 
47 
what it would "eat," and so on. And in tending and preserving 
the flames man kept adding to his store of knowledge. Sacred 
fires that must never be allowed to die out, like the fire of 
Vesta at Rome, were ritually tended by many ancient peoples 
and by modern savages. They are presumably survivals and 
reminiscences of a time when man had not yet learned to 
produce fire at will. 
When that discovery was made is uncertain. Savage peoples 
produce fire by the spark from flint struck against iron pyrites 
or hematite, by the friction of two pieces of wood, or by the 
heat generated on compressing air in a tube of bamboo. The 
first device was being employed in Europe as early as the last 
Ice Age. Several modifications of the friction method (fire 
plow, fire drill, and so on) are current among savages in 
different parts of the modern world, and are mentioned in 
ancient literatures. Perhaps the variety of methods used for 
kindling fire indicates that the trick was discovered only 
relatively late in human history, when our species had already 
been widely scattered into isolated groups. 
In any case, the discovery was one of first-class significance. 
Man could thereafter not only control but also initiate the 
puzzling process of burning, the mysterious power of heat. 
He became consciously a creator. The evocation of flame out 
of a pair of sticks or from flint, pyrites, and tinder looks very 
like making something out of nothing. When it was a less 
familiar event, it must have had a very exhilarating effect; you 
must have felt yourself a creator indeed. But of course man 
was a creator in shaping a piece of wood or stone into a tool. 
He was asserting a power over Nature and molding objects to 
his will. 
Such are the only certain facts that emerge from a study 
of the remains actually left by early pleistocene and pre- 
pleistocene "men." What they lived on is unknown. It is as- 
sumed that the earliest men snared and hunted wild animals 
and birds, caught fishes and lizards, collected wild fruits, 
shellfish, and eggs, and dug for roots and grubs. It is also 
assumed, but with less confidence, that they made coats of 
skins. Some certainly took refuge in caves, others may have 
erected rude shelters of :'oughs. Success in hunting could only 
be attained by prolonged and accurate observation of the 
habits of game; the results must have been built up into a 
collective tradition of anting lore. The distinction between 
nutritive and poisonous plants again had presumably to be 
learned by experience, and once more incorporated in a com- 
munal tradition. 
Man must learn the right seasons for hunting the different 

4 8 
FOOD GATHERERS 
species of game or collecting the several kinds of eggs and 
fruits. To do so successfully he must eventually decipher the 
calendar of the heavens; he must observe the phases of the 
moon and the risings of stars, and compare these observations 
with the botanical and zoological ones already mentioned. 
And, as noted, man had to discover by experiment the best 
stones for making tools and where such occurred. For even 
the earliest men success in life required a considerable body 
of astronomical, botanical, geological, and zoological knowl- 
edge. In acquiring and transmitting this our forerunners were 
laying the foundations of science. 
It may equally well be inferred that men learned to co- 
operate and act together in getting their livelihood. A creature 
so weak and poorly endowed as man could not in isolation 
successfully hunt the large or fierce animals that quite early 
provided an important item in his diet. Some form of social 
organization beyond the simple family (in the modern 
European sense of that word) has to be postulated, but the 
precise form is unknown. 
And nothing material can be added to the picture till the 
last Ice Age in Europe was approaching. In the interval we 
can, indeed, discern improvements in the manufacture of 
flint tools and regional divergences in the methods of working. 
In some areas the toolmakers concentrated upon detaching 
cOlivenient flakes from the parent lump (technically termed 
the core); the flakes were then trimmed up to serve as the 
actual tools. The procedure gives what archaeologists term a 
flake industry. Elsewhere attention was devoted rather to 
reducing the core itself to a handy shape by chipping bits off 
it; in this case the trimmed core becomes the actual tool, and 
an assemblage of such is termed a core industry. 
The distinction seems due to divergent traditions in flint- 
work followed by two different groups of "men." In a general 
way it seems that flake industries were confined to the northern 
part of the Old World-to the zone north of the great moun- 
tain spine marked by the Alps, Balkans, Caucasus, Hindu 
Kush, and Himalayas. Such skeletons as have been found as- 
sociated with flake industries belong to creatures specifically 
or even generically different from ourselves or from any pos- 
sible ancestor of ours. Core industries have been found in 
Southern India, in Syria and Palestine, all over Africa, in 
Spain, France, and England. Their makers may have belonged 
to the species Homo sapiens or to forms ancestral to him, but 
positive evidence is still lacking in 1941. During Ice Ages the 
flake people tended to spill over from their proper domain, 
which was getting frozen over, into En2land and France and 

FOOD GATHERERS 
49 
Syria, and ultimately even into Africa. Core industries during 
the same Ice Ages withdrew southward only to spread north 
again when genial conditions returned. As a result of these 
displacements of peoples, communities following different in- 
dustrial traditions came to live side by side. There are hints 
of a blending of the two traditions, though intercourse between 
creatures so different as, say, Sinanthropos and Homo sapiens 
is difficult to conceive. 
The last few pages summarize four-fifths of human history 
-say on a modest estimate 200,000 years! Prom that vast 
period survive nine or ten imperfect skeletons and innumerable 
tools. The cellars of English and Prench museums are cram- 
med with implements collected from the gravels of the Thames, 
the Seine, and other rivers, and in South Africa it is easy to 
pick up a cartload of tools on the surface at many sites. But 
the stupendous numbers of the earlier pleistocene tools need 
not betoken a large population. On the contrary, a single in- 
dividual might make and lose three or four tools every day, 
and 200,000 years were available for making those we now 
collect! In early to middle pleistocene times the human family 
was probably a numerically small group, comparable in size to 
that of contemporary manlike apes. 
First about 50,000 years ago does it become possible to 
add any significant details to the foregoing vague sketch. As 
the last Ice Age was approaching, groups of "men" who used 
to be termed Mousterians became prominent in Europe. As 
they habitually lived in caves to escape the intense cold, more 
details are known of their lives than of those of earlier groups. 
Industrially the Mousterians were adherents of the flake tradi.. 
tion, though some learned to make core implements too. 
Physically they belonged to the Neanderthal species, now ex- 
tinct. They walked with a shuffiing gait and could not hold 
their heads erect. Their jaws were chinless, and a huge bony 
ridge over the eyes and a retreating forehead gave their faces 
a bestial look. They could talk sufficiently to organize their co.. 
operative hunting expeditions, but, judging from the attach- 
ments for the tongue muscles, their speech must bave been 
very halting. 
Economically the Mousterians were hunters and had 
specialized in trapping huge arctic mammals-the mammoth 
and the woolly rhinoceros, whose carcasses they would drag 
to the mouth of their cave and there cut up. Naturally such 
big beasts cannot have been pursued by individuals or small 
families; mammoth hunting is a trade for some larger social 
unit co-operating for economic ends. 
Historically the most notable fact about the Mousterians 

50 
FOOD GATHERERS 
is the care they devoted to the disposal of the dead. More than 
a dozen Neanderthal skeletons have been found in France, 
ritually buried in the caves where their group lived. Generally 
attempts had been made to protect the body. At La Chapelle 
aux Saints several skeletons lay each in a shallow grave dug 
in the cave floor. The head sometimes rests on a stone pillow, 
with stones above and around it to relieve the pressure of the 
earth. In one instance the head had been severed from the 
trunk before interment and placed in the grave apart. Not only 
were the dead carefully interred: their graves were placed 
near the hearths, as if to warm their occupants. The departed 
was provided with tools and joints of meat. 
All this ceremonial bears witness to the activity of human 
thought in unexpected and uneconomic directions. Paced with 
the terrifying fact of death, their primitive emotions shocked 
by its ravages, the bestial-looking Mousterians had been roused 
to imaginative thinking. They would not believe in the com- 
plete cessation of earthly life, but dimly imagined some sort 
of continuance thereof in which the dead would still need 
material food and implements. The pathetic and futile 
tendance of the dead, thus early attested, is destined to become 
a rooted habit of human behavior which inspired such 
architectural wonders as the Pyramids and the Taj Mahal. 
Perhaps a further incrence may be hazarded from the dis- 
position of the graves near to hearths. Did the Mousterians 
somehow hope by the warmth of the fire to restore to the 
departed a quality the loss of which they recognized as symp- 
tomatic of death? If so they were already practicing magic 
and misapplying science. They would have correctly observed 
an association between life and warmth. They might infer that 
warmth was a cause of life: death would be due to a deficiency 
of warmth. In that case to remedy the deficiency might restore 
life. In this way good logical reasons could be assigned for the 
Mousterian and later buria: practices. Their error would be 
that, having made the experiment repeatedly, they refused to 
admit its failure: for Mousterians and their successors of our 
own species went on kindling fires in graves down to com- 
paratively recent times. 
It cannot be proved that the Mousterians were actuated by 
the motives here suggested, and it is certainly not pretended 
that they or any modern votary of magic formulated their 
reasons in the terms just mentioned. The argument here out- 
lined is that which would have led a modern scientist to do 
what the Mousterian did. But the scientist would have done it 
as an experiment once or twice to see if it had the desired 
result. The Mousterian did it as an act of faith, and that is 

FOOD GATHERERS 
51 
what distinguishes a magical operation from a scientific ex- 
periment. In judging its results, negative instances, i.e. failures, 
are simply ignored. Or rather objective judgment gives place 
to hope and fear. The fervor of man's faith in magic remedies 
is proportionate to his sense of helplessness in the face of a 
crisis like death. Peeling very helpless, he just dare not let 
that hope go. And just in so far as Nature seems alien and un- 
known is man afraid to omit anything that might help him in 
that menacing environment. 
At the same time, magic offers a short cut to power. The 
sort of argument I have quoted offers an apparently logical 
account of, say, life. But it has been reached without any 
penetrating and searching analysis. Hating thought, man 
accepts the explanation that lies nearest at hand and desperate- 
ly clings to it. 
A few millennia later the glacial climate of Europe improved 
slightly for a time. During this warmer interval men of our 
own species first appear positively in the archaeological record 
in Europe, North Africa, and Hither Asia. Neanderthal "man" 
abruptly disappears; his place is taken by modern men, whose 
bodies would hardly provoke comment in a mortuary today. 
Physically at least four distinct varieties or races can be 
recognized in Europe alone, while statuettes from Siberia 
show the peculiar forms of hair distinctive of the three major 
divisions of our species. Archaeologically the products of 
these modern men, termed Upper Paleolithic industries, fan 
into several cultural groups, each distinguished by its own 
peculiar traditions in flint-work, art, and so on. No exact cor- 
relation can, however, be established between the cu1tural 
and the racial groups. 
All Upper Paleolithic groups are far better equipped for 
dealing with the environment than any previously encountered. 
They have learnt to make a variety of distinct tools adapted 
to particular uses; they even make tools for making tools. 
They work bone and ivory as skilfully as flint; they have even 
invented simple mechanical devices like the bow and the spear- 
thrower to supplement human muscular power in hurling 
weapons. And, of course, such an array of new tools indicates 
not only increased technical skill, but also greater accumula- 
tions of knowledge and wider applications of science. A brief 
reference to the P ledmostians of East and Central Europe 
and to the Aurignacians and Magdalenians in Prance should 
suffice to illustrate these points. 
Despite the intense cold, the environment in Europe was 
eminently favorable for hunters equipped to meet it. The 
plains of Russia and Central Europe were open tundras or 

52 
FOOD GATHERERS 
steppes. Every summer bitter winds blowing off the glaciers 
and ice sheets covered these plains with a layer of fine dust 
(loss), through which young herbage sprouted each spring. 
Vast herds of mammoth, reindeer, bison, and wild horse 
ranged over the plains, browsing on the grass. Every year the 
herds migrated from summer pastures in Russia and Siberia 
'V 
FIG. 3.-ARCHERS AND ARROWS IN A STONE AGE 
PAINTING FROM SOUTHEAST SPAIN. 
to winter grazing in the Danube valley or on the Pontic steppe 
an d back a gain. 
The Predmostian hunters pitched their camps along passes 
between ice-capped mountains that such herds must traverse 
and where tongues projecting from the northern ice sheet re- 
stricted the beasts' movements. The camp sites are still marked 
by immense middens discovered under the loss at Mezine near 
Kiev, at pfedmost near Prerau in Moravia, at Willendorf in 
Lower Austria, and elsewhere. The size of the bone heaps- 
remains of over 1000 mammoths were recognized at Predmost 

FOOD GATHERERS 
53 
-attests the hunters' success in procuring mammoth meat. 
There was food enough for a vigorous population. But the 
meat could only be obtained by the effective co-operation of 
a substantial number of individuals and by detailed knowl- 
edge of the habits of the herds; the clever location of the 
camp sites proves the application of such knowledge. Russian 
excavators have shown that the hunters erected substantial 
half-subterranean houses to live in. 
Even more favorable conditions prevailed in Central Prance. 
The limestone plateaus were steppes on which browsed mam- 
moths, reindeer, bisons, musk oxen, horses, and other edible 
animals. Salmon ran every year in the waters of the Dordogne, 
the Vezere, and other rivers as abundantly as in British 
Columbia today. The walls of the valleys are honeycombed 
with caves offering converjenL habitations. By exploiting this 
environment intelligently, the Aurignacians and their suc- 
cessors, the Magdalenins, multiplied and created a rich 
culture. They were no more homeless nomads than were the 
K wakiutl of British Columbia who last century, despite a 
"paleolithic" economy, lived in substantial and even ornate 
wooden houses grouped in permanent villages. Such prosperity 
is a warning against underrating the possibilities of food- 
gathering as a livelihood. 
The deep Upper Paleolithic deposits in the caves, the masses 
of tools that can be collected, suggest an increased population. 
The number of Upper Paleolithic skeletons founJ in Prance 
alone exceeds that of al: earlier skeletons put together . Yet the 
period over which they must be distributed is not one- 
twentieth of that to which the latter belong. Nevertheless, the 
number of Upper Paleolithic skeletons is not one-hundredth 
of that attributed to the neolithic period in Prance, which did 
not Jast a fifth of the time assigned to the Aurignacian and 
Magdalenian phases. Intelligent exploitation of an eminently 
favorable environment enabled the Aurignacian hunters to 
multiply beyond all former inhabitants of Western Europe, 
but their numbers fell far short of those attained by their 
successors after the neolithic revolution. 
With game so abundant as to ensure security and even 
leisure, the Aurignacians 1 were enabled to build up on tradi- 
tions inherited from unknown ancestors a varied cultural life. 
On the material side its most striking traits are the possession 
of engines-the spear-thrower and the bow. The bow is, in- 
deed, not certainly attested among the Prench Aurignacians, 
1 It is now agreed that what used to be called the Aurignacian culture is 
reaJIy three distinct cultures. For the purposes of this book this newly 
rpcognized complexity may be conveniently ignored. 

S4 
EOOD GATHERERS 
but was used by contemporary but distinct people in East 
Spain. It is perhaps the first engine man devised. The motive 
power is, indeed, just human muscular energy, but in the ten- 
sion of the bow energy gradually expended in bending it is 
accumulated so as to be released all at once and concen- 
trated in dispatching the arrow. The spear-thrower ingeniously 
augments the energy man's arm can impart to a missile on the 
principle of the lever. It may have been invented first in the 
Magdalenian phase, and is still employed by the Australian 
aborigines and by the Eskimos. The Magdalenians had, more- 
over, learned to catch fish both with hook and line and with 
harpoons furnished with detachable heads. 
These peoples must have lived in communities large enough 
to hunt successfully big game like mammoth and Lison. How 
they were organized is, of course, unknown. Economically 
each group was self-sufficient. But self-sufficiency does not 
spell isolation; shells brought from the Mediterranean have 
been found in the caves of Central France. Presumably they 
were brought thither by some rudimentary form of trade. 
Still, shells, though valued for supposed magical virtues, are 
luxuries, not necessities. The trade they denote played no 
essential part in the group's economy. That was based upon 
hunting and collecting and, at lest by Magdalenian times, on 
fishing. No evidence for the production of food by the cultiva- 
tion of plants and breeding of animals has yet come to light 
in France or anywhere else at this period. Steps for the con- 
servation of game by the observance of close seasons may be 
inferred from the customs of contemporary savages. Neverthe- 
less, the woolly rhinoceros became extinct during Aurignacian 
times, the mammoth towards the close of the Magdalenian, 
perhaps through too-successful hunting. 
The most surprising and celebrated aspect of Upper Paleo- 
lithic cultures is the artistic activity of the hunters. They carved 
figures in the round in stone or ivory, modeled animals in clay, 
decorated weapons with representations and forrr...al designs, 
executed bas-reliefs on the rock walls of cave shelters, and en- 
graved or painted scenes on the ceilings of caverns. In many in- 
stances their products are in themselves of high artistic merit. 
Great modern artists, like the late Roger Fry, admire cave- 
paintings not as curiosities, but as masterpieces. The actual de- 
velopment of the power of drawing can be studied in the 
French caves. The oldest representations, assigned to the Au- 
rignacian phase, are just profile outlines, traced with the 
finger in mud, scratched with a flint on the rock, or sketched 
in charcoal; no attempt has been made at perspective or to 

FOOD GATHERERS 
55 
fill in details. In Magdalenian times the artist learned by 
shading to suggest depth, and even achieved a certain amount 
of perspective. Now remember we see things in three dimen- 
sions; it is difficult to represent them effectively in two. We 
have inherited a technique of doing this and of reinterpreting 
two-dimensional drawings. Prom childhood we become 
familiar with flat pictures, and learn to recognize in them 
solid objects. Some of us can be taught to reverse the process 
and to reproduce depth and distance on a sheet of paper. The 
Aurignacians or some earlier artistic ancestors had no picture- 
books. They had themselves to discover the technique of de- 
picting solids on a flat surface correctly and to establish the 
tradition. And incidentally drawing is as important to modern 
science as is writing. 
Yet the paleolithic sculptures and drawings are not merely 
expressions of a mysterious "artistic impulse." The artist, in- 
deed, sU1"ely enjoyed executing them, but he did not do it just 
to secure that joy, but for a serious economic motive. That is 
most obviously true in the case of the cave paintings and en- 
gravings. The pictures are generally situated in the deep re- 
cesses of limestone caves whither no daylight can penetrate. No 
families have ever lived in these fastnesses; they are often very 
difficult of access. And in executing the drawings the artist 
had often to adopt most uncomfortable attitudes, lying on his 
back or standing on a comrade's shoulders in a narrow crevice. 
Of course he had to work by a dim artificial light: the stone 
lamps have actuaIIy been found; fat may be assumed as the 
fuel, with moss for a wick. The pictures are almost exclu- 
sively very faithful portraits of individual animals. The artist 
has evidently been at great pains to make his representation 
lifelike; we even possess trial pieces, rough sketches on loose 
blocks of stone, made in preparation for the actual master- 
piece on the cave wall. 
All these considerations show that cave art had a magic pur- 
pose. An artistic production is, after all, an act of creation. 
The artist scratches upon the blank wall, and 10, there is a bison 
where formerly there had been none! To the logic of pre- 
scientific minds such a creation must have a counterpart in the 
outside world that could be tasted as well as seen. As surely 
as the artist drew a bison in the dark cavern, so surely would 
there be a living bison in the steppes outside for his fellows to 
kill and eat. To make sure of success, the artist occasionally 
(but rarely) drew his bison transfixed by a dart, as he desired 
to see it. 
Aurignacian and Magdalenian art was therefore practical in 

56 
FOOD GATHERERS 
its aim, and designed to ensure a supply of those animals on 
which the tribe depended for its food. So the Australian 
Arunta and other modern food-gatherers perform dances alld 
other ceremonies intended to promote the multiplication of 
emus and witchetty grubs and other edible animals or plants. 
If they could understand its implications, they would indig- 
nantly repudiate the title "food-gatherers" used to contrast 
them with the "food-producing" Papuan who cultivates yams. 
"Our magic rites," an Arunta would say, "are just as necessary 
and efficacious in keeping up the supply of emus and grubs, as 
the digging and weeding done by wretched cultivators." 
The pictures were doubtless connected with other magical 
ceremonies. In a scarcely accessible niche in the cave of 
Montespan the mud still preserves the marks left by the 
buttocks of youths who had squatted there before a magic pic- 
ture in Magdalenian times. That sounds quite like the initiation 
ceremonies practiced by savage tribes today. 
In any case, the artists must have been trained specialists. At 
Limeuil in the Dordogne a number of trial pieces executed on 
pebbles have been collected. They may be the copybooks of 
an art school; on some pieces corrections, as if by a master's 
hand, have been noticed. The artist-magicians were experts, 
specially trained for their task. As such they must have en- 
joyed respect, and even authority, in whatever social organi- 
zation then existed. But they can hardly have been specialists 
in the sense of being exempted from participation in the active 
food-quest of the group; the lifelike representation of animals 
in all sorts of natural attitudes could only be achieved by men 
who had closely studied the beasts in their native haunts as a 
hunter must. 
Other products of paleolithic art may be regarded as magic 
too, but in rather different ways. From Ptedmostian and more 
rarely from Aurignacian stations come small figurines of 
women, carved out of stone or ivory. Normally the bodies are 
excessively fat and the sexual features exaggerated, but the 
face is left almost blank. It is assumed that such were fertility 
charms. The generative powers of women would inhere in 
them, and through them be canalized to provide food for the 
tribe by ensuring the fertility of game and vegetation. 
Finally, Upper Paleolithic art is valuable as providing a 
rough index of the zoological knowledge possessed by men of 
that age. The faithfulness of their delineation illustrates the 
accuracy of their observations upon those animals that pro- 
vided their food. From the pictures it is stiJI possible to dis- 
tinguish the several species intended, even in the case of fishes 

FOOD GATHERERS 
57 
and deer. Magdalenians evidently recognized the same species 
as a modern zoologist. They understood something of animal 
physiology. At least they grasped the importance of the heart; 
a wounded bison is depicted with his heart exposed and trans. 
fixed by a dart. 
On the other hand, Magdalenian and Aurignacian art is.. 
excessively concrete. The drawings are portraits of individual 
animals in individual attitudes; there is nothing generalized 
about them. This need not mean that Magdalenians were in- 
capable of abstract thinking (as defined on p. 32). It does 
probably indicate that their thinking was habitually as con- 
crete as possible. In East Spain pictures, belonging to a rather 
later period but to a distinct social tradition, are much less 
lifelike and individual; they are impressionistic, and suggest 
deer and man much more than this deer or that man. In fact, 
after the Ice Age they lead on to a series of quite conventional 
representations. The artist no longer tries to portray, or even 
to suggest, an individual living stag; he is content with the 
fewest possible strokes to indicate the essential attributes by 
which a stag may be recognized. On the one hand, he has 
found out that a shorthand sketch is just as effective as a life 
portrait in multiplying edible stags in the real world. On the 
other hand, he has habituated himself to abstract thinking. 
He has grasped the idea of stag as contrasted with this or that 
stag, and has symbolized it in the most generalized form, 
omitting all the individual peculiarities that distinguish onc 
stag from another or the same stag at different times. 
The above account will indicate, however imperfectly, the 
extent of human progress during the Old Stone Age, the pleis- 
tocene period of geology. The Magdalenian culture of France 
is the most brilliant achievement of that long episode so far 
known to archaeology. The account here given should afford 
a glimpse of the prosperity, refinement, and density of popu- 
lation attainable by a hunting and collecting economy. It 
will indicate the wide variety of modes of life comprised 
under the general term "food-gathering," and serve as a warn- 
ing against attaching an unduly derogatory sense thereto. 
Nevertheless it was not among the Magdalenians of Europe 
that the neolithic revolution was initiated and the new econo- 
my created. The Magdalenians owed their prosperity to a 
successful adjustment to a special environment. When, with 
the passing of the last Ice Age, forest invaded the former 
steppes and tundra and ousted the herds of mammoth, bison, 
horse, and reindeer from France, the culture, based upon the 
hunting of these animals, decayed. Other peoples, who have 
left no such brilliant memorials behind them, created the new 

58 
FOOD GATHERERS 
feod-producing economy. It is, in fact, conceivable that, even 
in the days of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian hunters of 
Europe, tribes in other continents had begun cultivating plants 
and breeding animals. Professor Menghin and others have 
been led to infer this. But up to date no positive evidence has 
been adduced to confirm the inference. On the available evi- 
dence, during the Old Stone Age, i.e. the pleistocene era, 
gathering and hunting were the sole methods practiced by 
man in securing a livelihood. 

CHAPTER V 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
THROUGHOUT the vast eras of the Ice Ages man had made no 
fundamental change in his attitude to external Nature. He 
had remained content to take what he could get, though he 
had vastly improved his methods of getting and had learned 
discrimination in what he took. Soon after the end of the Ice 
Age man's attitude (or rather that of a few communities) to 
his environment underwent a radical change fraught with 
revolutionary consequences for the whole species. In absolute 
figures the era since the Ice Age is a trifling fraction of the 
total time during which men or manlike creatures have been 
active on the earth. Fifteen thousand years is a generous esti- 
mate of the post-glacial period, as against a conservative figure 
of 250,000 years for the preceding era. Yet in the last twen- 
tieth of his history man has begun to control Nature, or has 
at least succeeded in controlling her by co-operating with her. 
The steps by which man's control was made effective have 
been gradual, their effects cumulative. But among them we 
may distinguish some which, judged by the standards ex- 
plained in Chapter I, stand out as revolutions. The first revo- 
lution that transformed human economy gave man control 
over his own food supply. Man began to plant, cultivate, and 
improve by selection edible grasses, roots, and trees. And he 
succeeded in taming and firmly attaching to his person certain 
species of animal in return for the fodder he was able to offer, 
the protection he could afford, and the forethought he could 
exercise. The two steps are closely related. Many authorities 
now hold that cultivation is everywhere older than stock- 
breeding. Others, notably the German historical school, be- 
lieve that, while some human groups were beginning to 
cultivate plants, other groups were domesticating animals. 
Very few still contend that a stage of pastoralism universally 
preceded cultivation. For purposes of exposition we shall here 
adopt the first theory. Even today many tribes of cultivators 
survive who possess no domestic animals. In Central Europe 
and Western China, where mixed farming has been for cen- 
turies the prevailing economy, the oldest peasants revealed by 
59 

60 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
the archaeologist's spade relied very little, if at all, on domestic 
animals, but lived on agricultural produce and perhaps a little 
game. 
Quite a large variety of plants are capable of providing a 
staple diet under cultivation. Rice, wheat, barley, millet, maize, 
yams, sweet potatoes, respectively support considerable popu- 
lations even today. But in the civilizations which have con- 
tributed most directly and most generously to the building up 
of the cultural heritage we enjoy, wheat and barley lie at the 
foundations of the economy. These two cereals offer, in fact, 
exceptional advantages. The food they yield is highly nutri- 
tious, the grains can easily be stored, the return is relatively 
high, and, above all, the labor involved in cultivation is not 
too absorbing. The preparation of the fields and sowing cer- 
tainly demand a considerable effort; some weeding and watch- 
ing are requisite while the crop is ripening; harvest demands 
intensive exertion by the whole community. But these efforts 
are seasonal. Before and after sowing come intervals in which 
the fields need practically no attention. The grain grower en- 
joys substantial spells of leisure, during which he can devote 
himself to other occupations. The rice grower, on the other 
hand, enjoys no such respite. His toil need perhaps never be 
so intensive as that demanded by the grain harvest, but it is 
more continuous. 
As the historic civilizations of the Mediterranean basin, 
Hither Asia, and India were built upon cereals, we shall con- 
fine our attention to the economies based upon wheat and 
barley. The histories of these have been much more exten- 
sively studied than those of other cultivated plants, and may 
be briefly indicated. 
Both wheats and barleys are domesticated forms of wild 
grasses. But in each case cultivation, the deliberate selection 
for seed purposes of the best plants, and conscious or acci.. 
dental crossings of varieties have produced grains far larger 
an more nutritive than any wild grass-seeds. Two wild grasses 
ancestral to wheat are known-dinkel and wild emmer. Both 
grow wild in mountainous countries, the former in the Bal- 
kans, the Crimea, Asia Minor, and the Caucasus, emmer 
further south in Palestine and perhaps in Persia. 
The present distribution may, of course, be deceptive; 
climate has changed greatly since the time when cultivation 
began, and plant geography is dependent upon climate. In- 
deed, V avilov, arguing from different premises, has proposed 
Afghanistan and Northwestern China as the original centers 
of wheat-growing. In any case, wild dinkel is the parent of a 
small, unsatisfying wheat, extensively cultivated in Central 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
61 
Europe in prehistoric times and still grown in Asia Minor. A 
far superior grain may be got from the cultivation of emmer 
(Triticum dicoccum). Emmer seems to have been the oldest 
wheat cultivated in Egypt, in Asia Minor, and in Western 
Europe, and is often grown today. But the majority of the 
modern bread wheats belong to a third variety (Triticum v ul- 
gare), to which no wild ancestor is known. They may result 
from crosses between emmer and some unknown grass. The 
oldest wheat grains found in Mesopotamia, Turkestan, Persia, 
and India belong to this group. 
The wild ancestors of barley are also mountain grasses. 
They have been reported from Marmarica in North Africa, 
Palestine, Asia Minor, Transcaucasia, Persia, Afghanistan, 
and Turkestan. Vavilov's methods would point to primary 
centers of barley cultivation in Abyssinia and Southeastern 
Asia. The questions where cultivation started and whether in 
one center or in several are still undecided. Because sickles 
have recently been found in cave dwellings in Palestine, ac- 
companied by a set of tools appropriate to a food-gathering 
economy rather than to the culture normally associated with 
the first revolution, it is argued that cereal cultivation started 
in or near Palestine. But it is not impossible that these cave 
dwellers (termed N atufians) were just a backward tribe who 
had adopted some elements of culture from more progressive 
cultivators elsewhere, but had not yet thoroughly reorganized 
their economy. 
As a revolution the introduction of a food-producing econo- 
my should affect the lives of all concerned, so as to be reflect- 
ed in the population curve. Of course, no "vital statistics" 
have been recorded to prove that the expected increase of 
population did occur. But it is easy to see that it should. The 
community of food-gatherers had been restricted in size by 
the food supplies available-the actual number of game ani- 
mals, fish, edible roots, and berries growing in its territory. No 
human effort could augment these supplies, whatever magi- 
cians might say. Indeed, improvements in the technique or 
intensification of hunting and collecting beyond a certain 
point would result in the progressive extermination of the 
game and an absolute diminution of supplies. And, in practice, 
hunting populations appear to be nicely adjusted to the re- 
sources at their disposal. Cultivation at once breaks down the 
limits thus imposed. To increase the food supply it is only 
necessary to sow more seed, to bring more land under tillage. 
If there are more mouths to feed, there will also be more 
hands to till the fields. 
Again, children become economically useful. To hunters 

62 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
children are liable to be a burden. They have to be nourished 
for years before they can begin to contribute to the family 
larder effectively. But quite young toddlers can help in weed- 
ing fields and scaring off birds or trespassing beasts. If there 
are sheep and cattle, boys and girls can mind them. A priori, 
then, the probability that the new economy was accompanied 
c 
FIG. 4.-NEOLITHIC HOES. a 
by an increase of population is very high. That population did 
really expand quite fast seems to be established by archae- 
ology. Only so can we explain the apparent suddenness with 
which peasant communities sprang up in regions previously 
deserted or tenanted only by very sparse groups of collectors. 
Round the lake that once filled the Fayum depression the 
number of Old Stone Age tools is certainly imposing. But 
they have to be spread over so many thousand years that the 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
63 
population they attest may be exiguous. Then quite abruptly 
the shore of a somewhat shrunken lake is found to be fringed 
with a chain of populous hamlets, all seemingly contemporary 
and devoted to farming. The Nile valley from the First Cata- 
ract down to Cairo is quickly lined with a chain of flourishing 
peasant villages, all seeming to start about the same time and 
all deve10ping steadily down to 3000 B.C. Or take the forest 
plains of Northern Europe. After the Ice Age we find therc 
scattered settlements of hunters and fishers along the coasts, 
on the shores of lagoons, and on sandy patches in the forest. 
The relics collected rom such sites should probably be spread 
over a couple of thousand years, and so are only compatible 
with a tiny population. But then, within the space of a few cen- 
turies, Denmark first, and thereafter Southern Sweden, North 
Germany, and Holland, become dotted with tombs built of 
gigantic stones. It must have taken a considerable force to 
build such burial-places, and in fact some contain as many 
as 200 skeletons. The growth of the population must then have 
been rapid. It is true that in this case the first farmers, who 
were also the architects of the big stone graves, are supposed to 
have been immigrants. But as they are supposed to have come 
by boat from Spain round Orkney and across the North Sea, 
the actual immigrant population cannot have been very large. 
The multitude implied by the tomb.> must have resulted from 
the fecundity of a few immigrnt families and that of the older 
hunters who had joined with these in exploiting the agricul- 
tural resources of the virgin north. Finally, the human skele- 
tons assigned to the New Stone Age in Europe alone are 
several hundred times more numerous than those from the 
whole of the Old Stone Age. Yet the New Stone Age in Europe 
lasted at the outside 2000 years-less than one hundredth of 
the time assigned to the Old! 
It would be tedious to pile up evidence; its implication are 
clear. It was only after the first revolution-but immediately 
thereafter-that our species really began to multiply at all fast. 
Certain other implications and consequences of this first or 
"neolithic" revolution can be considered later. It is desirable 
at this point to enter a caveat. 
The adoption of cultivation must not be confused with the 
adoption of a sedentary life. It has been customary to con- 
trast the settled life of the cultivator with the nomadic exis- 
tence of the "homeless hunter." The contrast is quite fictitious. 
Last century the hunting and fishing tribes of the Pacific coasts 
of Canada possessed permanent villages of substantial, ornate, 
and almost luxurious wooden houses. The Magdalenians of 
France during the Ice Age certainly occupied the same cave 

64 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
over several generations. On the other hand, certain methods 
of cultivation impose a sort of nomadism upon their practition- 
ers. To many peasants in Asia, Africa, and South America, 
even today, cultivation means simply clearing a patch of scrub 
or jungle, digging it up with a hoe or just a stick, sowing it, and 
then reaping the crop. The plot is not fallowed, still less 
manured, but just re-sown next year. Of course, under such 
conditions the yield declines conspicuously after a coup Ie of 
seasons. Thereupon another plot is cleared, and the process 
repeated till that too is exhausted. Quite soon all the available 
land close to the settlement has been cropped to exhaustion. 
When that has happened, the people move away and start 
afresh elsewhere. Their household goods are simple enough to 
be easily transported. The houses themselves are flimsy hovels, 
probably grown foul by prolonged occupation, and can readily 
be replaced. 
What has just been described is the most primitive form of 
cultivation, often termed hoe-culture or garden-culture. Nature 
soon posed a question to the first cultivators-the problem of 
soil exhaustion. The easiest way of dealing with the issue was 
to dodge it and move away. Actually that solution is perfectly 
satisfactory so long as there is plenty of cultivable land and the 
cultivator is content to do without such luxuries and refine- 
ments as impede migration. It was, of course, a nuisance to 
have to clear a new bit of forest every few years, but that was 
surely less trouble than thinking out a new solution. In any case 
this sort of cultivation prevailed throughout Europe north of 
the Alps in prehistoric times. It may have survived among 
some German tribes down to the beginning of our era; for the 
geographer Strabo remarks upon their readiness to shift their 
settlements. It is still practiced today, for example, among the 
rice-growing Nagas in Assam, among the Boro in the Amazon 
basin, and even by grain growers in the Sudan. Yet it is a 
wasteful method, and ultimately limits the population, since 
suitable land is nowhere unrestricted. 
If nomadic garden-culture is the most primitive type of cul- 
tivation, it is not quite the simplest nor certainly the oldest. 
Throughout the great belt of countries now arid or desert, be- 
tween the temperate forests of the north and the jungles of the 
tropics, the most suitable land for cultivation is often found on 
the alluvial soils deposited where intermittent torrents flow out 
from the hills on to the plains, and in the valleys of rivers that 
periodically overflow their banks. In that arid zone ttJ.e muddy 
flood plains beside the great rivers and the silts, spreading out 
like a fan at the mouth of a torrent's gorge, form a welcome 
contrast to the un fertile sands or sterile rocks of the desert. 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
65 
And on them the waters remaining from the floods take the 
place of the uncertain rains in providing the moisture needed 
for the germination and ripening of crops. And so in the 
Eastern Sudan the Hadendoa scattered millet seeds on the wet 
mud left by the Nile flood every autumn and just waited for 
the crop to sprout. Whenever a thunderstorm on Mount Sinai 
has brought down the Wady el Arish in flood, the desert Arabs 
hasten to sow barley grains in the freshly deposited silt and 
gather a welcome crop. 
Now under such conditions the floods, thus utilized, not only 
water the crop, they create fresh soil. The flood waters are 
yellow and muddy from the sediments which they have col- 
lected in their impetuous passage through the hills. As they 
spread out and flow more gent1y, the suspended mud is de- 
posited as a deep silt on the inundated lands. The silt contains 
the chemical constituents that last year's crop had taken from 
the soil, which is thus renewed and refertilized. Under condi- 
tions of natural irrigation, the cultivator need not be nomadic. 
He can go on cultivating the same patches year after year pro- 
vided they are flooded between each harvest. 
Now the method of cultivation just described is possible 
precisely in the regions where wild ancestors of wheat and 
barley are probably native. Perry has cogently argued that irri- 
gation is the oldest method of grain-growing. In particular, 
conditions in the Nile Valley would have been exceptionally 
favorable to the deliberate cultivation of cereals. The Nile, 
swollen by the monsoon rains on the Abyssinian plateau, over- 
flows its banks with remarkable regularity every autumn. The 
flood arrives at a convenient season when the heat is no longer 
so intense as to scorch up young shoots. And so, Perry sug- 
gests, the reliable and timely Nile flood first prompted men to 
plant seeds deliberately and let them grow. Food-gatherers 
must have utilized grains of wild wheat and barley for food 
long before they started cultivating them. Handfuls of such 
seeds, scattered on the wet silt of the Nile's flood, v:ould be 
the direct ancestors of all cultivated cereals. And natural irri- 
gation would be the prototype of all systems of cultivation. 
Perry's plausible and consistent account of the Egyptian 
origin of agriculture is, of course, just a theory supported by 
even less direct evidence than the Palestinian origin mentioned 
on p. 61. At the time of the oldest agricultural settlements in the 
Nile Valley the rainfall in Hither Asia and North Africa was 
more generous than today, so that irrigation was by no means 
the sole method of getting crops to grow. The idea of cultivat- 
ing cereals undoubtedly spread very rapidly; North Syria, Iraq, 
and the Persian plateau are studded with the ruins of agricul- 

66 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
tural villages going back nearly, if not quite, as far as the oldest 
of such villages in Egypt. Migratory garden-culture would ex- 
plain this rapid diffusion quite simply. It is not so easy to see 
how a system, developed under the exceptional conditions of 
the Nile Valley, should have been transplanted to Persia and 
Mesopotamia, with their very different and less favorable 
circumstances. As to Europe, it is highly probable that the idea 
of cultivation and the cereals cultivated were first introduced 
by hoe-cultivators spreading from North Africa over Western 
Europe and by others expanding from the Danube basin into 
Belgium and Germany; for the wild ancestors of wheat and 
barley are not to be expected north of the Balkans. 
On the other hand, cultivation in Egypt was not so simple. In 
its natural state the Nile Valley must have been a chain of 
swamps, choked with reedy jungle that sheltered hippopotami 
and other troublesome beasts. To make it cultivable the 
swamps must be drained and cleared and their dangerous deni- 
zens driven out. Such an undertaking was possible to a well- 
organized community of some size and equipped with efficient 
tools. On the whole it looks as if cultivation dependent on the 
Nile flood would be later than simple hoe-cultivation and de- 
rived therefrom. It is really unprofitable to speculate how, 
where, and when the cultivation of cereals began. It is perhaps 
slightly less futile to inquire how the primary form of food- 
production was completed and transformed into mixed farm- 
ing, assuming the theory enunciated on p. 59. 
In practically all the oldest food-producing settlements ex- 
amined by archaeologists in Europe, Hither Asia, and North 
Africa, the basic industry is mixed farming; in addition to the 
cultivation of cereals, animals are bred for food. This economy 
is characteristic of the "neolithic" stage wherever such exist. 
The food animals kept were not very varied: horned cattle, 
sheep, goats, and swine. Comparatively few species-fowls are 
the most important-have been added to the farmyards in sub- 
sequent periods or other countries. Horned cattle require 
rather rich grass, but can live on well-watered steppes, in 
naturally irrigated valleys, and even in forests that are not too 
dense. Pigs like swamps or woodlands; sheep and goats can 
thrive under dry, though not absolutely desert, conditions, and 
both are at home in hilly and mountainous country. Wild 
goats probably once ranged all along the mountains that divide 
Eurasia lengthwise, perhaps from the Pyrenees, or at least 
from the Balkans eastwards to the Himalaya. Wild sheep lived 
along the same chains, but in three distinct varieties. The 
mouflon survives in the Mediterranean islands and the hill 
country of Hither Asia from Turkey to Western Persia; east 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
67 
of the mouflon, in Turkestan, Afghanistan, and the Punjab, is 
the home of the uria1; still farther east, in the mountains of 
Central Asia, lives the argal. In Africa no wild sheep is known. 
The oldest Egyptian sheep belong to the urial stock, as do the 
oldest European flocks; but the mouflon is represented side by 
side with the urial on early monuments froD Mesopotamia. 
The reader will note that ancestors of our farmyard animals 
lived wild in most of the regions that seem likely to have com- 
prised the cradle of grain-growing. But the absence of wild 
sheep from Africa makes Egypt unlikely as a starting point of 
mixing farming. 
As already remarked, the period when the food-producing 
economy became established WdS one of climatic crises ad- 
versely affecting precisely that zone of arid sub-tropical coun- 
tries where the earliest farmers appear, and where the wild 
ancestors of cultivated cereals and domestic animals actually 
lived. The 111Cltiug of the European ice sheets and the contrac- 
tion of the high pressures or anticyclones over thenl involved 
a northward shift in the normal path of the rain-bearing de- 
pressions from the Atlantic. The showers that had watered 
North Africa and Arabia were deflected over Europe. Desicca- 
tion set in. Of course the process was not sudden or cata- 
strophic. At first and for long, the sole harbinger would be the 
greater severity and longer duration of periodical droughts. 
But quite a small reduction in the rainfall would work a devas- 
tating change in countries that were always relatively dry. It 
would mean the diffe;eLce between continuous grasslands and 
sandy deserts interrupted by occasional oases. 
A number of animals that could live comfortably with a 
twelve-inch annual rainfall would become a surplus popula- 
tion if the precipitation diminished by a couple of inches for 
two or three years on end. To get food and water, the grass- 
eaters would have to congregate round a diminishing number 
of springs and streams-in oases. There they would be more 
exposed than ever to the attacks of beasts of prey-lions, 
leopards, and wolves-that would also gravitate to the oases 
for water. And they would be brought up against man too; for 
the same causes would force even hunters to frequent the 
springs and valleys. The huntsman and his prey thus find them- 
selves united in an effort to circumvent the dreadful power of 
drought. But if the hunter is also a cultivator, he will have 
something to offer the famished beasts: the stubble of his 
freshly reaped fields will afford the best grazing in the oasis. 
Once the grains are garnered, the cultivator can tolerate half- 
starved mouflons or wild oxen trespassing upon his garden 
plots. Such will be too weak to run away, too thin to be worth 

68 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
kilIing for food. Instead, man can study their habits, drive off 
the lions and wolves that would prey upon them, and perhaps 
even offer them some surplus grain from his stores. The beasts, 
for their part, will grow tame and accustomed to man's proxi- 
mity. 
Hunters today, and doubtless in prehistoric times, have been 
accustomed to make pets of young wild animals for ritual ends 
or just for fun. Man has allowed the dog to frequent his camp 
in return for the offal of his prey and refuse from his feasts. 
Under the conditions of incipient desiccation the cultivator has 
the chance of attaching to his menage not only isolated young 
beasts, but the remnants of complete flocks or herds, compris- 
ing animals of both sexes and all ages. If he lust realizes the 
advantage of having a group of such half-tamed beasts hanging 
round the fringes of his settlement as a reserve of game easily 
caught, he will be on the way to domestication. 
Next he must exercise restraint and discrimination in using 
this reserve of meat. He must refrain from frightening the 
beasts unnecessarily or killing the youngest and tamest. Once 
he begins to kill only the shyest and least amenable bulls or 
rams, he will have started selective breeding, eliminating un- 
tractable brutes, and consequently favoring the more docile. 
But he must also use his new opportunities of studying the life 
of the beasts at close range. He will thus learn about the 
processes of reproduction, the animals' needs of food and 
water. He must act upon his knowledge. Instead of merely 
driving the herd away when the time comes round for sowing 
his plots again, he must follow the beasts, guide them to suit- 
able pastures and water, and contillue to ward off predatory 
carnivora. It can thus be imagined how with lapse of time a 
flock or a herd should have been bred that was not only tame, 
but actually dependent upon man. 
That result could happen only provided the peculiar cli- 
matic conditions continued long e:lough, and suitable animals 
were haunting human settlements. No doubt experiments were 
tried with various species; herds of antelopes and gazelles were 
kept by the Egyptians about 3000 B.C. These and other un- 
known experiments were fruitless. Luckily, cattle, sheep, goats, 
and pigs were included in the wild fauna of the desiccated 
regions in Asia. These did become firmly attached to man and 
ready to follow him. 
At first the tame or domesticated beast would presumably be 
regarded only as a potenial source of meat, an easily accessible 
sort of game. Other uses would be discovered later. It might 
be noticed that crops flourished best on plots that had been 
grazed over. Ultimately the value of dung as a fertilizer would 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
69 
be reaJized. The proces3 of milking can only have been dis- 
covered when men had had ample opportunity of studying 
at close quarters the suckling of calves and lambs and kids. 
But once the trick was grasped, milk would become a second 
staple. It could be obtained without killing the beast, without 
touching your capital. Selection would again be applied. The 
best milkers would be spared, and their young reared in 
preference to other calves, lambs, or kids. Still later the hair 
of sheep or goats would win appreciation. It could be treated 
by processes, perhaps originally applied to plant fibers, and 
woven into cloth or else beaten into felt. Wool is entirely the 
artificial product of selective breeding. On wild sheep it is 
merely a down between the hairs. It was still unknown to the 
Egyptians even after 3000 B.C. But in Mesopotamia sheep 
were being bred for their wool before that date. The harnessing 
of animals to bear burdens or draw plows and vehicles is a late 
adaptation, and will be considered among the steps leading up 
to the second revolution in human economy (p. 99). 
The minimal characteristics of simple cultivation have al- 
ready been considered. But these must now be pictured as com- 
bined with stock-breeding if we are to understand the basic 
economy revealed in neolithic settlements in North Africa, 
Hither Asia, and Europe. If the number of animals kept re- 
mains quite small, the account already given will hold good: 
the animals will be put to graze on the stubble after the harvest 
and at other seasons on natural pastures round the settlement. 
Beyond telling off a few youths to look after the herd, the com- 
munal economy can be left as already described. But as soon 
as the flocks exceed a low limit, special provision may have to 
be made for them. Trees and scrub may be burned off to make 
room for grass. In a river valley it may be thought worth-while 
to clear or irrigate special meadows to serve as pasture for 
cattle. Crops may be deliberately grown, harvested, and con- 
served to serve exclusively as fodder. Or the animals may be 
driven far afield to find pastures in the dry season. In Mediter- 
ranean lands, Persia, and Asia Minor there is good summer 
grazing on the hills which in winter are snow-clad. And so 
sheep and cattle are driven up to hill pastures in the spring. 
And now a regular company of the village's inhabitants must 
accompany the herds to ward off wild beasts, to milk the cows 
and ewes. The herders must generally take with them supplies 
of grain and other equipment. In some cases the fraction of the 
community that migrate with their gear to the summer pastures 
is quite small. But in hot and dry countries, like Persia, parts 
of the Eastern Sudan, and in the northwestern Himalayas, the 
bulk of the community abandons its village in the stifling 

70 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
valley and accompanies the herds to the cooler hills. Only a 
few stay behind to look after the fields and dwellings. 
From this it is no far cry to a purely pastoral economy in 
which cultivation plays a negligible role. Pure pastoral no- 
madism is familiar, and is illustrated by several peoples in the 
Old World; the Bedouin of Arabia and Mongolian tribes of 
Central Asia are the best-known examples. How old such a 
mode of life may be is uncertain. Pastoralists are not likely to 
leave many vestiges by which the archaeologist could recognize 
their presence. They tend to use vessels of leather and basketry 
instead of pots, to live in tents instead of in excavated shelters 
or huts supported by stout timber posts or walls of stone or 
brick. Leather vessels and baskets have as a rule no chance of 
surviving; tents need not even leave deep post holes to mark 
where they once stood. (Though wood decays, modern archae- 
ology can recognize the hole made by a post five thousand 
years ago.) 
The failure to recognize prehistoric settlement sites or 
groups of relics belonging to pure pastoralists is not in itself 
any proof that such did not exist. To that extent the postulate 
of the "historical school," that pure pastoralism and pure hoe- 
culture were originally practiced independently by separate 
peoples and that mixed farming resulted from their subsequent 
fusion, is irrefutable. Yet Forde has recently emphasized the 
instability of pure pastoralism. Many typical pastoral tribes 
today, like the patriarchs in Genesis, actually cultivate grain, 
though in an incidental and rather casual manner. If they grow 
no grain themselves, pastoral nomads are almost always eco- 
nomically dependent upon settled peasant villages. The cultiva- 
tors may be tributaries or serfs to the pastoralists, but they are 
essential to their subsistence. 
Whatever its origin, stock-breeding gave man control over 
his own food supply in the same way as cultivation did. In 
mixed farming it becomes an equal partner in the food-pro- 
ducing economy. But just as the term "cultivation" covers 
many distinct modes of gaining a livelihood, so the single 
phrase "mixed farming" marks an equal disparity and diver- 
sity. The several different modes of cultivation may be com- 
bined in varying degrees with distinct attitudes to the livestock. 
The diversity of the permutations and combinations has just 
been suggested. The multiplicity of concrete applications of 
the food-producing economy must never be forgotten. 
It must be remembered, too, that food-production does not 
at once supersede food-gathering. If today hunting is only a 
ritual sport and game is a luxury for the rich, fishing is stiIl a 
great industry, contributing directly to everybody's diet. At first 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
71 
hunting, fowling, fishing, the collection of fruits, snails, and 
grubs continued to be essential activities in the food-quest of 
any food-producing group. Grain and milk began as mere 
supplements to a diet of game, fish, berries, nuts, and ants' 
eggs. Probably at first cultivation was an incidental activity of 
the women while their lords were engaged in the really serious 
business of the chase. Only slowly did it win the status of an 
independent and ultimately predominant industry. When the 
archaeological record first reveals neolithic communities in 
Egypt and Iran, survivals from the food-gathering regime 
clearly stand on an equal footing with grain-growing and stock- 
breeding. Only subsequently does their economic importance 
decline. After the second revolution, hunting and fowling have 
become, as with us, ritual sports, or else, like fishing, special- 
ized industries practiced by groups within the community or by 
independent societies, economically dependent upon an agri- 
cultural civilization. 
Two other aspects of the simple food-producing economy 
deserve attention. In the first place, food-production, even in 
its simplest form, provides an opportunity and a motive for 
the accumulation of a surplus. A crop must not be consumed 
as soon as it is reaped. The grains must be conserved and eked 
out so as to last till the next harvest, for a whole year. And a 
proportion of every crop must be set aside for seed. The con- 
servation is easy. But it means on the one hand forethought and 
thrift, on the other receptacles for storage. These are quite as 
essential as, and may actually be more elaborate than, dwell- 
ings. In the neolithic villages of the Fayum, perhaps the oldest 
of their kind, excavated silos, lined with straw basketry or mat- 
ting, are the most substantial constructions that have survived. 
Again, livestock that has been laboriously carried over the 
dry season must not be indiscriminately slaughtered and de- 
voured. The young cows and ewes at least must be spared and 
reared to provide milk and to augment the herd or flock. Once 
these ideas have been driven home, the production and ac- 
cumulation of a surplus are much easier for food-producers 
than for food gatherers. The yield of crops and of herds soon 
outstrips the immediate needs of the community. The storage 
of grain, the conservation of live meat "on the hoof" is much 
simpler, especially in a warm climate, than the preservation 
of stocks of slaughtered game. The surplus thus gathered will 
help to tide the community over bad seasons; it will form a re- 
serve against droughts and crop failures. It will serve to sup- 
port a growing population. Ultimately it may constitute a basis 
for rudimentary trade, and so pave the way to a second revo- 
lution. 

72 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
Secondly, the economy is entirely self-sufficing. The simple 
food-producing community is not dependent for any necessity 
of life on imports obtained by barter or exchange from another 
group. It produces and collects all the food it needs. It relies 
on raw materials available in its immediate vicinity for the sim- 
ple equipment it demands. Its constituent members or house- 
holds manufacture the requisite implements, utensils, and 
weapons. 
This economic self-sufficiency does not necessarily spell iso- 
lation. The variations in the simple food-producing economy 
already indicated, the simultaneous pursuit of several methods 
of obtaining nourishment by different groups, are liable to 
bring the several communities concerned into mutual contact. 
Driving their flocks to summer pastures, the herdsmen from 
one village are likely to meet their counterparts from another. 
On hunting expeditions across the desert, huntsmen from one 
oasis may cross parties from another. In such ways the isola- 
tion of each community is liable to be broken down. Far from 
being a scattering of discrete units, the neolithic world should 
be viewed as a continuous chain of communities. Each would 
be linked to its neighbors on either side by recurrent, if infre- 
quent and irregular, contacts. 
The simple food-producing economy just described is an 
abstraction. Our picture is based on a selection of supposedly 
distinctive traits from materials afforded by ethnographers' 
observations on modern "savages" and inferences from par- 
ticular archaeological sites. The precise stage of economic 
development here adumbrated may never have been fully 
realized in precisely this concrete form. Archaeology alone 
could justify the presentation of a "neolithic" economy as a 
universal historical stage in the progress towards modern civili- 
zation. But all archaeology can do at present is to isolate tem- 
porary phases in what was really a continuous process. We 
have tacitly assumed that similar phases were realizeJ nearly 
simultaneously in several areas. But in prehistoric times such 
simultaneity cannot be proved, even in the cases of regions so 
close together as Tasa in Middle Egypt, the Fayum, and the 
Delta. Strict parallelism in time between Egypt and, say, North 
Syria would be hard to establish. To claim it as between Egypt 
and North Europe would be almost certainly false; our best 
examples of a simple food-producing economy in Britain or 
Belgium are to be dated in terms of solar years perhaps thirty 
centuries later than their counterparts in Egypt. And we have 
deliberately cited contemporary savage groups as illustrating 
the same economic stage. 
Archaeology has disclosed communities whose basic econ- 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
73 
omy approximates to that just described in the Nile Valley 
at Tasa, on the western edge of the Delta, and on the shore 
of an old Jake in the Fayum, in the rain belt of North Syria 
between Aleppo and Mosul, and on the slopes of the Iranian 
plateau perhaps 7000 years ago. Rather later we find the same 
economy established in Crete, on the plateau of Asia Minor  
and in Thessaly and other parts of Mainland Greece. Still later 
it becomes traceable in Spain, on the Black Earth belt of the 
Ukraine and Bessarabia, around the Lower Danube valley, in 
the Hungarian plain, and then throughout Central Europe 
wherever patches of so-called loss offered fertile sons not too 
heavily wooded. The same economy spread widely over West- 
ern Europe from Spain to Southern England and Belgium. It 
emerges later still in Denmark, North Germany, and Sweden 
-perhaps not before 2000 B.C. Similar communities, recently 
identified in Western China, need not be much older. The 
Maoris of New Zealand were still on this economic plane when 
Captain Cook landed near the end of the eighteenth century 
A.D. ! 
All the groups of simple food-producers recognized by ar- 
chaeology are distinguished from one another by very marked 
differences. Archaeologists divide them into a bewildering 
variety of "cultures." Each has its own distinctive types of 
tools, vessels, weapons, and ornaments, its own peculiar art and 
burial rites. Even the applications of the basic economy differ 
from group to group. Nomadic garden-culture was, for in- 
stance, the rule in Western Europe, on the loss lands of Central 
Europe, in the Ukraine, and in Western China-all temperate 
regions. In Crete or Thessaly even the oldest settlements seem 
relatively permanent. Again, in Western Europe the breeding 
of cattle, sheep, and swine, and hunting were at least on an 
equal footing with grain-growing. On the Central European 
Joss domestic animals seem to have played at first a minor role 
in the food supply, and game an altogether negligible one. The 
neolithic Chinese kept only pigs. 
Among the neolithic Egyptians at Tasa cattle and sheep 
bones were found in plenty, but no remains of pig. That ani- 
mal was, however, plentiful in the contemporary settlements 
in the Fayum and on the Delta's edge. Again, the grains grown 
differ-emmer wheat in Egypt, Assyria, Western and North- 
ern Europe, dinkel in the Danube basin, bread-wheat perhaps 
in Syria and Turkestan. Thus there is no such thing as a 
neolithic civilization. Various human groups of different racial 
composition, living under diverse conditions of climate and 
soil, have adopted the same ground ideas and adapted then1 
differently to their several environments. 

74 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
The differences which so clearly separate neolithic cultures 
are not surprising in view of the distinctive character of the 
economy, the self-sufficiency of each community. Because 
each group was economically independent of any neighbors, 
it could remain isolated from them. And in such isolation each 
group could work out its own arts and crafts, its own styles 
and institutions independent of the rest. Only the most bigoted 
evolutionist will contend that these independent developments 
would converge everywhere to like results. The reverse may be 
actually observed. If one studies in detail several closely allied 
neolithic groups-on the Central European loss, for exam- 
ple-one notices a continual divergence, the multiplication of 
individualized groups each differing from one another ever 
more pronouncedly in the fashionable shape for vases, the 
style of their decoration, and so on. 
Nevertheless, the possible isolation was never actually real- 
ized-perhaps, indeed, complete economic self-sufficiency was 
nowhere attained. Everywhere intercourse between adjacent 
groups is attested to the archaeologist by an interchange of 
objects. Such might result from accidental contacts between 
herdsmen and hunters, such as we have anticipated, from 
formal visits, from the practice of seeking a wife outside one's 
own village (exogamy), and so on. It might lead up to a sort 
of irregular trade through which objects might travel great 
distances. So to neolithic settlements on the Fayum lake shells 
were brought both from the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. 
Bracelets made from the shell of a Mediterranean mussel, 
Spondylus gaederopi, have been found in neolithic graves even 
in Bohemia and South Germany. 
The point is that such trade was not an integral part of the 
community's economic life; the articles it brought were in 
some sense luxuries, non-essentials. Yet the intercourse thus 
attested was of vital importance to human progress; it provided 
channels whereby ideas from one society might reach another, 
whereby foreign materials might be compared, whereby, in 
fact, culture itself might be diffused. Indeed, "neolithic civil- 
ization" in part owes its expansion to the prior existence 
amongst still sparser hunting communities of a rudimentary 
web of intercourse. 
In exceptional cases communication between separate 
groups of the kind here envisaged might lead to more regular 
'trade" and to intercommunal specialization even within the 
framework of the neolithic economy. In England, Belgium, 
and France archaeologists have discovered neolithic flint 
mines. The miners probably cultivated plants and bred cattle 
in the intervals of mining. But it is quite certain that they were 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
75 
not producing for themselves alone, but exporting their flints 
to a wider market. Nevertheless, where seas, forests, or 
wooded mountains intervened, intercourse in neolithic times 
must generally have been very infrequent and the percolation 
of ideas exceedingly slow. Only in the arid zone round the 
Mediterranean and east thereof was intercourse at all rapid 
or extensive. 
Thus "neolithic times" may mean anything between 6000 
B.C. and A.D. 1800. "Neolithic civilization" is a dangerous term 
applicable to a huge variety of cultural groups, all more or less 
on the same economic plane. Still, at sites like Tasa, the Fayum 
lake, and the lowest levels at Arpachiyah in Assyria the econ- 
omy just outlined does seem actually to represent the higbest 
form of organization attained anywhere at that precise mo- 
ment. Elsewhere and later we still find communities exhibiting 
the same fundamental economic structure. And all have more 
than mere abstractions of economics in common. It is true that 
the other agreements are only slightly Jess abstract. Stil1, it is 
worth-while ignoring the differences of their concrete appJ ica- 
tions and considering some of these general traits common 
to many "neolithic" societies. The outstanding common fea- 
tures are wood-working, pottery manufacture, and a textile 
industry. 
At the time when the neolithic revolution makes itself mani- 
fest, when cultivation first becomes perceptible, North Africa 
and Hither Asia were still enjoying a higher rainfall than 
today; trees still grew in regions now treeless. At the same 
time, in Europe, forests had replaced the tundras and steppes 
of the Ice Age. Man was obliged to deal with timber. The re- 
sponse to this stimulus was the creation of the "polished stone 
celt" (axe or adze), which to the older archaeologists was the 
distinctive mark of "neolithic times." The implement is a large 
slice or pebble of fine-grained stone, one end of which has 
been ground down to form a sharp cutting edge. It was bafted 
into the end of a stick or an antler to form an axe or an adze. 
In the later part of the Old Stone Age axe-like tools seent 
to have been unknown. The ground stone celt does not seem 
to derive directly from the "hand axe" of flaked stone or flint 
current earlier in the Old Stone Age. The essence of the 
neolithic tool is that its edge is sharpened by grinding. The new 
technique might be suggested by effects observed on stone 
rubbers used for grinding grains on other stones. Or perhaps 
for digging up the garden plots a split pebble was lashed on 
to the end of a stick to make a sort of hoe; then the end of the 
pebble might be rubbed sharp by friction with sandy soil. But 
though neolithic celts are almost invariably found in the oldest 

76 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
settlements of simple food-producers, it is not certain that the 
implement is really a result of the new economy. Axe-like 
tools are found, for instance, on the Baltic, long before there 
are any indications of farming. The models there seem to be 
provided by implements of bone and antler, also skarpened 
by polishing. Ground stone axes and adzes were certainly used 
by some denizens of the North European forest who still bred 
no animals for food and cultivated no plants. And outside 
Europe many typical food-gatherers, including even the ab- 
origines of Australia, used ground stone axes. On the other 
hand, the N atufians of Palestine, who certainly reaped some- 
thing, presumably a cereal, with sickles, possessed no axes. The 
ground stone celt is not therefore an infallible sign of the 
neolithic economy in the sense here used of self-sufficing food 
production. 
Still, wherever it arose, the ground stone celt provided a 
tough iIllplement and a resistant edge that would not be 
chipped or blunted by a few blows. It enabled man to hew 
and to shape timber. Carpentry could begin. Plows, wheels, 
plank-boats, wooden houses all require axes and adzes for 
their manufacture. The invention of the ground stone celt was 
an essential pre-condition for these later achievements. 
The preparation and storage of cereal foods may be sup- 
posed to have put a premium upon vessels which would at 
once stand heat and hold liquids. A universal feature of 
neolithic communities seems to have been the manufacture 
of pots. (Such were not, hovv'ever, used by the N atufians of 
Palestine.) Pottery may, indeed, have been discovered before 
the rise of the food-producing economy. It might have orig- 
inated in the accidental burning of a basket plastered with clay 
to make it water-tight. A couple of small fragments allegedly 
found in an Old Stone Age layer in Kenya suggest this possibil- 
ity. But it is only in neolithic times that pot-making is attested 
on a large scale; a neolithic site is generally strewn with frag- 
ments of broken pottery. 
The new industry has great significance for human thought 
and for the beginning of science. Pot-making is perhaps the 
earliest conscious utilization by man of a chemical change. 
The essence of the process is the explusion by heat of some 
molecules of water (termed the "water of constitution") from 
the hydrated silicate of aluminum which is the chemist's name 
for potter's clay. A lump of clay when wet is completely plas- 
tic; it will disintegrate in excess of water and crumble to pow- 
der if dried. When the "water of constitution," chemically 
combined in it, is expelled rather above 600 0 C. the material 
loses its plasticity altogether; the whole lump solidifies, and 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
77 
will keep its shape wet or dry unless deliberately and labori- 
ously broken up by crushing or pounding. The essence of the- 
potter's craft is that she can mold a piece of clay into any- 
shape she desire and then give that shape permanence by "fir- 
ing" (i.e. heating to over 600 0 C.). 
To early man this change in the quality of the material must 
have seemed a sort of magic transubstantiation-the conver- 
sion of mud or dust into stone. It may have prompted some- 
philosophical questions as to the meaning of substance and 
sameness. How is the plastic clay the same substance as the- 
hard but brittle earthenware? The pot you put into the fire has 
much the same shape as what you draw out, but tbe color 
has changed and the texture is quite different. 
The discovery of pottery consisted essentially in finding out 
how to control and utilize the chemical change just mentioned. 
But, like all other discoveries, its practical application involves. 
others. To be able to mold your clay you must wet it; but if 
you put your damp plastic pot straight into the fire, it will 
crack. The water, added to the clay to make it plastic, must be- 
dried out gently in the sun or near the fire, before the vessel 
can be baked. Again, the clay has to be selected and prepared.. 
If it contains too large grits, it will not model easily nor yield 
a handsome or serviceable pot; some process of washing must 
be devised to eliminate coarse material. On the other hand, if 
the clay contains no grit, it will stick to the fingers in molding. 
and crack in firing. To avoid this danger some gritty material 
-sand, powdered stone or shell, chopped straw, what is 
termed a "temper"-must be added. 
In the process of firing, the clay changes not only its physical 
consistency, but also its color. The latter change is determined 
partly by chemical impurities in the material, partly by the 
process of firing. Most clays contain some iron oxide. If the- 
air has free access to the pot while it is hot, the vessel will 
come out with a reddish hue because the iron will be oxidized 
to form the red ferric oxide. But if the pot be surrounded dur- 
ing firing with glowing charcoal and the gases given off during. 
imperfect combustion, the iron salts will be reduced, and the 
product will be gray, because ferroso-ferric oxide is black. A 
dark color may also be produced by free carbon in the clay. 
That may be derived from the charring of vegetable or organic 
impurities in the raw material, or from soot from the fire soak-- 
ing into the pores of the red-hot earthenware, or from fats or 
dung deliberately applied to the vase surface while it is stiU 
hot. Man had to learn to control such changes as these and to 
utilize them to enhance the beauty of the vessel. 
At first, local conditions, the sort of clay and fuel available. 

78 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
on the spot, would be allowed to determine the color of the 
pot. Average clays, burned in the smoky brushwood fires of 
well-watered regions, yield black or dirty gray vessels. Under 
rather drier climates reds and brown can be produced. The hot 
fires made from thorny Mediterranean or desert plants easily 
yield pale buff, pinkish, or greenish wares. Subsequently the 
potter learns how to produce such effects at will or to enhance 
them for the embellishment of the vessel. She might, for in- 
stance, cover the vase's surface with a thin layer-a "slip" or 
wash-of selected clay, rich in iron oxides, in order to pro- 
duce a good fed ware. She might even apply such specially pre- 
pared clays with a brush so as to outline painted patterns. It 
must be remembered that the effect of color painted on an 
unfired vessel is quite different from that of the final product. 
Vase-painting is no simple art; the artist has to forecast in ad- 
vance what the fired pot is going to look like. The feat was 
early achieved in Hither Asia. It was a long time before 
painted pottery could be manufactured in temperate regions 
where the natural fuel gave a smoky flame. 
There the light ground needed to show up painted decora- 
tion could only be achieved with the aid of a further invention 
-a built oven or kiln in which the vases can be raised to 900 0 
or 1000 0 C., and yet kept out of contact with the flames. Such 
a device is not attested for the earliest neolithic communities; it 
does not reach Central or Western Europe till the Iron Age. 
Thus the potter's craft, even in its crudest and most general- 
ized form, was already complex. It involved an appreciation of 
a number of distinct processes, the application of a whole con- 
stellation of discoveries. Only a fe\v of these have been even 
mentioned. At the risk of boring the reader, we must note one 
more. The shaping of the pot itself is not so easy as it sounds. 
Quite small vessels can, of course, be kneaded and molded, 
mud-pie fashion, out of a lump of clay. Or a coating of clay 
can be spread over an open basket or a half-gourd; when it has 
dried, the form can be removed, and you have an open dish 
or platter ready for firing. 
But if anything larger is desired, or a vessel with a narrow 
neck like a bottle or jug, such elementary processes no longer 
suffice: the vessel must be built up. In neolithic Europe and 
Asia this was generally done by the ring method; after the base 
had been molded, rings of clay of the desired diameter were 
prepared. One was attached to the base and then another set 
on the top edge of this, and so on. It is a slow process. The 
rings must be fairly wet and plastic when they are put on. But 
as soon as one ring is in place, you must pause and let it dry 
and harden-but not too much-before adding the next story. 

THE NEOLITEIC REVOLUTION 
79 
The mere construction of a large pot may take several days. 
The constructive character of the potter's craft reacted on 
human thought. Building up a pot was a supreme instance of 
creation by man. The lump of clay was perfectly plastic; man 
could mold it as he would. In making a tool of stone or bone 
he was always limited by the shape and size of the original 
material; he could only take bits away from it. No such limi- 
tations restrict the activity of the potter. She can form her lump 
as she wishes; she can go on adding to it without any doubts as 
to the solidity of the joins. In thinking of "creation," the free 
activity of the potter in "making form where there was no 
form" constantly recurs to man's mind; the similes in the Bible 
taken from the potter's craft illustrate the point. 
In practice the potter's freedom to create was not at first 
fully utilized. Fancy cannot work in a vacuum. What it creates 
must be like something already known. Moreover, pots were 
generally made by women and for women, and women are par- 
ticularly suspicious of radical innovations. So the earliest pots 
are obvious imitations of familiar vessels made from other 
materials-from gourds, from bladders, membranes, and skins, 
from basketry and wickerwork, or even from human skulls. 
To enhance the resemblance, the grass sling in which a gourd, 
like a modern Chianti flask, was carried, the stitching of the 
"wine-skin," or the interlacing fibres of the basket were often 
imitated by patterns incised or painted on the pot. Thus the 
vessel in the fresh material came to look less new-fangled and 
outlandish to the prudent housewife! 
Among the remains of the earliest neolithic villages of Egypt 
and Hither Asia we find the first indications of a textile in- 
dustry. Manufactured garments, woven out of linen, or later 
wool, begin to compete with dressed skins or skirts of leaves 
as protection against cold and sun. For this to be possible an- 
other complex of discoveries and inventions is requisite, a fur- 
ther body of scientific knowledge must be practically applied. 
In the first place, a suitable material was needed, a fibrous sub- 
stance that would yield long threads. The neolithic villagers on 
the Fayum lake were already using flax. They must have 
selected this from all other plants and begun to cultivate it de- 
liberately in addition to growing cereals. Another variety of 
flax n1ay have been discovered and grown in Asia. A local 
European flax was cultivated and utilized in Switzerland in 
neolithic times. 
Other materials must have been tried. Cotton was certainly 
being grown in the Indus valley soon after 3000 B.C. Wool, as 
already noted, was used in Mesopotamia about the same time. 
Before wool-bearing sheep had been produced by selective 

80 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
breeding, the hairs of sheep and goats may have served for the 
production of a sort of cloth, since hair can be woven. A textile 
industry thus not only requires the knowledge of special sub- 
stances like flax, cotton, and wool, but also the breeding of 
special animals and the cultivation of particular plants. 
Among the prereq Jisite inventions a device for spinning is 
important. The little discs of stone or pottery, termed whorls, 
that served to weight the end of a spindle, like miniature fly- 
wheels, generally constitute the sole tangible proof of the exis- 
tence of a textile industry that an archaeologist can hope to 
find. Only very exceptional conditions can preserve actual 
textile products or the vvooden implements used in their pro- 
duction. 
Of these the most essential is a loom. It is, indeed, possible 
to produce a sort of cloth with the aid of a frame by a sort of 
glorified plaiting process similar to that employed in making 
mats. Blankets of dogs' hair were actually produced in this way 
by food-gathering tribes on the northwest coast of Canada 
last century. But in the Old World a true 100m goes back to 
neolithic times. Now a loom is quite an elaborate piece of 
machinery-much too elaborate to be described here. Its use 
is no less complicated. The invention of the loom was one of 
the great triumphs of human ingenuity. Its inventors are name- 
less, but they made an essential contribution to the capital 
stock of human knowledge, an application of science that only 
to the unthinking seems too trivial to deserve the name. 
All the foregoing industries require for their exercise a 
technical skill that can only be acquired by training and prac- 
tice. Yet all were household crafts. In our hypothetical neo- 
lithic stage there would be no specialization of labor-at most 
a division of work between the sexes. And that system can still 
be seen at work today. Among hoe-cultivators the women gen- 
erally till the fields, build up and fire the pots, spin, and weave; 
men look after animals, hunt and fish, clear the plots for cul- 
tivation, and act as carpenters, preparing their own tools and 
weapons. But, of course, to such a generalization there are 
many exceptions: among the Y oruba, for instance, weaving is 
in the hands of men. 
All the industries named, from garden culture to weaving, 
have been rendered possible only by the accumulation of ex- 
perience and the application of deductions therefrom. Each 
and all repose on practical science. Moreover, the exercise of 
each craft is throughout regulated and directed by a constantly 
expanding body of practical science. The appropriate lore is 
handed on from parent to child for generation after generation. 
The cultivator, for instance, must know in practice what soil 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOL"0TION 
81 
it is most profitable to till, when to break up the ground, how 
to distinguish young grain shoots from sprouting weeds, and a 
host of other details. The young potter must learn to find and 
choose proper clay, how to clean it, with what proportion of 
water and grit it should be mixed, and so on. 
Thus there grows up to be handed on a great body of craft 
lore-snippets of botany, geology, and chemistry, one might 
say. If we may judge from the procedure of modern bar- 
barians, the legitimate deductions from experience are inex- 
tricably mixed up with what we should call useless magic. Each 
operation of every craft must be accompanied by the proper 
spells and the prescribed ritual acts. All this body of rules, 
practical and magical, forms part of the craft tradition. It is 
handed on from parent to child by example and by precept. 
The daughter helps her mother at making pots, watches her 
closely, imitates her, an receives from her lips oral directions, 
warnings, and advice. The applied sciences of neolithic times 
were handed on by what today we should call a system of ap- 
prenticeship. 
The neolithic crafts have been presented as household in.. 
dustries. Yet the craft traditions are not individual, but col- 
lective traditions. The experience and wisdom of all the com- 
munity's members are constantly being pooled. In a modem 
African village the housewife does not retire into seclusion in 
order to build up and fire her pots. All the women of the village 
work together, chatting and comparing notes; they even help 
one another. The occupation is public; its rules are the result 
of communal experience. And so in prehistoric times all the 
pots from a given neolithic village exhibit a monotonous uni.. 
formity. They bear the stamp of a strong collective tradition 
rather than of individuality. 1 
And the neolithic economy as a whole cannot exist without 
co-operative effort. The heavier labor of clearing patches in a 
forest or draining a marsh must be a collective undertaking. 
The digging of drains, the defense of the settlement against 
wild beasts or floods, must again be communal responsibilities. 
The dwellings in neolithic villages both in Egypt and in West- 
ern Europe have been proved to be arranged in a regular order, 
not scattered about indiscriminately. All this implies some 
social organization to co-ordinate and control the communal 
activities. What that organization was we can never know ex- 
actly. One assertion seems plausible. 
The effective unit of social organization in pure neolithic 
times was generally very small. A typical Thessalian village, 
] Yet certain "neolithic" communities today recognize the proprietary rights 
of individuals or families to particular patterns, ceremonies, or processes. 

82 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
rather advanced in the period, covered an area of 100 by 45 
metres, or just over one acre! Several neolithic cemeteries have 
been fully explored in Central Europe. None contained more 
than twenty graves. (Of course, we do not know how long the 
settlement was occupied nor how many generations are repre- 
sented in each cemetery.) Amon3 :nodern representatives of 
garden-cultivation a tendency for the village to break up has 
been noted by ethnographers. Som; of the young men hive off 
with their wives and start a new village of their own. They like 
the freedom of their new settlement, in which they are exempt 
from the authority and oversight of their elders. Then, found- 
ing a new village with plots of virgin jungle close to the dwell- 
ings saves long walks to the gardens, such as become necessary 
when the original village is populous and the nearest land has 
already been used up. On the whole the separation would be 
convenient-provided, of course, there was land available. In 
neolithic times there was as yet no shortage. 
Undoubtedly the co-operative activities involved :n "neo- 
lithic" life found outward expression in social and political 
institutions. Undoubtedly such in.stitutions were consolidated 
and reinforced by magico-religious sanctions, by a more or less 
coherent system of beliefs and superstitions, by what Marxists 
would call an ideology. The new forces controlled by man as 
the result of the neolithic revolution and the knowledge gained 
and applied in the exercise of the new crafts must have reacted 
upon man's outlook. They must ha"e modified his institutions 
and his religion. But precisely what form neolithic institutions 
and beliefs assumed is unknowable. 
Deductions of what ought to be appropriate to the neo- 
lithic economy need not correspond to historical reality: the 
precise forms of the English constitution and of English 
protestantism in the nineteenth century cannot be deduced 
from the capitalist system. Generalizations from observations 
made on a few ancient sites can claim no universal validity. In- 
ferences from institutions and rites, observed among barbarous 
tribes today, do not certainly, or even probably, give clues to 
the political and mental life of other barbarous tribes who, 
6000 years earlier, had reached a similar stage of economic 
development. Institutions, beliefs, and theories notoriously 
tend to lag behind actual practice. There was, as has already 
been insisted, no "neolithic" civilization, only a multitude of 
different concrete applications of a few very general principles 
and notions. 
If barbarous tribes today are still content to secure a liveli- 
hood by the same "neolithic" method as 6000 years ago, there 
is no guarantee that their political and religious life has been 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
83 
equally stagnant. On the contrary, subsequent revolutions have 
had worldwide effects, for reasons indicated on p. 136. Five 
thousand years give ample time for some results of the 
second revolution to percolate even to Australia. There is posi- 
tive evidence that some of the material achievements due to 
the second revolution were adopted by peoples whose economic 
organization remained unaffected as a whole. All typical hoe- 
cultivators in Africa, for instance, have been using iron for 
centuries. The second revolution, we shall see, evoked vigorous 
systems of magico-religious beliefs. The spread of great stone 
graves among neolithic peoples in Western and Northern Eu- 
rope is most plausibly explained by repercussions of the beliefs 
then formulated in the Ancient East. Some authorities would 
find traces of such beliefs even among food-gathering abo- 
rigines in Australia and America. To use contemporary bar- 
barians' religions as evidence for the religion of Egypt or 
Hither Asia in 5000 B. c. would be possible only if the diffusion 
of ideas were entirely eliminated. 
We shall not therefore attempt a description of "the neo- 
lithic polity" and "the neolithic religion." It is really unlikely 
that any such existed. The "neolithic revolution" was not a 
catastrophe, but a process. Its several stages were doubtless 
modifying the social institutions and magico-religious ideas of 
food-gatherers and hunters. But it would be long before any 
new system or systems, more appropriate to the nascent econ- 
omy, became firmly established. Ere then the second revolution 
may already have been beginning. It was perhaps the very 
absence of rigid ideologies and deeply-rooted institutions that 
permitted the rapid progress from self-sufficing villages to in- 
dustrial and commercial cities in less than 2000 years. 
Firmly entrenched institutions, passionately held supersti- 
tions, are notoriously inimical to social change and the scie:t- 
tific advances that make it necessary. And the force of such 
reaction in a community seems to be inversely proportional to 
the community's economic security. A group always on the 
brink of starvation dare not risk change. The least deviation 
from the traditional procedures tha' have been found to yield 
the essential modicum of subsistence may imperil the whole 
group. It would be just as dangerous to antagonize the mys- 
terious magic powers that control the weather by omitting a 
rite or a sacrifice as to omit poisoning the arrowhead that is to 
slay an elephant. 
Now, even after the first revolution, life remained very pre- 
carious for the little group of self-sufficing peasants. A 
drought, a hailstorm, a blight might mean famine. Such peas- 
ants had no world market to draw upon, so that deficiencies of 

84 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
crops in one area could be compensated by a surplus in an- 
other. They had still only a limited variety of sources of food. 
All their several crops, their herds, and their game might easily 
be affected by the same catastrophe. The reserves in store were 
never large. A self-sufficing peasant community is inevitably 
fully conscious of its immediate dependence on the powers 
that bring rain and sunshine, thunder and hurricane. But these 
act capriciously and terribly. At all costs they must be com- 
pelled, cajoled, or conciliated. 
Now, once you can make yourself believe that you have 
found a system of magic to achieve that compulsion, or a 
ritual to ensure that conciliation, the belief becomes a solace 
in the terrors of life that one dare not surrender. Had such 
magics and rituals been firmly established, they would surely 
have retarded the spread of the second revolution. After it, 
firmly rooted beliefs-for instance, in the efficacy of astrology 
and tbe potency of divine kings and ancestral spirits-did 
impede the growth of true science and the establishment of an 
inter-urban international economy. But perhaps the first revo- 
lution was still just sapping confidence in the necessity of 
hunters' magic and its political consequences when the disturb- 
ing ideas and discoveries heralding the second revolution were 
emerging. Perhaps any new system of organization and belief, 
adapted to the neolithic economy, had not become established 
and rooted when the economy itself began to disolve in the 
Orient. 
Nevertheless, certain hints are available as to institutions 
that did or did not subsist in neolithic times. Sometimes they 
seem to have reacted upon the form taken by the second revo- 
lution. That many institutions were taken over from the older 
order is only natural. In the Nile Valley there is indirect evi- 
dence of the survival of a system of totemic clans. The later 
neolithic villages seem to have been the settlements belonging 
to such clans. When in historical times the villages became the 
capitals of parishes (nomes), they bore names like Elephantine 
and Palcontown (Hierakonpolis), taken apparently from the 
totem of the localized clan, the elephant and the falcon. The 
standards of the parishes were clan emblems, and even in pre- 
historic times such emblems figure upon the vases. Such a clan 
system is not uncommon among simple food-producers today, 
and may be a genuine survival from neolithic times. But that 
all neolithic communities were organized as totemic clans can- 
not be asserted. 
Of chieftainship there is no definite evidence in early neo- 
lithic cemeteries or villages. There are, that is to say, no out- 
standingly wealthy graves, evidently belonging to a person of 

THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
85 
rank, and no dwellings that could pass for palaces. The great 
stone graves of Western and Northern Europe which do look 
princely belong to a time when ideas proper to the second revo- 
lution were being diffused, and they are probably inspired 
thereby. Houses larger than the normal have been noted in 
some neolithic villages in Europe, but they may be communal 
lodges of clubs, like the bachelors' houses of the Pacific 
Islanders, rather than princely residences. Nor is there unam- 
biguous evidence of warfare. Weapons are certainly often 
found in neolithic graves and settlements. But were they arms 
of war or merely implements of the chase? Woman's increasing 
share in the provision of food for the community may have 
raised also the social status of the sex. But that too is uncer- 
tain. 
As to the magico-religious notions that held neolithic com- 
munities together, a few guesses may be hazarded. The 
tendance of the dead, going far back into the Old Stone Age, 
may have assumed a deeper significance in the new. In the case 
of several neolithic groups, indeed, no burials have been dis- 
covered. But generally the dead were carefully interred in built 
or excavated graves, either grouped in cemeteries near the 
settlement or dug close to the individual dwellings. The dead 
are normally provided Y/ith utensils or weapons, vases of food 
and drink, and toilet articles. In prehistoric Egypt pictures of 
animals and objects are painted on the funerary vases. They 
presumably had the same magic significance as the cave paint- 
ing and rock-carvings of Old Stone Age hunters. In historical 
times they were transferred to the walls of the tomb, and then 
attached texts show that they were really designed to ensure to 
the dead the continued enjoyment of the services they depict. 
Such tendance denotes an attitude to the ancestral spirits 
that goes back to far older periods. But now the earth in which 
the ancestors' remains lie buried is seen as the soil from which 
the community's food supply magically springs each year. The 
ancestral spirits must surely be regarded as assisting in the 
crops' germination. 
Fertility cults, magic rites to assist or compel the forces of 
reproduction, may have become more prominent than ever in 
neolithic times. Small figurines of women, carved in stone or 
ivory, with the sexual characters well marked, have been noted 
in camps of the Old Stone Age. But similar figures, now gen- 
erally modeled in clay, are very common in neolithic settle- 
ments and graves. They are often termed "mother goddesses." 
Was the earth from whose womb the young grain sprouts really 
conceived in the likeness of a woman with whose generative 
functions man is certainly familiar? 

86 
THE NEOLITHIC REVOLUTION 
The early Oriental civilizations periodically celebrated with 
great pomp a "sacred marriage," the nuptial union of a "king" 
and a "queen," who on this occasion represented divinities. 
Their union not only symbolized, but also magically ensured 
and compelled, the fertilization of the earth, that she might 
bring forth her fruits in due season. But the seed must die and 
be buried before it can sprout and multiply. A human repre- 
sentative of the grain, a "corn king," was once slain and buried. 
His place was taken by a young successor who should stand 
for the growing crops till he too must lie like the seed in the 
ground. These magical rites, these dramatic representations of 
the death and rebirth of the grain, were often mitigated in prac- 
tice by historical times. But they can be discerned behind many 
early myths, and in neolithic times may have been observed 
literally. Yet they might pave the way to political power. The 
"corn king" may claim by magic to have attained immortality. 
Then he is a secular king, too, entitled to the dignity of a god. 
Finally, cultivation may have required a closer observation 
of the seasons, a more accurate division of time, the year. Agri- 
cultural operations are essentially seasonal, and their success 
is largely dependent upon the time of their performance. But 
the proper season is determined by the sun, not by the moon's 
phases, which provide a calendar for hunters. In northerly 
latitudes the changes in the sun's path between the solstices are 
conspicuous enough to provide clues as to the seasons. The 
observation of such clues would emphasize the sun's role as 
ruler of the seasons and guarantee his divinity. 
But near the tropics the sun's movement is less striking. 
There the stars, always visible in those cloudless skies, provide 
a more obvious means of determining and dividing the solar 
year . You note that certain stars of constellations take up a sig- 
nificant position in the sky at the time when experience sug- 
gests you should plant your crops, others when you may ex- 
pect rain to ripen them. By so using the stars as guides, men 
may have come to the belief that they actually influenced ter- 
restrial affairs. You confuse connection in time with causal 
connection. Because the star Sirius is seen on the horizon at 
dawn when the Nile flood arrives, it is inferred that Sirius 
causes the Nile flood. Astrology is based on this sort of confu- 
sion. In Mesopotamia the sign for deity was a star. Cults of the 
sun and of the stars may have been growing up in this sort of 
way in neolithic times. But really we do not know to what 
extent man had yet formulated any idea of divinity. It is diffi- 
cult to distinguish ideas elaborated and diffused after the 
second revolution from those developed by the first. 

